  
 
 
 
Assembly Language Programming 
Lecture Notes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Delivered by 
Belal Hashmi 
 
 
 
Compiled by 
Junaid Haroon 
  
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
 
Preface 
Assembly language programming develops a very basic and low level 
understanding of the computer. In higher level languages there is a distance 
between the computer and the programmer. This is because higher level 
languages are designed to be closer and friendlier to the programmer, 
thereby creating distance with the machine. This distance is covered by 
translators called compilers and interpreters. The aim of programming in 
assembly language is to bypass these intermediates and talk directly with the 
computer. 
There is a general impression that assembly language programming is a 
difficult chore and not everyone is capable enough to understand it. The 
reality is in contrast, as assembly la nguage is a very simple subject. The 
wrong impression is created because it is very difficult to realize that the real 
computer can be so simple. Assembly language programming gives a 
freehand exposure to the computer and lets the programmer talk with it in 
its language. The only translator that remains between the programmer and 
the computer is there to symbolize the computer’s numeric world for the ease 
of remembering.  
To cover the practical aspects of assembly language programming, IBM PC 
based on Intel architecture will be used as an example. However this course 
will not be tied to a particular architec ture as it is often done. In our view 
such an approach does not create versatile assembly language programmers. 
The concepts of assembly language that are common across all platforms will 
be developed in such a manner as to emphasize the basic low level 
understanding of the computer instead of  the peculiarities of one particular 
architecture. Emphasis will be more on assembly language and less on the 
IBM PC. 
B e f o r e  a t t e m p t i n g  t h i s  c o u r s e  y o u  s h o u l d  k n o w  b a s i c  d i g i t a l  l o g i c  
operations of AND, OR, NOT etc. You should know binary numbers and their 
arithmetic. Apart from these basic concepts there is nothing much you need 
to know before this course. In fact if you are not an expert, you will learn 
assembly language quickly, as non-experts see things with simplicity and the 
basic beauty of assembly language is th at it is exceptionally simple. Do not 
ever try to find a complication, as one will not be there. In assembly language 
what is written in the program is all that is there, no less and no more. 
After successful completion of this co urse, you will be able to explain all 
the basic operations of the computer and in essence understand the 
psychology of the computer. Having seen the computer from so close, you 
will understand its limitations and its capabilities. Your logic will become fine 
grained and this is one of the basic ob jectives of teaching assembly language 
programming. 
Then there is the question that why should we learn assembly language 
when there are higher level languages one better than the other; C, C++, 
Java, to name just a few, with a neat programming environment and a 
simple way to write programs. Then why do we need such a freehand with 
the computer that may be dangerous at times? The answer to this lies in a 
very simple example. Consider a tran slator translating from English to 
Japanese. The problem faced by the translator is that every language has its 
own vocabulary and grammar. He may need to translate a word into a 
sentence and destroy the beauty of the topic. And given that we do not know 
--- Page Break ---
ii 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
ii 
Japanese, so we cannot verify that our intent was correctly conveyed or not. 
Compiler is such a translator, just  a lot dumber, and having a scarce 
number of words in its target langua ge, it is bound to produce a lot of 
garbage and unnecessary stuff as a result of its ignorance of our program 
logic. In normal programs such garbage is acceptable and the ease of 
programming overrides the loss in efficiency but there are a few situations 
where this loss is unbearable. 
Think about a four color picture scanned at 300 dots per inch making 
90000 pixels per square inch. Now a processing on this picture requires 
360000 operations per square inch, on e operation for each color of each 
pixel. A few extra instructions placed by the translator can cost hours of 
extra time. The only way to optimize this is to do it directly in assembly 
language. But this doesn’t mean that the whole application has to be written 
in assembly language, which is almost never the case. It’s only the 
performance critical part that is coded in assembly language to gain the few 
extra cycles that matter at that point. 
Consider an arch just like the ones in mosques. It cannot be made of big 
stones alone as that would make the arch wildly jagged, not like the fine arch 
we are used to see. The fine grains of  cement are used to smooth it to the 
desired level of perfection. This operation of smoothing is optimization. The 
core structure is built in a higher level language with the big blocks it 
provides and the corners that need optimization are smoothed with the fine 
grain of assembly language which allows extreme control. 
Another use of assembly language is in a class of time critical systems 
called real time systems. Real time systems have time bound responses, with 
an upper limit of time on certain operations. For such precise timing 
requirement, we must keep the instruct ions in our total control. In higher 
level languages we cannot even tell how many computer instructions were 
actually used, but in assembly langua ge we can have precise control over 
them. Any reasonable sized application or a serious development effort has 
nooks and corners where assembly language is needed. And at these corners 
if there is no assembly language, there can be no optimization and when 
there is no optimization, there is no beauty. Sometimes a useful application 
becomes useless just because of the carelessness of not working on these 
jagged corners.  
The third major reason for learning assembly language and a major 
objective for teaching it is to produce fine grained logic in programmers. Just 
like big blocks cannot produce an arch, the big thick grained logic learnt in a 
higher level language ca nnot produce the beauty and fineness assembly 
language can deliver. Each and every grain of assembly language has a 
meaning; nothing is presumed (e.g. div and mul for input and out put of 
decimal number). You have to put together these grains, the minimum 
number of them to produce the desired outcome. Just like a “for” loop in a 
higher level language is a block cons truct and has a hundred things hidden 
in it, but using the grains of assembly  language we do a similar operation 
with a number of grains but in the process understand the minute logic 
hidden beside that simple “for” construct. 
Assembly language cannot be learnt by reading a book or by attending a 
course. It is a language that must be tasted and enjoyed. There is no other 
way to learn it. You will need to try every example, observe and verify the 
things you are told about it, and experiment a lot with the computer. Only 
then you will know and become able to appreciate how powerful, versatile, 
and simple this language is; the three properties that are hardly ever present 
together. 
Whether you program in C/C++ or Java, or in any programming paradigm 
be it object oriented or declarative, everything has to boil down to the bits 
and bytes of assembly language before the computer can even understand it. 
--- Page Break ---
 
Table of Contents 
Preface i 
Table of Contents iii 
1 Introduction to Assembly Language 1 
1.1. Basic Computer Architecture 1 
1.2. Registers 3 
1.3. Instruction Groups 5 
1.4. Intel iapx88 Architecture 6 
1.5. History 6 
1.6. Register Architecture 7 
1.7. Our First Program 9 
1.8. Segmented Memory Model 12 
2 Addressing Modes 17 
2.1. Data Declaration 17 
2.2. Direct Addressing 17 
2.3. Size Mismatch Errors 21 
2.4. Register Indirect Addressing 22 
2.5. Register + Offset Addressing 25 
2.6. Segment Association 25 
2.7. Address Wraparound 26 
2.8. Addressing Modes Summary 27 
3 Branching 31 
3.1. Comparison and Conditions 31 
3.2. Conditional Jumps 33 
3.3. Unconditional Jump 36 
3.4. Relative Addressing 37 
3.5. Types of Jump 37 
3.6. Sorting Example 38 
4 Bit Manipulations 43 
4.1. Multiplication Algorithm 43 
4.2. Shifting and Rotations 43 
4.3. Multiplication in Assembly Language 46 
4.4. Extended Operations 47 
4.5. Bitwise Logical Operations 50 
4.6. Masking Operations 51 
5 Subroutines 55 
5.1. Program Flow 55 
5.2. Our First Subroutine 57 
5.3. Stack 59 
5.4. Saving and Restoring Registers 62 
5.5. Parameter Passing Through Stack 64 
5.6. Local Variables 67 
6 Display Memory 71 
--- Page Break ---
iv 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
iv 
6.1. ASCII Codes 71 
6.2. Display Memory Formation 72 
6.3. Hello World in Assembly Language 74 
6.4. Number Printing in Assembly 76 
6.5. Screen Location Calculation 79 
7 String Instructions 83 
7.1. String Processing 83 
7.2. STOS Example – Clearing the Screen 85 
7.3. LODS Example – String Printing 86 
7.4. SCAS Example – String Length 87 
7.5. LES and LDS Example 89 
7.6. MOVS Example – Screen Scrolling 90 
7.7. CMPS Example – String Comparison 92 
8 Software Interrupts 95 
8.1. Interrupts 95 
8.2. Hooking an Interrupt 98 
8.3. BIOS and DOS Interrupts 99 
9 Real Time Interrupts and Hardware Interfacing 105 
9.1. Hardware Interrupts 105 
9.2. I/O Ports 106 
9.3. Terminate and Stay Resident 111 
9.4. Programmable Interval Timer 114 
9.5. Parallel Port 116 
10 Debug Interrupts 125 
10.1. Debugger using single step interrupt 125 
10.2. Debugger using breakpoint interrupt 128 
11 Multitasking 131 
11.1. Concepts of Multitasking 131 
11.2. Elaborate Multitasking 133 
11.3. Multitasking Kernel as TSR 135 
12 Video Services 141 
12.1. BIOS Video Services 141 
12.2. DOS Video Services 144 
13 Secondary Storage 147 
13.1. Physical Formation 147 
13.2. Storage Access Using BIOS 148 
13.3. Storage Access using DOS 153 
13.4. Device Drivers 158 
14 Serial Port Programming 163 
14.1. Introduction 163 
14.2. Serial Communication 165 
15 Protected Mode Programming 167 
15.1. Introduction 167 
15.2. 32bit Programming 170 
15.3. VESA Linear Frame Buffer 172 
15.4. Interrupt Handling 174 
16 Interfacing with High Level Languages 179 
--- Page Break ---
 TABLE OF CONTENTS v 
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
v 
16.1. Calling Conventions 179 
16.2. Calling C from Assembly 179 
16.3. Calling Assembly from C 181 
17 Comparison with Other Processors 183 
17.1. Motorolla 68K Processors 183 
17.2. Sun SPARC Processor 184 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
1 
Introduction to Assembly 
Language 
1.1. BASIC COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE 
Address, Data, and Control Buses 
A computer system comprises of a processor, memory, and I/O devices. 
I/O is used for interfacing with the external world, while memory is the 
processor’s internal world. Processor is the core in this picture and is 
responsible for performing operations. The operation of a computer can be 
fairly described with processor and memory only. I/O will be discussed in a 
later part of the course. Now the whole working of the computer is 
performing an operation by the processor on data, which resides in memory. 
The scenario that the processor executes operations and the memory 
contains data elements requires a mechanism for the processor to read that 
data from the memory. “That data” in  the previous sentence much be 
rigorously explained to the memory wh ich is a dumb device. Just like a 
postman, who must be told the precise address on the letter, to inform him 
where the destination is located. Another significant point is that if we only 
want to read the data and not write it, then there must be a mechanism to 
inform the memory that we are interested in reading data and not writing it. 
Key points in the above discussion are: 
• There must be a mechanism to inform memory that we want to do the 
read operation 
• There must be a mechanism to inform memory that we want to read 
precisely which element 
• There must be a mechanism to transfer that data element from 
memory to processor 
The group of bits that the processor uses to inform the memory about 
which element to read or write is collectively known as the address bus . 
Another important bus called the data bus is used to move the data from the 
memory to the processor in a read op eration and from the processor to the 
memory in a write operation. The th ird group consists of miscellaneous 
independent lines used for control purposes. For example, one line of the bus 
is used to inform the memory about whether to do the read operation or the 
write operation. These lines are collectively known as the control bus. 
These three buses are the eyes, nose, and ears of the processor. It uses 
them in a synchronized manner to perform a meaningful operation. Although 
the programmer specifies the meaningful operation, but to fulfill it the 
processor needs the collab oration of other units and peripherals. And that 
collaboration is made available using th e three buses. This is the very basic 
description of a computer and it can be extended on the same lines to I/O 
but we are leaving it out just for simplicity for the moment. 
The address bus is unidirectional and address always travels from 
processor to memory. This is because memory is a dumb device and cannot 
predict which element the processor at a particular instant of time needs. 
Data moves from both, processor to memory and memory to processor, so 
the data bus is bidirectional. Control bus is special and relatively complex, 
because different lines comprising it behave differently. Some take 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
2 
information from the processor to a pe ripheral and some take information 
from the peripheral to the processor. Th ere can be certain events outside the 
processor that are of its interest. To bring information about these events the 
data bus cannot be used as it is ow ned by the processor and will only be 
used when the processor grants permission to use it. Therefore certain 
processors provide control lines to br ing such information to processor’s 
notice in the control bus. Knowing these signals in detail is unnecessary but 
the general idea of the control bus must be conceived in full. 
 
 
 
We take an example to explain the collaboration of the processor and 
memory using the address, control, and data buses. Consider that you want 
your uneducated servant to bring a book from the shelf. You order him to 
bring the fifth book from top of the shelf. All the data movement operations 
are hidden in this one sentence. Such a simple everyday phenomenon seen 
from this perspective explains the se emingly complex working of the three 
buses. We told the servant to “bring a book” and the one which is “fifth from 
top,” precise location even for the servant who is much more intelligent then 
our dumb memory. The dumb servant follows the steps one by one and the 
book is in your hand as a result. If however you just asked him for a book or 
you named the book, your uneducated servant will stand there gazing at you 
and the book will never come in your hand.  
Even in this simplest of all examples, mathematics is there, “fifth from 
top.” Without a number the servant would not be able to locate the book. He 
is unable to understand your will. Then you tell him to put it with the 
seventh book on the right shelf. Precision is involved and only numbers are 
precise in this world. One will always be one and two will always be two. So 
we tell in the form of a number on the address bus which cell is needed out 
of say the 2000 cells in the whole memory. 
A binary number is generated on the address bus, fifth, seventh, eighth, 
tenth; the cell which is needed. So the cell number is placed on the address 
bus. A memory cell is an n-bit location  to store data, normally 8-bit also 
called a byte. The number of bits in a cell is called the cell width. The two 
dimensions, cell width and number of cells, define the memory completely 
just like the width and depth of a well de fines it completely. 200 feet deep by 
15 feet wide and the well is completely described. Similarly for memory we 
define two dimensions. The first dimens ion defines how many parallel bits 
are there in a single memory cell. The memory is called 8-bit or 16-bit for 
this reason and this is also the word  size of the memory. This need not 
match the size of a processor word whic h has other parameters to define it. 
In general the memory cell cannot be wi der than the width of the data bus. 
Best and simplest operation requires th e same size of data bus and memory 
cell width. 
PROCESSOR MEMORY 
PERIPHERALS 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
3 
As we previously discussed that the control bus carries the intent of the 
processor that it wants to read or to write. Memory changes its behavior in 
response to this signal from the processor. It defines the direction of data 
flow. If processor wants to read but me mory wants to write, there will be no 
communication or useful flow of info rmation. Both must be synchronized, 
like a speaker speaks and the listener lis tens. If both speak simultaneously 
or both listen there will be no commun ication. This precise synchronization 
between the processor and the memory is the responsibility of the control 
bus. 
Control bus is only the mechanism. The responsibility of sending the 
appropriate signals on the control bus to the memory is of the processor. 
Since the memory never wants to listen or to speak of itself. Then why is the 
control bus bidirectional. Again we take the same example of the servant and 
the book further to elaborate this situation. Consider that the servant went 
to fetch the book just to find that the drawing room door is locked. Now the 
servant can wait there indefinitely keeping us in surprise or come back and 
inform us about the situation so that  we can act accordingly. The servant 
even though he was obedient was unable  to fulfill our orders so in all his 
obedience, he came back to inform us about the problem. Synchronization is 
still important, as a result of our orders  either we got the desired cell or we 
came to know that the memory is locked for the moment. Such information 
cannot be transferred via the address or the data bus. For such situations 
when peripherals want to talk to the processor when the processor wasn’t 
expecting them to speak, special lin es in the control bus are used. The 
information in such signals is usually  to indicate the incapability of the 
peripheral to do something for the moment. For these reasons the control 
bus is a bidirectional bus and can ca rry information from processor to 
memory as well as from memory to processor. 
1.2. REGISTERS 
The basic purpose of a computer is to perform operations, and operations 
need operands. Operands are the data on which we want to perform a certain 
operation. Consider the addition oper ation; it involves adding two numbers 
to get their sum. We can have precisely one address on the address bus and 
consequently precisely one element on the data bus. At the very same instant 
the second operand cannot be brought inside the processor. As soon as the 
second is selected, the first operand is no longer there. For this reason there 
are temporary storage places inside the processor called registers. Now one 
operand can be read in a register and added into the other which is read 
directly from the memory. Both are made accessible at one instance of time, 
one from inside the processor and one from outside on the data bus. The 
result can be written to at a distinct location as the operation has completed 
and we can access a different memory cell. Sometimes we hold both 
operands in registers for the sake of efficiency as what we can do inside the 
processor is undoubtedly faster than if we have to go outside and bring the 
second operand.  
Registers are like a scratch pad ram inside the processor and their 
operation is very much like normal memory cells. They have precise locations 
and remember what is placed inside them. They are used when we need 
more than one data element inside the processor at one time. The concept of 
registers will be further elaborated as we progress into writing our first 
program. 
Memory is a limited resource but the number of memory cells is large. 
Registers are relatively very small in number, and are therefore a very scarce 
and precious resource. Registers are more than one in number, so we have to 
precisely identify or name them. Some manufacturers number their registers 
like r0, r1, r2, others name them like A, B, C, D etc. Naming is useful since 
the registers are few in number. This is called the nomenclature of the 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
4 
particular architecture. Still other manufacturers name their registers 
according to their function like X stands for an index register. This also 
informs us that there are special functions of registers as well, some of which 
are closely associated to the particular architecture. For example index 
registers do not hold data instead they are used to hold the address of data. 
There are other functions as well and the whole spectrum of register 
functionalities is quite large. However most of the details will become clear as 
the registers of the Intel architecture are discussed in detail.  
Accumulator 
There is a central register in every processor called the accumulator. 
Traditionally all mathematical and logi cal operations are performed on the 
accumulator. The word size of a processor is defined by the width of its 
accumulator. A 32bit processor has an accumulator of 32 bits. 
Pointer, Index, or Base Register 
The name varies from manufacturer to manufacturer, but the basic 
distinguishing property is that it does not hold data but holds the address of 
data. The rationale can be understood by examining a “for” loop in a higher 
level language, zeroing elements in an array of ten elements located in 
consecutive memory cells. The location to be zeroed changes every iteration. 
That is the address where the operation is performed is changing. Index 
register is used in such a situation to hold the address of the current array 
location. Now the value in the index register cannot be treated as data, but it 
is the address of data. In general whenever we need access to a memory 
location whose address is not known until runtime we need an index 
register. Without this register we would have needed to explicitly code each 
iteration separately.  
In newer architectures the distinction between accumulator and index 
registers has become vague. They have general registers which are more 
versatile and can do both functions. They do have some specialized behaviors 
but basic operations can be done on all general registers. 
Flags Register or Program Status Word 
This is a special register in every architecture called the flags register or 
the program status word. Like the accumulator it is an 8, 16, or 32 bits 
register but unlike the accumulator it is meaningless as a unit, rather the 
individual bits carry different meanings. The bits of the accumulator work in 
parallel as a unit and each bit mean the same thing. The bits of the flags 
register work independently and individually, and combined its value is 
meaningless.  
An example of a bit commonly present in the flags register is the carry flag. 
The carry can be contained in a single bit as in binary arithmetic the carry 
can only be zero or one. If a 16bit number is added to a 16bit accumulator, 
and the result is of 17 bits the 17th bi t is placed in the ca rry bit of the flags 
register. Without this 17th bit the answer is incorrect. More examples of flags 
will be discussed when dealing with the Intel specific register set. 
Program Counter or Instruction Pointer 
Everything must translate into a binary number for our dumb processor to 
understand it, be it an operand or an operation itself. Therefore the 
instructions themselves must be tran slated into numbers. For example to 
add numbers we understand the word “add.” We translate this word into a 
number to make the processor understand it. This number is the actual 
instruction for the computer. All the objects, inheritance and encapsulation 
constructs in higher level languages translate down to just a number in 
assembly language in the end. Addition, multiplication, shifting; all big 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
5 
programs are made using these simple building blocks. A number is at the 
bottom line since this is the only thing a computer can understand. 
A program is defined to be  “an ordered set of instructions.” Order in this 
definition is a key part. Instructions run one after another, first, second, 
third and so on. Instructions have a positional relationship. The whole logic 
depends on this positioning. If the computer executes the fifth instructions 
after the first and not the second, all our logic is gone. The processor should 
ensure this ordering of instructions. A special register exists in every 
processor called the program counter or  the instruction pointer that ensures 
this ordering. “The program counter holds the address of the next instruction 
to be executed.” A number is placed in the memory cell pointed to by this 
register and that number tells the processor which instruction to execute; for 
example 0xEA, 255, or 152. For the processor 152 might be the add 
instruction. Just this one number tells  i t  t h a t  i t  h a s  t o  a d d ,  w h e r e  i t s  
operands are, and where to store the result. This number is called the 
opcode. The instruction pointer moves from one opcode to the next. This is 
how our program executes and progress es. One instruction is picked, its 
operands are read and the instruction is  executed, then the next instruction 
is picked from the new address in instruction pointer and so on.  
Remembering 152 for the add operation or 153 for the subtract operation 
is difficult. To make a simple way to re member difficult things we associate a 
symbol to every number. As when we write “add” everyone understands what 
we mean by it. Then we need a small program to convert this “add” of ours to 
152 for the processor. Just a simple search and replace operation to 
translate all such symbols to their corresponding opcodes. We have mapped 
the numeric world of the processor to our symbolic world. “Add” conveys a 
meaning to us but the number 152 does not. We can say that add is closer to 
the programmer’s thinking. This is the basic motive of adding more and more 
translation layers up to higher level languages like C++ and Java and Visual 
Basic. These symbols are called instruction mnemonics . Therefore the 
mnemonic “add a to b” conveys more information to the reader. The dumb 
translator that will convert these mnemon ics back to the original opcodes is 
a key program to be used throughout this course and is called the assembler.  
1.3. INSTRUCTION GROUPS 
Usual opcodes in every processor exist for moving data, arithmetic and 
logical manipulations etc. However their mnemonics vary depending on the 
will of the manufacturer. Some manufacturers name the mnemonics for data 
movement instructions as “move,” some  call it “load” and “store” and still 
other names are present. But the basic set of instructions is similar in every 
processor. A grouping of these instruct ions makes learning a new processor 
quick and easy. Just the group an instruction belongs tells a lot about the 
instruction. 
Data Movement Instructions 
These instructions are used to move data from one place to another. These 
places can be registers, memory, or even inside peripheral devices. Some 
examples are: 
mov  ax, bx  
lad  1234 
Arithmetic and Logic Instructions 
Arithmetic instructions like addition, subtraction, multiplication, division 
and Logical instructions like logical and, logical or, logical xor, or 
complement are part of this group. Some examples are: 
and  ax, 1234 
add  bx, 0534 
add  bx, [1200] 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
6 
The bracketed form is a complex variation meaning to add the data placed 
at address 1200. Addressing data in memory is a detailed topic and is 
discussed in the next chapter. 
Program Control Instructions 
The instruction pointer points to the next instruction and instructions run 
one after the other with the help of this register. We can say that the 
instructions are tied with one another. In some situations we don’t want to 
follow this implied path and want to order the processor to break its flow if 
some condition becomes true instead of the spatially placed next instruction. 
In certain other cases we want the processor to first execute a separate block 
of code and then come back to resume processing where it left.  
These are instructions that control the program execution and flow by 
playing with the instruction pointer and altering its normal behavior to point 
to the next instruction. Some examples are: 
cmp  ax, 0 
jne  1234 
We are changing the program flow to the instruction at 1234 address if the 
condition that we checked becomes true. 
Special Instructions 
Another group called special instructions works like the special service 
commandos. They allow changing specific processor behaviors and are used 
to play with it. They are used rarely but are certainly used in any meaningful 
program. Some examples are: 
cli 
sti 
Where cli clears the interrupt flag and sti sets it. Without delving deep into 
it, consider that the cli instruction in structs the processor to close its ears 
from the outside world and never listen to what is happening outside, 
possibly to do some very important task at hand, while sti restores normal 
behavior. Since these instructions chan ge the processor behavior they are 
placed in the special instructions group. 
1.4. INTEL IAPX88 ARCHITECTURE 
Now we select a specific architecture to discuss these abstract ideas in 
concrete form. We will be using IBM PC based on Intel architecture because 
of its wide availability, because of fr ee assemblers and debuggers available 
for it, and because of its wide use in  a variety of domains. However the 
concepts discussed will be applicable on  any other architecture as well; just 
the mnemonics of the particular language will be different.  
Technically iAPX88 stands for “Intel Advanced Processor Extensions 88.” It 
was a very successful processor also called 8088 and was used in the very 
first IBM PC machines. Our discussion will revolve around 8088 in the first 
half of the course while in the second half we will use iAPX386 which is very 
advanced and powerful processor. 8088 is a 16bit processor with its 
accumulator and all registers of 16 bits. 386 on the other hand, is a 32bit 
processor. However it is downward compatible with iAPX88 meaning that all 
code written for 8088 is valid on the 386. The architecture of a processor 
means the organization and functionalities of the registers it contains and 
the instructions that are valid on the processor. We will discuss the register 
architecture of 8088 in detail below whil e its instructions are discussed in 
the rest of the book at appropriate places. 
1.5. HISTORY 
Intel did release some 4bit processors in the beginning but the first 
meaningful processor was 8080, an 8b it processor. The processor became 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
7 
popular due to its simplistic design an d versatile architecture. Based on the 
experience gained from 8080, an advanced version was released as 8085. 
The processor became widely popular in the engineering community again 
due to its simple and logical nature.  
Intel introduced the first 16bit processor named 8088 at a time when the 
concept of personal computer was evolving. With a maximum memory of 64K 
on the 8085, the 8088 allowed a whole mega byte. IBM embedded this 
processor in their personal computer. The first machines ran at 4.43 MHz; a 
blazing speed at that time. This was the right thing at the right moment. No 
one expected this to become the bigg est success of computing history. IBM 
PC XT became so popular and successf ul due to its open architecture and 
easily available information.  
The success was unexpected for the developers themselves. As when Intel 
introduced the processor it contained a timer tick count which was valid for 
five years only. They never anticipated the architecture to stay around for 
more than five years but the history took a turn and the architecture is there 
at every desk even after 25 years and the tick is to be specially handled every 
now and then. 
1.6. REGISTER ARCHITECTURE 
The iAPX88 architecture consists of 14 registers. 
 
 
General Registers (AX, BX, CX, and DX) 
The registers AX, BX, CX, and DX behave as general purpose registers in 
Intel architecture and do some specific fu nctions in addition to it. X in their 
names stand for extended meaning 16bit registers. For example AX means 
we are referring to the extended 16bit “A” register. Its upper and lower byte 
are separately accessible as AH (A high byte) and AL (A low byte). All general 
purpose registers can be accessed as one 16bit register or as two 8bit 
registers. The two registers AH and AL are part of the big whole AX. Any 
change in AH or AL is reflected in AX as well. AX is a composite or extended 
register formed by gluing together the two parts AH and AL. 
The A of AX stands for Accumulator.  Even though all general purpose 
registers can act as accumulator in most instructions there are some specific 
variations which can only work on AX which is why it is named the 
accumulator. The B of BX stands for Base because of its role in memory 
addressing as discussed in the next chapter. The C of CX stands for Counter 
as there are certain instructions that work with an automatic count in the 
CX register. The D of DX stands for Dest ination as it acts as the destination 
in I/O operations. The A, B, C, and D are in letter sequence as well as depict 
some special functionality of the register. 
CS 
DS 
SS 
ES 
IP 
SP
BP
SI
DI
AH AL
BH BL
CH CL
DH DLFLAGS
(AX)
(BX)
(CX)
(DX)
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
8 
Index Registers (SI and DI) 
SI and DI stand for source index and destination index respectively. These 
are the index registers of the Intel ar chitecture which hold address of data 
and used in memory access. Being an open and flexible architecture, Intel 
allows many mathematical and logical operations on these registers as well 
like the general registers. The source and destination are named because of 
their implied functionality as the source or the destination in a special class 
of instructions called the string instru ctions. However their use is not at all 
restricted to string instructions. SI and DI are 16bit and cannot be used as 
8bit register pairs like AX, BX, CX, and DX. 
Instruction Pointer (IP) 
This is the special register containing the address of the next instruction to 
be executed. No mathematics or memory access can be done through this 
register. It is out of our direct control and is automatically used. Playing with 
it is dangerous and needs special care. Program control instructions change 
the IP register. 
Stack Pointer (SP) 
It is a memory pointer and is used indirectly by a set of instructions. This 
register will be explored in the discussion of the system stack.  
Base Pointer (BP) 
It is also a memory pointer containing the address in a special area of 
memory called the stack and will be explored alongside SP in the discussion 
of the stack. 
Flags Register  
The flags register as previously discussed is not meaningful as a unit 
rather it is bit wise significant and ac cordingly each bit is named separately. 
The bits not named are unused. The Intel FLAGS register has its bits 
organized as follows: 
 
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 
    O D I T S Z  A  P  C 
 
The individual flags are explained in the following table.  
 
C Carry When two 16bit numbers are added the answer can be 
17 bits long or when two 8bit numbers are added the 
answer can be 9 bits long. This extra bit that won’t fit 
in the target register is placed in the carry flag where it 
can be used and tested. 
P Parity  Parity is the number of “one” bits in a binary number. 
Parity is either odd or even. This information is 
normally used in communications to verify the integrity 
of data sent from the sender to the receiver. 
A Auxiliary 
Carry 
A number in base 16 is called a hex number and can be 
represented by 4 bits. The collection of 4 bits is called a 
nibble. During addition or subtraction if a carry goes 
from one nibble to the next this flag is set. Carry flag is 
for the carry from the whole addition while auxiliary 
carry is the carry from the first nibble to the second. 
Z Zero Flag The Zero flag is set if the last mathematical or logical 
instruction has produced a zero in its destination. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
9 
S Sign Flag A signed number is re presented in its two’s complement 
form in the computer. The most significant bit (MSB) of 
a negative number in this representation is 1 and for a 
positive number it is zero. The sign bit of the last 
mathematical or logical operation’s destination is 
copied into the sign flag. 
T Trap Flag The trap flag has a sp ecial role in debugging which will 
be discussed later. 
I Interrupt Flag It tells whether the processor can be interrupted from 
outside or not. Sometimes the programmer doesn’t 
want a particular task to be interrupted so the 
Interrupt flag can be zeroed for this time. The 
programmer rather than the processor sets this flag 
since the programmer knows when interruption is okay 
and when it is not. Interruption can be disabled or 
enabled by making this bit zero or one, respectively, 
using special instructions. 
D Direction Flag Specifically related to  string instructions, this flag tells 
whether the current operation has to be done from 
bottom to top of the block (D=0) or from top to bottom 
of the block (D=1). 
O Overflow Flag The overflow flag is set during signed arithmetic, e.g. 
addition or subtraction,  when the sign of the 
destination changes unexpectedly. The actual process 
sets the overflow flag whenever the carry into the MSB 
is different from the carry out of the MSB 
Segment Registers (CS, DS, SS, and ES) 
The code segment register, data segment register, stack segment register, 
and the extra segment register are special registers related to the Intel 
segmented memory model and will be discussed later. 
1.7. OUR FIRST PROGRAM 
The first program that we will write will only add three numbers. This very 
simple program will clarify most of the basic concepts of assembly language. 
We will start with writing our algorithm in English and then moving on to 
convert it into assembly language. 
English Language Version 
“Program is an ordered set of instru ctions for the processor.” Our first 
program will be instructions manipulating AX and BX in plain English. 
move 5 to ax 
move 10 to bx 
add bx to ax 
move 15 to bx 
add bx to ax 
Even in this simple reflection of thoughts in English, there are some key 
things to observe. One is the concept of destination as ev ery instruction has 
a “to destination” part and there is a source before it as well. For example the 
second line has a constant 10 as its source and the register BX as its 
destination. The key point in giving the first program in English is to convey 
that the concepts of assembly lang uage are simple but fine. Try to 
understand them considering that all above is everyday English that you 
know very well and every concept will eventually be applicable to assembly 
language. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
10 
Assembly Language Version 
Intel could have made their assembly  language exactly identical to our 
program in plain English but they have abbreviated a lot of symbols to avoid 
unnecessarily lengthy program when the meaning could be conveyed with 
less effort. For example Intel has named their move instruction “mov” instead 
of “move.” Similarly the Intel order of  placing source and destination is 
opposite to what we have used in our English program, just a change of 
interpretation. So the Intel way of writing things is: 
operation destination, source 
operation destination 
operation source 
operation 
The later three variations are for instructions that have one or both of their 
operands implied or they work on a single or no operand. An implied operand 
means that it is always in a particular register say the accumulator, and it 
need not be mentioned in the instruction. Now we attempt to write our 
program in actual assembly language of the iapx88. 
 
 Example 1.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
; a program to add three numbers using registers  
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, 5              ; load first number in ax 
              mov  bx, 10             ; load second number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  bx, 15             ; load third number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
001 To start a comment a semicolon is used and the assembler ignores 
everything else on the same line. Comments must be extensively 
used in assembly language programs to make them readable. 
002 Leave the org directive for now as it will be discussed later. 
003 The constant 5 is loaded in one register AX. 
004 The constant 10 is loaded in another register BX. 
005 Register BX is added to register AX and the result is stored in 
register AX. Register AX should contain 15 by now. 
006 The constant 15 is loaded in the register BX. 
007 Register BX is again added to register AX now producing 15+15=30 
in the AX register. So the program has computed 5+10+15=30. 
008 Vertical spacing must also be used extensively in assembly language 
programs to separate logical blocks of code. 
009-010 The ending lines are related more to the operating system than to 
assembly language programming. It is a way to inform DOS that our 
program has terminated so it can display its command prompt 
again. The computer may reboot or behave improperly if this 
termination is not present. 
 
Assembler, Linker, and Debugger 
We need an assembler to assemble this program and convert this into 
executable binary code. The assembler that we will use during this course is 
“Netwide Assembler” or NASM. It is a free and open source assembler. And 
the tool that will be most used will be the debugger. We will use a free 
debugger called “A fullscreen debugger” or AFD. These are the whole set of 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
11 
weapons an assembly language programmer needs for any task whatsoever 
at hand.  
To assemble we will give the following command to the processor assuming 
that our input file is named EX01.ASM. 
nasm ex01.asm –o ex01.com –l ex01.lst 
This will produce two files EX01.COM that is our executable file and 
EX01.LST that is a special listing file that we will explore now. The listing file 
produced for our example above is sh own below with comments removed for 
neatness. 
 
 
     1                                   
     2                                  [org 0x0100] 
     3 00000000 B80500                                mov  ax, 5               
     4 00000003 BB0A00                                mov  bx, 10              
     5 00000006 01D8                                  add  ax, bx              
     6 00000008 BB0F00                                mov  bx, 15              
     7 0000000B 01D8                                  add  ax, bx              
     8                                   
     9 0000000D B8004C                                mov  ax, 0x4c00          
    10 00000010 CD21                                  int  0x21 
 
 
The first column in the above listing is offset of the listed instruction in the 
output file. Next column is the op code into which our instruction was 
translated. In this case this opcode is B8. Whenever we move a constant into 
AX register the opcode B8 will be used . After it 0500 is appended which is 
the immediate operand to this instru ction. An immediate operand is an 
operand which is placed directly inside the instruction. Now as the AX 
register is a word sized register, and one hexadecimal digit takes 4 bits so 4 
hexadecimal digits make one word or two bytes. Which of the two bytes 
should be placed first in the instruct ion, the least significant or the most 
significant? Similarly for 32bit numbers either the order can be most 
significant, less significant, lesser sign ificant, and least significant called the 
big-endian order used by Motorola and some other companies or it can be 
least significant, more significant, more significant, and most significant 
called the little-endian order and is used by Intel. The big-endian have the 
argument that it is more natural to read and comprehend while the little-
endian have the argument that this scheme places the less significant value 
at a lesser address and more significant value at a higher address. 
Because of this the constant 5 in ou r instruction was converted into 0500 
with the least significant byte of 05 first and the most significant byte of 00 
afterwards. When read as a word it is 0005 but when written in memory it 
will become 0500. As the first instructio n is three bytes long, the listing file 
shows that the offset of the next instruction in the file is 3. The opcode BB is 
for moving a constant into the BX register, and the operand 0A00 is the 
number 10 in little-endian byte order. Similarly the offsets and opcodes of 
the remaining instructions are shown in order. The last instruction is placed 
at offset 0x10 or 16 in decimal. The size  of the last instruction is two bytes, 
so the size of the complete COM file becomes 18 bytes. This can be verified 
from the directory listing, using the DIR command, that the COM file 
produced is exactly 18 bytes long. 
Now the program is ready to be run inside the debugger. The debugger 
shows the values of registers, flags, st ack, our code, and one or two areas of 
the system memory as data. Debugger allows us to step our program one 
instruction at a time and observe its effect on the registers and program 
data. The details of using the AFD debugger can be seen from the AFD 
manual.  
After loading the program in the debugger observe that the first instruction 
is now at 0100 instead of absolute zero. This is the effect of the org directive 
at the start of our program. The first instruction of a COM file must be at 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
12 
offset 0100 (decimal 255) as a requirement. Also observe that the debugger is 
showing your program even though it was provided only the COM file and 
neither of the listing file or the program source. This is because the 
translation from mnemonic to opcode is reversible and the debugger mapped 
back from the opcode to the inst ruction mnemonic. This will become 
apparent for instructions that have two mnemonics as the debugger might 
not show the one that was written in the source file.  
As a result of program execution either registers or memory will change. 
Since our program yet doesn’t touch memory the only changes will be in the 
registers. Keenly observe the registers AX, BX, and IP change after every 
instruction. IP will change after ev ery instruction to point to the next 
instruction while AX will accumulate the result of our addition. 
1.8. SEGMENTED MEMORY MODEL 
Rationale 
In earlier processors like 8080 and 8085 the linear memory model was 
used to access memory. In linear memory model the whole memory appears 
like a single array of data. 8080 and 8085 could access a total memory of 
64K using the 16 lines of their address bus. When designing iAPX88 the Intel 
designers wanted to remain compatible with 8080 and 8085 however 64K 
was too small to continue with, for their new processor. To get the best of 
both worlds they introduced the segmented memory model in 8088. 
There is also a logical argument in favor of a segmented memory model in 
addition to the issue of compatibilit y discussed above. We have two logical 
parts of our program, the code and the data, and actually there is a third 
part called the program stack as well, but higher level languages make this 
invisible to us. These three logical parts of a program should appear as three 
distinct units in memory, but making this division is not possible in the 
linear memory model. The segmented memory model does allow this 
distinction. 
Mechanism 
The segmented memory model allows multiple functional windows into the 
main memory, a code window, a data window etc. The processor sees code 
from the code window and data from  the data window. The size of one 
window is restricted to 64K. 8085 softwa re fits in just one such window. It 
sees code, data, and stack from this one window, so downward compatibility 
is attained.  
However the maximum memory iAPX88 can access is 1MB which can be 
accessed with 20 bits. Compare this with the 64K of 8085 that were accessed 
using 16 bits. The idea is that the 64K window just discussed can be moved 
anywhere in the whole 1MB. The four segment registers discussed in the 
Intel register architecture are used for this purpose. Therefore four windows 
can exist at one time. For example one window that is pointed to by the CS 
register contains the currently executing code. 
To understand the concept, consider  the windows of a building. We say 
that a particular window is 3 feet above the floor and another one is 20 feet 
above the floor. The reference point, the floor is the base of the segment 
called the datum point in a graph and all measurement is done from that 
datum point considering it to be zero. So CS holds the zero or the base of 
code. DS holds the zero of data. Or we can say CS tells how high code from 
the floor is, and DS tells how high data  from the floor is, while SS tells how 
high the stack is. One extra segment ES can be used if we need to access two 
distant areas of memory at the same ti me that both cannot be seen through 
the same window. ES also has special role in string instructions. ES is used 
as an extra data segment and cannot be used as an extra code or stack 
segment.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
13 
Revisiting the concept again, like the datum point of a graph, the segment 
registers tell the start of our window which can be opened anywhere in the 
megabyte of memory available. The window is of a fixed size of 64KB. Base 
and offset are the two key variables in a segmented address. Segment tells 
the base while offset is added into it. The registers IP, SP, BP, SI, DI, and BX 
all can contain a 16bit offset in them and access memory relative to a 
segment base.  
The IP register cannot work alone. It needs the CS register to open a 64K 
window in the 1MB memory and then IP works to select code from this 
window as offsets. IP works only inside this window and cannot go outside of 
this 64K in any case. If the window is moved i.e. the CS register is changed, 
IP will change its behavior accordingly and start selecting from the new 
window. The IP register always works relatively, relative to the segment base 
stored in the CS register. IP is a 16bit register capable of accessing only 64K 
memory so how the whole megabyte ca n contain code anywhere. Again the 
same concept is there, it can access 64K at one instance of time. As the base 
is changed using the CS register, IP can be made to point anywhere in  the 
whole megabyte. The process is illustrated with the following diagram. 
 
 
Physical Address Calculation 
Now for the whole megabyte we need 20 bits while CS and IP are both 
16bit registers. We need a mechanism to make a 20bit number out of the two 
16bit numbers. Consider that the segment value is stored as a 20 bit number 
with the lower four bits zero and the offset value is stored as another 20 bit 
number with the upper four bits zeroed. The two are added to produce a 
20bit absolute address. A carry if generated is dropped without being stored 
anywhere and the phenomenon is called address wraparound. The process is 
explained with the help of the following diagram. 
 
xxxx0 
Paragraph 
Boundary 
Offset 
64K 
Segment 
Base 
00000
FFFFF
Physical Address 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
14 
 
 
Therefore memory is determined by a segment-offset pair and not alone by 
any one register which will be an ambiguous reference. Every offset register 
is assigned a default segment register to resolve such ambiguity. For example 
the program we wrote when loaded into memory had a value of 0100 in IP 
register and some value say 1DDD in the CS register. Making both 20 bit 
numbers, the segment base is 1DDD0 and the offset is 00100 and adding 
them we get the physical memory address of 1DED0 where the opcode 
B80500 is placed.  
Paragraph Boundaries 
As the segment value is a 16bit number and four zero bits are appended to 
the right to make it a 20bit number, segments can only be defined a 16byte 
boundaries called paragraph boundaries.  The first possible segment value is 
0000 meaning a physical base of 00000 and the next possible value of 0001 
means a segment base of 00010 or 16 in decimal. Therefore segments can 
only be defined at 16 byte boundaries. 
Overlapping Segments 
We can also observe that in the case of our program CS, DS, SS, and ES 
all had the same value in them. This is called overlapping segments so that 
we can see the same memory from any window. This is the structure of a 
COM file. 
Using partially overlapping segmen ts we can produce a number of 
segment, offset pairs that all access the same memory. For example 
1DDD:0100 and IDED:0000 both point to the same physical memory. To test 
this we can open a data window at 1DED:0000 in the debugger and change 
the first three bytes to “90” which is the opcode for NOP (no operation). The 
change is immediately visible in the code window which is pointed to by CS 
containing 1DDD. Similarl y IDCD:0200 also points to the same memory 
location. Consider this like a portion of  wall that three different people on 
three different floors are seeing through their own windows. One of them 
painted the wall red; it will be changed for all of them though their 
perspective is different. It is the same phenomenon occurring here. 
The segment, offset pair is called a logical address, while the 20bit address 
is a physical address which is the real thing. Logical addressing is a 
mechanism to access the physical memory. As we have seen three different 
logical addresses accessed the same physical address. 
 
19-----------------------------------0
16bit Segment Register 0000
16bit Logical Address0000 
20bit Physical Address
15----------------------------0
15----------------------------0
Segment Address
Offset Address
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
15 
 
EXERCISES 
1. How the processor uses the address bus, the data bus, and the 
control bus to communicate with the system memory? 
2. Which of the following are unidirectional and which are bidirectional? 
a. Address Bus 
b. Data Bus 
c. Control Bus 
3. What are registers and what are the specific features of the 
accumulator, index registers, program counter, and program status 
word? 
4. What is the size of the accumulator of a 64bit processor? 
5. What is the difference between an instruction mnemonic and its 
opcode?  
6. How are instructions classified into groups? 
7. A combination of 8bits is called a byte. What is the name for 4bits and 
for 16bits? 
8. What is the maximum memory 8088 can access? 
9. List down the 14 registers of the 8088 architecture and briefly 
describe their uses. 
10. What flags are defined in the 8088 FLAGS register? Describe the 
function of the zero flag, the carry flag, the sign flag, and the overflow 
flag. 
11. Give the value of the zero flag, the carry flag, the sign flag, and the 
overflow flag after each of the follow ing instructions if AX is initialized 
with 0x1254 and BX is initialized with 0x0FFF. 
a. add ax, 0xEDAB 
b. add ax, bx 
c. add bx, 0xF001 
12. What is the difference between little endian and big endian formats? 
Which format is used by the Intel 8088 microprocessor? 
13. For each of the following words identify the byte that is stored at lower 
memory address and the byte that is stored at higher memory address 
in a little endian computer.  
a. 1234 
b. ABFC 
c. B100 
d. B800 
1DDD0
Offset 
0100 
00000
FFFFF
1DED0
64K 
Offset
0200 
64K 
1DCD0
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
16 
14. What are the contents of memory locations 200, 201, 202, and 203 if 
the word 1234 is stored at offset 200 and the word 5678 is stored at 
offset 202? 
15. What is the offset at which the first executable instruction of a COM 
file must be placed? 
16. Why was segmentation originally introduced in 8088 architecture? 
17. Why a segment start cannot start from the physical address 55555. 
18. Calculate the physical memory address generated by the following 
segment offset pairs. 
a. 1DDD:0436 
b. 1234:7920 
c. 74F0:2123 
d. 0000:6727 
e. FFFF:4336 
f. 1080:0100 
g. AB01:FFFF 
19. What are the first and the last physical memory addresses accessible 
using the following segment values? 
a. 1000 
b. 0FFF 
c. 1002 
d. 0001 
e. E000 
20. Write instructions that perform the following operations. 
a. Copy BL into CL 
b. Copy DX into AX 
c. Store 0x12 into AL 
d. Store 0x1234 into AX 
e. Store 0xFFFF into AX 
21. Write a program in assembly language that calculates the square of 
six by adding six to the accumulator six times. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
2 
Addressing Modes 
2.1. DATA DECLARATION  
The first instruction of our first assembly language program was “mov ax, 
5.” Here MOV was the opcode; AX was the destination operand, while 5 was 
the source operand. The value of 5 in this case was stored as part of the 
instruction encoding. In the opcode B80500, B8 was the opcode and 0500 
was the operand stored immediately afterwards. Such an operand is called 
an immediate operand. It is one of the many types of operands available.  
Writing programs using just the immedi ate operand type is difficult. Every 
reasonable program needs some data in memory apart from constants. 
Constants cannot be changed, i.e. they cannot appear as the destination 
operand. In fact placing them as destination is meaningless and illegal 
according to assembly language syntax . Only registers or data placed in 
memory can be changed. So real data is the one stored in memory, with a 
very few constants. So there must be a mechanism in assembly language to 
store and retrieve data from memory. 
To declare a part of our program as holding data instead of instructions we 
need a couple of very basic but special assembler directives. The first 
directive is “define byte” written as “db.” 
db   somevalue 
As a result a cell in memory will be reserved containing the desired value 
in it and it can be used in a variety of ways. Now we can add variables 
instead of constants. The other directiv e is “define word” or “dw” with the 
same syntax as “db” but reserving a whole word of 16 bits instead of a byte. 
There are directives to declare a double or a quad word as well but we will 
restrict ourselves to byte and word declarations for now. For single byte we 
use db and for two bytes we use dw.  
To refer to this variable later in the program, we need the address occupied 
by this variable. The assembler is there to help us. We can associate a 
symbol with any address that we want to remember and use that symbol in 
the rest of the code. The symbol is there for our own comprehension of code. 
The assembler will calculate the address of that symbol using our origin 
directive and calculating the instructio n lengths or data declarations in-
between and replace all references to the symbol with the corresponding 
address. This is just like variables in a higher level language, where the 
compiler translates them into addresses;  just the process is hidden from the 
programmer one level further. Such a symbol associated to a point in the 
program is called a label and is written as the label name followed by a colon. 
2.2. DIRECT ADDRESSING 
Now we will rewrite our first program such that the numbers 5, 10, and 15 
are stored as memory variables instead of constants and we access them 
from there. 
 
 Example 2.1 
001 
002 
003 
; a program to add three numbers using memory variables 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, [num1]         ; load first number in ax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
18 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
              mov  bx, [num2]         ; load second number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  bx, [num3]         ; load third number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  [num4], ax         ; store sum in num4 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   5 
num2:         dw   10 
num3:         dw   15 
num4:         dw   0 
002 Originate our program at 0100. The first executable instruction 
should be placed at this offset. 
003 The source operand is changed from constant 5 to [num1]. The 
bracket is signaling that the operand is placed in memory at address 
num1. The value 5 will be loaded in ax even though we did not 
specified it in our program code, rather the value will be picked from 
memory. The instruction should be read as “read the contents of 
memory location num1 in the ax register.” The label num1 is a 
symbol for us but an address for the processor while the conversion 
is done by the assembler. 
013 The label num1 is defined as a word and the assembler is requested 
to place 5 in that memory location. The colon signals that num1 is a 
label and not an instruction. 
 
Using the same process to assemble as discussed before we examine the 
listing file generated as a result with comments removed. 
 
 
     1                                   
     2                                  [org 0x0100] 
     3 00000000 A1[1700]                              mov  ax, [num1]          
     4 00000003 8B1E[1900]                            mov  bx, [num2]          
     5 00000007 01D8                                  add  ax, bx              
     6 00000009 8B1E[1B00]                            mov  bx, [num3]          
     7 0000000D 01D8                                  add  ax, bx              
     8 0000000F A3[1D00]                              mov  [num4], ax          
     9                                   
    10 00000012 B8004C                                mov  ax, 0x4c00          
    11 00000015 CD21                                  int  0x21 
    12                                   
    13 00000017 0500                    num1:         dw   5 
    14 00000019 0A00                    num2:         dw   10 
    15 0000001B 0F00                    num3:         dw   15 
    16 0000001D 0000                    num4:         dw   0 
 
 
The first instruction of our program has changed from B80500 to A11700. 
The opcode B8 is used to move constants into AX, while the opcode A1 is 
used when moving data into AX from memory. The immediate operand to our 
new instruction is 1700 or as a word  0017 (23 decimal) and from the bottom 
of the listing file we can observe that this is the offset of num1. The 
assembler has calculated the offset of num1 and used it to replace references 
to num1 in the whole program. Also the value 0500 can be seen at offset 
0017 in the file. We can say contents of memory location 0017 are 0005 as a 
word. Similarly num2, num3, and num4 are placed at 0019, 001B, and 
001D addresses.  
When the program is loaded in the debu gger, it is loaded at offset 0100, 
which displaces all memory accesses in our program. The instruction 
A11700 is changed to A11701 meaning that our variable is now placed at 
0117 offset. The instruction is show n as mov ax, [0117]. Also the data 
w i n d o w  c a n  b e  u s e d  t o  v e r i f y  t h a t  o f f s e t  0 1 1 7  c o n t a i n s  t h e  n u m b e r  0 0 0 5 .  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
19 
Execute the program step by step and examine how the memory is read and 
the registers are updated, how the instruction pointer moves forward, and 
how the result is saved back in memo ry. Also observe inside the debugger 
code window below the code for termination, that the debugger is 
interpreting our data as code and showing it as some meaningless 
instructions. This is because the debugg er sees everything as code in the 
code window and cannot differentiate our declared data from opcodes. It is 
our responsibility that we terminate execution before our data is executed as 
code. 
Also observe that our naming of num1, num2, num3, and num4 is no 
longer there inside the debugger. The debugger is only showing the numbers 
0117, 0119, 011B, and 011D. Our numerical machine can only work with 
numbers. We used symbols for our ease to label or tag certain positions in 
our program. The assembler converts these symbols into the appropriate 
numbers automatically. Also observe that the effect of “dw” is to place 5 in 
two bytes as 0005. Had we used “db” this would have been stored as 05 in 
one byte. 
Given the fact that the assembler knows only numbers we can write the 
same program using a single label. As we know that num2 is two ahead of 
num1, we can use num1+2 instead of num2 and let the assembler calculate 
the sum during assembly process. 
 
 Example 2.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
; a program to add three numbers accessed using a single label 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, [num1]         ; load first number in ax 
              mov  bx, [num1+2]       ; load second number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  bx, [num1+4]       ; load third number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  [num1+6], ax       ; store sum at num1+6 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   5 
              dw   10 
              dw   15 
              dw   0 
004 The second number is read fr om num1+2. Similarly the third 
number is read from num1+4 and the result is accessed at num1+6.  
013-016 The labels num2, num3, and num4 are removed and the data there 
will be accessed with reference to num1. 
 
Every location is accessed with reference to num1 in this example. The 
expression “num1+2” comprises of constants only and can be evaluated at 
the time of assembly. There are no variables involved in this expression. As 
we open the program inside the debugger we see a verbatim copy of the 
previous program. There is no difference at all since the assembler catered 
for the differences during assembly. It  calculated 0117+2=0119 while in the 
previous it directly knew from the valu e of num2 that it has to write 0119, 
but the end result is a ditto copy of the previous execution. 
Another way to declare the above data and produce exactly same results is 
shown in the following example. 
 
 Example 2.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
; a program to add three numbers accessed using a single label 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, [num1]         ; load first number in ax 
              mov  bx, [num1+2]       ; load second number in bx 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
20 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  bx, [num1+4]       ; load third number in bx 
              add  ax, bx             ; accumulate sum in ax 
              mov  [num1+6], ax       ; store sum at num1+6 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   5, 10, 15, 0 
013 As we do not need to place labels on individual variables we can save 
space and declare all data on a single line separated by commas. 
This declaration will declare four words in consecutive memory 
locations while the address of first one is num1. 
 
The method used to access memory in the above examples is called direct 
addressing. In direct addressing the memory address is fixed and is given in 
the instruction. The actual data used is placed in memory and now that data 
can be used as the destination oper and as well. Also the source and 
destination operands must have the same size. For example a word defined 
memory is read in a word sized register. A last observation is that the data 
0500 in memory was corrected to 0005 when read in a register. So registers 
contain data in proper order as a word.  
A last variation using direct addressing shows that we can directly add a 
memory variable and a register instead of adding a register into another that 
we were doing till now.  
 
 Example 2.4 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
; a program to add three numbers directly in memory  
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, [num1]         ; load first number in ax 
              mov  [num1+6], ax       ; store first number in result 
              mov  ax, [num1+2]       ; load second number in ax 
              add  [num1+6], ax       ; add second number to result 
              mov  ax, [num1+4]       ; load third number in ax 
              add  [num1+6], ax       ; add third number to result 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   5, 10, 15, 0 
 
W e g en er a t e  t h e f ol l ow i n g  l i s t i n g  f i le a s  a  r es ul t  of  t h e a s s e m bl y  pr oc e s s  
described previously. Comments are again removed. 
 
 
     1                                   
     2                                  [org 0x0100] 
     3 00000000 A1[1900]                              mov  ax, [num1]          
     4 00000003 A3[1F00]                              mov  [num1+6], ax        
     5 00000006 A1[1B00]                              mov  ax, [num1+2]        
     6 00000009 0106[1F00]                            add  [num1+6], ax        
     7 0000000D A1[1D00]                              mov  ax, [num1+4]        
     8 00000010 0106[1F00]                            add  [num1+6], ax        
     9                                   
    10 00000014 B8004C                                mov  ax, 0x4c00          
    11 00000017 CD21                                  int  0x21 
    12                                   
    13 00000019 05000A000F000000        num1:         dw   5, 10, 15, 0 
 
 
The opcode of add is changed becaus e the destination is now a memory 
location instead of a register. No othe r significant change is seen in the 
listing file. Inside the debugger we observe that few opcodes are longer now 
and the location num1 is now translatin g to 0119 instead of 0117. This is 
done automatically by the assembler as a result of using labels instead of 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
21 
hard coding addresses. During execution we observe that the word data as it 
is read into a register is read in correct order. The significant change in this 
example is that the destination of addition is memory. Method to access 
memory is direct addressing, whether it is the MOV instruction or the ADD 
instruction.  
The first two instructions of the last program read a number into AX and 
placed it at another memory location. A quick thought reveals that the 
following might be a possible single instruction to replace the couple. 
mov  [num1+6], [num1]   ; ILLEGAL 
However this form is illegal and not allowed on the Intel architecture. None 
of the general operations of mov add,  sub etc. allow moving data from 
memory to memory. Only register to register, register to memory, memory to 
register, constant to memory, and constant to register operations are 
allowed. The other register to constant, memory to constant, and memory to 
memory are all disallowed. Only string instructions allow moving data from 
memory to memory and will be discussed in detail later. As a rule one 
instruction can have at most one operand in brackets, otherwise assembler 
will give an error. 
2.3. SIZE MISMATCH ERRORS 
If we change the directive in the last example from DW to DB, the program 
will still assemble and debug without erro rs, however the results will not be 
the same as expected. When the first operand is read 0A05 will be read in the 
register which was actually two operands place in consecutive byte memory 
locations. The second number will be read as 000F which is the zero byte of 
num4 appended to the 15 of num3. The third number will be junk depending 
on the current state of the machine. According to our data declaration the 
third number should be at 0114 but it is accessed at 011D calculated with 
word offsets. This is a logical error of  the program. To keep the declarations 
and their access synchronized is the responsibility of the programmer and 
not the assembler. The assembler allows the programmer to do everything he 
wants to do, and that can possibly run on the processor. The assembler only 
keeps us from writing illegal instru ctions which the processor cannot 
execute. This is the difference between a syntax error and a logic error. So 
the assembler and debugger have both do ne what we asked them to do but 
the programmer asked them to do the wrong chore.  
The programmer is responsible for accessing the data as word if it was 
declared as a word and accessing it as a byte if it was declared as a byte. The 
word case is shown in lot of previous examples. If however the intent is to 
treat it as a byte the following code shows the appropriate way.  
 
 Example 2.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
; a program to add three numbers using byte variables 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  al, [num1]         ; load first number in al 
              mov  bl, [num1+1]       ; load second number in bl 
              add  al, bl             ; accumulate sum in al 
              mov  bl, [num1+2]       ; load third number in bl 
              add  al, bl             ; accumulate sum in al 
              mov  [num1+3], al       ; store sum at num1+3 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         db   5, 10, 15, 0 
003 The number is read in AL register which is a byte register since the 
memory location read is also of byte size. 
005 The second number is now placed at num1+1 instead of num1+2 
because of byte offsets. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
22 
013 To declare data db is used instead of dw so that each data declared 
occupies one byte only. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe that the AL register takes appropriate 
values and the sum is calculated and stored in num1+3. This time there is 
no alignment or synchronization error. The key thing to understand here is 
that the processor does not match defines to accesses. It is the programmer’s 
responsibility. In general assembly la nguage gives a lot of power to the 
programmer but power comes with re sponsibility. Assembly language 
programming is not a difficult task but a responsible one. 
In the above examples, the processor knew the size of the data movement 
operation from the size of the register involved, for example in “mov ax, 
[num1]” memory can be accessed as byte or as word, it has no hard and fast 
size, but the AX register tells that this operation has to be a word operation. 
Similarly in “mov al, [num1]” the AL register tells that this operation has to 
be a byte operation. However in “mov ax, bl” the AX register tells that the 
operation has to be a word operation whil e BL tells that this has to be a byte 
operation. The assembler will declare that this is an illegal instruction. A 5Kg 
bag cannot fit inside a 1Kg bag and according to Intel a 1Kg cannot also fit in 
a 5Kg bag. They must match in size. The instruction “mov [num1], [num2]” is 
illegal as previously discussed not b ecause of data movement size but 
because memory to memory moves are not allowed at all.  
The instruction “mov [num1], 5” is legal but there is no way for the 
p r o c e s s o r  t o  k n o w  t h e  d a t a  m o v e m e n t  s i z e  i n  t h i s  o p e r a t i o n .  T h e  v a r i a b l e  
num1 can be treated as a byte or as a word and similarly 5 can be treated as 
a byte or as a word. Such instructions are declared ambiguous by the 
assembler. The assembler has no way to guess the intent of the programmer 
as it previously did using the size of the register involved but there is no 
register involved this time. And memory is a linear array and label is an 
address in it. There is no size associated with a label. Therefore to resolve its 
ambiguity we clearly tell our intent to the assembler in one of the following 
ways. 
mov  byte [num1], 5 
mov  word [num1], 5 
2.4. REGISTER INDIRECT ADDRESSING 
We have done very elementary data  access till now. Assume that the 
numbers we had were 100 and not just three. This way of adding them will 
cost us 200 instructions. There must be some method to do a task repeatedly 
on data placed in consecutive memory cells. The key to this is the need for 
some register that can hold the address of data. So that we can change the 
address to access some other cell of memory using the same instruction. In 
direct addressing mode the memory cell accessed was fixed inside the 
instruction. There is another method in which the address can be placed in a 
register so that it can be changed. For the following example we will take 10 
instead of 100 numbers but the algorithm is extensible to any size. 
There are four registers in iAPX88 ar chitecture that can hold address of 
data and they are BX, BP, SI, and DI. There are minute differences in their 
working which will be discussed later. For the current example, we will use 
the BX register and we will take just three numbers and extend the concept 
with more numbers in later examples. 
 
 Example 2.6 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
; a program to add three numbers using indirect addressing 
[org 0x100] 
              mov  bx, num1           ; point bx to first number 
              mov  ax, [bx]           ; load first number in ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to second number 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
23 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
              add  ax, [bx]           ; add second number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to third number 
              add  ax, [bx]           ; add third number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to result 
              mov  [bx], ax           ; store sum at num1+6 
    
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   5, 10, 15, 0 
003 Observe that no square brackets around num1 are used this time. 
The address is loaded in bx and not the contents. Value of num1 is 
0005 and the address is 0117. So BX will now contain 0117.  
004 Brackets are now used around BX.  In iapx88 architecture brackets 
can be used around BX, BP, SI, and DI only. In iapx386 more 
registers are allowed. The instruction will be read as “move into ax 
the contents of the memory location whose address is in bx.” Now 
since bx contains the address  of num1 the contents of num1 are 
transferred to the ax register. Wi thout square brackets the meaning 
of the instruction would have been totally different. 
005 This instruction is changing the address. Since we have words not 
bytes, we add two to bx so that it points to the next word in memory. 
BX now contains 0119 the address of the second word in memory. 
This was the mechanism to change addresses that we needed. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe that the first instruction is “mov bx, 011C.” 
A constant is moved into BX. This is  because we did not use the square 
brackets around “num1.” The address of “num1” has moved to 011C because 
the code size has changed due to changed instructions. In the second 
instruction BX points to 011C and the value read in AX is 0005 which can be 
verified from the data window. After the addition BX points to 011E 
containing 000A, our next word, and so on. This way the BX register points 
to our words one after another and we can add them using the same 
instruction “mov ax, [bx]” without fixing the address of our data in the 
instructions. We can also subtract from BX to point to previous cells. The 
address to be accessed is now in total program control. 
One thing that we needed in our problem to add hundred numbers was the 
capability to change address. The second thing we need is a way to repeat 
the same instruction and a way to know that the repetition is done a 100 
times, a terminal condition for the repetition. For the task we are introducing 
two new instructions that you should read and understand as simple English 
language concepts. For simplicity on ly 10 numbers are added in this 
example. The algorithm is extensible to any size. 
 
 Example 2.7 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
; a program to add ten numbers 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  bx, num1           ; point bx to first number 
              mov  cx, 10             ; load count of numbers in cx 
              mov  ax, 0              ; initialize sum to zero 
 
l1:           add  ax, [bx]           ; add number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to next number 
              sub  cx, 1              ; numbers to be added reduced 
              jnz  l1                 ; if numbers remain add next 
 
              mov  [total], ax        ; write back sum in memory 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
24 
018 total:        dw   0 
006 Labels can be used on code as well. Just like data labels they 
remember the address at which they are used. The assembler does 
not differentiate between code labels and data labels. The 
programmer is responsible for using a data label as data and a code 
label as code. The label l1 in this case is the address of the following 
instruction. 
009 SUB is the counterpart to ADD with the same rules as that of the 
ADD instruction.  
010 JNZ stands for “jump if not zero.” NZ is the condition in this 
instruction. So the instruction is re ad as “jump to the location l1 if 
the zero flag is not set.” And revisi ting the zero flag definition “the 
zero flag is set if the last mathematical or logical operation has 
produced a zero in its destination. ” For example “mov ax, 0” will not 
set the zero flag as it is not a mathematical or logical instruction. 
However subtraction and addition will set it. Also it is set even when 
the destination is not a register. Now consider the subtraction 
immediately preceding it. As long as the CX register is non zero after 
this subtraction the  zero flag will not be set and the jump will be 
taken. And jump to l1, the proce ssor needs to be told each and 
everything and the destination is an important part of every jump. 
Just like when we ask someone to go, we mention go to this market 
o r  t h a t  h o u s e .  T h e  p r o c e s s o r  i s  m u c h  m o r e  l o g i c a l  t h a n  u s  a n d  
needs the destination in every in struction that asks it to go 
somewhere. The processor will load l1  in the IP register and resume 
execution from there. The processor will blindly go to the label we 
mention even if it contains data and not code. 
 
The CX register is used as a counter in this example, BX contains the 
changing address, while AX accumulates the result. We have formed a loop 
in assembly language that executes until its condition remains true. Inside 
the debugger we can observe that the subtract instruction clears the zero flag 
the first nine times and sets it on the tenth time. While the jump instruction 
moves execution to address l1 the firs t nine times and to the following line 
the tenth time. The jump instruction breaks program flow.  
The JNZ instruction is from the program control group and is a conditional 
jump, meaning that if the condition NZ is true (ZF=0) it will jump to the 
address mentioned and otherwise it will progress to the next instruction. It is 
a selection between two paths. If the condition is true go right and otherwise 
go left. Or we can say if the weather is ho t, go this way, and if it is cold, go 
this way. Conditional jump is the most  important instruction, as it gives the 
processor decision making capability, so it must be given a careful thought. 
Some processors call it branch, probably  a more logical name for it, however 
the functionality is same. Intel chose to name it “jump.” 
An important thing in the above example is that a register is used to 
r e f e r e n c e  m e m o r y  s o  t h i s  f o r m  o f  a c c e s s  i s  c a l l e d  r e g i s t e r  i n d i r e c t  m e m o r y  
access. We used the BX register for it and the B in BX and BP stands for 
base therefore we call register indirect memory access using BX or BP, 
“based addressing.” Similarly when SI or DI is used we name the method 
“indexed addressing.” They have the same functionality, with minor 
differences because of which the two are called base and index. The 
differences will be explained later, however for the above example SI or DI 
could be used as well, but we would name it indexed addressing instead of 
based addressing. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
25 
2.5. REGISTER + OFFSET ADDRESSING 
Direct addressing and indirect addressing using a single register are two 
basic forms of memory access. Anot her possibility is to use different 
combinations of direct and indirect references. In the above example we used 
BX to access different array elements which were placed consecutively in 
memory like an array. We can also place in BX only the array index and not 
the exact address and form the exact address when we are going to access 
the actual memory. This way the same register can be used for accessing 
different arrays and also the register can be used for index comparison like 
the following example does. 
 
 Example 2.8 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
; a program to add ten numbers using register + offset addressing 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  bx, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  cx, 10             ; load count of numbers in cx 
              mov  ax, 0              ; initialize sum to zero 
 
l1:           add  ax, [num1+bx]      ; add number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to next index 
              sub  cx, 1              ; numbers to be added reduced 
              jnz  l1                 ; if numbers remain add next 
 
              mov  [total], ax        ; write back sum in memory 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 
total:        dw   0 
003 This time BX is initialized to zero instead of array base 
007 The format of memory access has changed. The array base is added 
to BX containing array index at the time of memory access. 
008 A s  t h e  a r r a y  i s  o f  w o r d s ,  B X  j u m p s  i n  s t e p s  o f  t w o ,  i . e .  0 ,  2 ,  4 .  
Higher level languages do appropriate incrementing themselves and 
we always use sequential array indexes. However in assembly 
language we always calculate in bytes and therefore we need to take 
care of the size of one array element which in this case is two. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe that the memory access instruction is 
shown as “mov ax, [011F+bx]” and the actual memory accessed is the one 
whose address is the sum of 011F an d the value contained in the BX 
register. This form of access is of the register indirect family and is called 
base + offset or index + offset depending on whether BX or BP is used or SI 
or DI is used.  
2.6. SEGMENT ASSOCIATION 
All the addressing mechanisms in iAPX88 return a number called effective 
address. For example in base + offset addressing, neither the base nor the 
offset alone tells the desired cell in memory to be accessed. It is only after the 
addition is done that the processor knows which cell to be accessed. This 
number which came as the result of addition is called the effective address. 
But the effective address is just an offset and is meaningless without a 
segment. Only after the segment is known, we can form the physical address 
that is needed to access a memory cell. 
We discussed the segmented memory model of iAPX88 in reasonable detail 
at the end of previous chapter. However during the discussion of addressing 
modes we have not seen the effect of  segments. Segmentation is there and 
it’s all happening relative to a segment base. We saw DS, CS, SS, and ES 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
26 
inside the debugger. Everything is rela tive to its segment base, even though 
we have not explicitly explained its fu nctionality. An offset alone is not 
complete without a segment. As previously discussed there is a default 
segment associated to every register which accesses memory. For example 
CS  i s  a s s o c i a t e d t o I P by  d ef a ul t ;  r a t h er  i t  i s  t i e d w i t h  i t .  It  c a n n ot  a c c es s  
memory in any other segment. 
In case of data, there is a bit relaxation and nothing is tied. Rather there is 
a default association which can be overridden. In the case of register indirect 
memory access, if the register used is one of SI, DI, or BX the default 
segment is DS. If however the register used is BP the default segment used is 
SS. The stack segment has a very critical and fine use and there is a reason 
why BP is attached to SS by default.  However these will be discussed in 
detail in the chapter on stack. IP is tied to CS while SP is tied to SS. The 
association of these registers cannot be changed; they are locked with no 
option. Others are not locked and can be changed. 
To override the association for one instruction of one of the registers BX, 
BP, SI or DI, we use the segment override prefix. For example “mov ax, 
[cs:bx]” associates BX with CS for this one instruction. For the next 
instruction the default association will come back to act. The processor 
places a special byte before the instruction called a prefix, just like prefixes 
and suffixes in English language. No pref ix is needed or placed for default 
association. For example for CS the byte 2E is placed and for ES the byte 26 
is placed. Opcode has not changed, but the prefix byte has modified the 
default association to association with the desired segment register for this 
one instruction. 
In all our examples, we never declared a segment or used it explicitly, but 
everything seemed to work fine. The impo rtant thing to note is that CS, DS, 
SS, and ES all had the same value. The value itself is not important but the 
fact that all had the same value is important. All four segment windows 
exactly overlap. Whatever segment register we use the same physical memory 
will be accessed. That is why everything was working without the mention of 
a single segment register. This is the formation of COM files in IBM PC. A 
single segment contains code, data, and the stack. This format is operating 
system dependant, in our case defined by DOS. And our operating system 
defines the format of COM files such that all segments have the same value. 
Thus the only meaningful thing that remains is the offset. 
For example if BX=0100, SI=0200, and CS=1000 and the memory access 
under consideration is [cs:bx+si+0x0700 ], the effective address formed is 
bx+si+0700 = 0100 + 0200 + 0700 = 0A00. Now multiplying the segment 
value by 16 makes it 10000 and adding the effective address 00A00 forms 
the physical address 10A00. 
2.7. ADDRESS WRAPAROUND 
There are two types of wraparounds. One is within a single segment and 
the other is inside the whole physical memory. Segment wraparound occurs 
when during the effective address calculation a carry is generated. This carry 
is dropped giving the effect that when  we try to access beyond the segment 
limit, we are actually wrapped around to the first cell in the segment. For 
example if BX=9100, DS=1 500 and the access is [bx+0x7000] we form the 
effective address 9100 + 7000 = 10100. The carry generated is dropped 
forming the actual effective address of 0100. Just like a circle when we 
reached the end we started again from the beginning. An arc at 370 degrees 
is the same as an arc at 10 degrees. We tried to cross the segment boundary 
and it pushed us back to the start. This is called segment wraparound. The 
physical address in the above example will be 15100. 
The same can also happen at the time of physical address calculation. For 
example BX=0100, DS=FFF0 and the access under consideration is 
[bx+0x0100]. The effective address will be 0200 and the physical address will 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
27 
be 100100. This is a 21bit answer and cannot be sent on the address bus 
which is 20 bits wide. The carry is  dropped and just like the segment 
wraparound our physical memory has wr apped around at its very top. When 
we tried to access beyond limits the actual access is made at the very start. 
T h i s  s e c o n d  w r a p a r o u n d  i s  a  b i t  d i f f e r e n t  i n  n e w e r  p r o c e s s o r  w i t h  m o r e  
address lines but that will be explained in later chapters.  
2.8. ADDRESSING MODES SUMMARY 
The iAPX88 processor supports seven modes of memory access. Remember 
that immediate is not an addressing mode but an operand type. Operands 
can be immediate, register, or memory. If the operand is memory one of the 
seven addressing modes will be used to access it. The memory access 
mechanisms can also be written in th e general form “base + index + offset” 
and we can define the possible addressing modes by saying that any one, 
two, or none can be skipped from the general form to form a legal memory 
access. 
There are a few common mistakes done in forming a valid memory access. 
Part of a register cannot be used to access memory. Like BX is allowed to 
hold an address but BL or BH are not. Address is 16bit and must be 
contained in a 16bit register. BX-SI is not possible. The only thing that we 
can do is addition of a base register with an index register. Any other 
operation is disallowed. BS+BP and SI+DI are both disallowed as we cannot 
have two base or two index registers in one memory access. One has to be a 
base register and the other has to be an index register and that is the reason 
of naming them differently.  
Direct 
A fixed offset is given in brackets and the memory at that offset is 
accessed. For example “mov [1234], ax” stores the contents of the AX 
registers in two bytes starting at address 1234 in the current data segment. 
The instruction “mov [1234], al” stores the contents of the AL register in the 
byte at offset 1234. 
Based Register Indirect 
A base register is used in brackets and the actual address accessed 
depends on the value contained in that register. For example “mov [bx], ax” 
moves the two byte contents of the AX register to the address contained in 
the BX register in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [bp], al” 
moves the one byte content of the AL register to the address contained in the 
BP register in the current stack segment. 
Indexed Register Indirect 
An index register is used in brackets and the actual address accessed 
depends on the value contained in that register. For example “mov [si], ax” 
moves the contents of the AX register to the word starting at address 
contained in SI in the current data segment. The instruction “mov [di], ax” 
moves the word contained in AX to the offset stored in DI in the current data 
segment. 
Based Register Indirect + Offset 
A base register is used with a constant offset in this addressing mode. The 
value contained in the base register is added with the constant offset to get 
the effective address. For example “mov [bx+300], ax” stores the word 
contained in AX at the offset attained  by adding 300 to BX in the current 
data segment. The instruction “mov [bp+ 300], ax” stores the word in AX to 
the offset attained by adding 300 to BP in the current stack segment. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
28 
Indexed Register Indirect + Offset 
An index register is used with a constant offset in this addressing mode. 
The value contained in the index register is added with the constant offset to 
get the effective address. For example “mov [si+300], ax” moves the word 
contained in AX to the offset attained by adding 300 to SI in the current data 
segment and the instruction “mov [di+300], al” moves the byte contained in 
AL to the offset attained by adding 300 to DI in the current data segment.  
Base + Index 
One base and one index register is used in this addressing mode. The 
value of the base register and the index register are added together to get the 
effective address. For example “mov [bx+si], ax” moves the word contained in 
the AX register to offset attained by adding BX and SI in the current data 
segment. The instruction “mov [bp+di], al” moves the byte contained in AL to 
the offset attained by adding BP and DI in the current stack segment. 
Observe that the default segment is based on the base register and not on 
the index register. This is why base registers and index registers are named 
separately. Other examples are “mov [bx+di], ax” and “mov [bp+si], ax.” This 
method can be used to access a two dimensional array such that one 
dimension is in a base register and the other is in an index register.  
Base + Index + Offset 
This is the most complex addressing method and is relatively infrequently 
used. A base register, an index register, and a constant offset are all used in 
this addressing mode. The values of the base register, the index register, and 
the constant offset are all added together to get the effective address. For 
example “mov [bx+si+300], ax” moves the word contents of the AX register to 
the word in memory starting at offset attained by adding BX, SI, and 300 in 
the current data segment. Default segment association is again based on the 
base register. It might be used with the array base of a two dimensional array 
as the constant offset, one dimension in the base register and the other in 
the index register. This way all calculation of location of the desired element 
has been delegated to the processor. 
EXERCISES 
1. What is a label and how does the assembler differentiates between 
code labels and data labels? 
2. List the seven addressing modes available in the 8088 architecture. 
3. Differentiate between effective address and physical address. 
4. What is the effective address generated by the following 
instructions? Every instruction is independent of others. Initially 
BX=0x0100, num1=0x1001, [num1]=0x0000, and SI=0x0100 
a. mov ax, [bx+12] 
b. mov ax, [bx+num1] 
c. mov ax, [num1+bx] 
d. mov ax, [bx+si] 
5. What is the effective address generated by the following 
combinations if they are valid. If not give reason. Initially 
BX=0x0100, SI=0x0010, DI=0x0001, BP=0x0200, and SP=0xFFFF 
a. bx-si 
b. b x - b p      
c. bx+10 
d. bx-10 
e. bx+sp    
f. bx+di 
6. Identify the problems in the following instructions and correct them 
by replacing them with one or two instruction having the same 
effect. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
29 
a. mov [02], [ 22] 
b. mov [wordvar], 20 
c. mov bx, al 
d. mov ax, [si+di+100] 
7. What is the function of segment override prefix and what 
changes it brings to the opcode? 
8. What are the two types of address wraparound? What 
physical address is accessed with [BX+SI] if FFFF is loaded in 
BX, SI, and DS. 
9. Write instructions to do the following. 
a. C o p y  c o n t e n t s  o f  m e m o r y  l o c a t i o n  w i t h  o f f s e t  0 0 2 5  i n  t h e  
current data segment into AX. 
b. Copy AX into memory location with offset 0FFF in the 
current data segment. 
c. M o v e  c o n t e n t s  o f  m e m o r y  l o c a t i o n  w i t h  o f f s e t  0 0 1 0  t o  
memory location with offset 002F in the current data 
segment. 
10. Write a program to calculate the square of 20 by using a loop 
that adds 20 to the accumulator 20 times. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
3 
Branching 
3.1. COMPARISON AND CONDITIONS 
Conditional jump was introduced in the last chapter to loop for the 
addition of a fixed number of array elements. The jump was based on the 
zero flag. There are many other conditions possible in a program. For 
example an operand can be greater than another operand or it can be 
smaller. We use comparisons and boolean expressions extensively in higher 
level languages. They must be available is some form in assembly language, 
otherwise they could not possibly be made available in a higher level 
language. In fact they are available in a very fine and purified form. 
The basic root instruction for all comparisons is CMP standing for 
compare. The operation of CMP is to subtract the source operand from the 
destination operand, updating the flags without changing either the source 
or the destination. CMP is one of the key instructions as it introduces the 
capability of conditional routing in the processor.  
A closer thought reveals that with subtraction we can check many different 
conditions. For example if a larger number is subtracted from a smaller 
number then borrow is needed. The carry flag plays the role of borrow during 
the subtraction operation. And in this condition the carry flag will be set. If 
two equal numbers are subtracted the answer is zero and the zero flag will be 
set. Every significant relation between the destination and source is evident 
from the sign flag, carry flag, zero flag, and the overflow flag. CMP is 
meaningless without a conditional jump immediately following it. 
Another important distinction at this point is the difference between signed 
and unsigned numbers. In unsigned numbers only the magnitude of the 
number is important, whereas in si gned numbers both the magnitude and 
the sign are important. For example -2 is greater than -3 but 2 is smaller 
than 3. The sign has affected our comparisons.  
Inside the computer signed numbers are represented in two’s complement 
notation. In essence a number in this representation is still a number, just 
that now our interpretation of this number will be signed. Whether we use 
jump above and below or we use jump  greater or less will convey our 
intention to the processor. The jump above and greater operations at first 
sight seem to be doing the same operation, and similarly below and less 
operations seem to be similar. Howe ver for signed numbers JG and JL will 
work properly and for unsigned JA and JB will work properly and not the 
other way around.  
It is important to note that at the time of comparison, the intent of the 
programmer to treat the numbers as signed or unsigned is not clear. The 
subtraction in CMP is a no rmal subtraction. It is only after the comparison, 
during the conditional jump operation, that the intent is conveyed. At that 
time with a specific combination of flags checked the intent is satisfied. 
For example a number 2 is represented in a word as 0002 while the 
number -2 is represented as FFFE. In a byte they would be represented as 02 
and FE. Now both have the same magnitude however the different sign has 
caused very different representation in two’s complement form. Now if the 
intent is to use FFFE or decimal 6553 4 then the same data would be placed 
i n  t h e  w o r d  a s  i n  c a s e  o f  - 2 .  I n  f a c t  i f  - 2  a n d  6 5 5 3 4  a r e  c o m p a r e d  t h e  
processor will set the zero flag signa ling that they are exactly equal. As 
regards an unsigned comparison the number 65534 is much greater than 2. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
32 
So if a JA is taken after comparing -2 in the destination with 2 in the source 
the jump will be taken. If however JG is used after the same comparison the 
jump will not be taken as it will consider the sign and with the sign -2 is 
smaller than 2. The key idea is that -2 and 65534 were both stored in 
memory in the same form. It was the interpretation that treated it as a signed 
or as an unsigned number. 
The unsigned comparisons see the numbers as 0 being the smallest and 
65535 being the largest with the order that 0 < 1 < 2 … < 65535. The signed 
comparisons see the number -32768 which has the same memory 
representation as 32768 as the smallest number and 32767 as the largest 
with the order -32768 < -32767 < … < -1 < 0 < 1 < 2 < … < 32767. All the 
negative numbers have the same representation as an unsigned number in 
the range 32768 … 65535 however the si gned interpretation of the signed 
comparisons makes them be treated as negative numbers smaller than zero. 
All meaningful situations both for signed and unsigned numbers that 
occur after a comparison are detailed in the following table. 
 
DEST = SRC ZF = 1 When the source is subtracted 
from the destination and both are 
equal the result is zero and 
therefore the zero flag is set. This 
works for both signed and 
unsigned numbers. 
UDEST < USRC CF = 1 When an unsigned source is 
subtracted from an unsigned 
destination and the destination is 
smaller, borrow is needed which 
sets the carry flag. 
UDEST ≤ USRC ZF = 1 OR CF = 1 If the zero flag is set, it means 
that the source and destination 
are equal and if the carry flag is 
set it means a borrow was needed 
in the subtraction and therefore 
the destination is smaller. 
UDEST ≥ USRC CF = 0 When an unsigned source is 
subtracted from an unsigned 
destination no borrow will be 
needed either when the operands 
are equal or when the destination 
is greater than the source.  
UDEST > USRC ZF = 0 AND CF = 0 The unsigned source and 
destination are not equal if the 
zero flag is not set and the 
destination is not smaller since 
no borrow was taken. Therefore 
the destination is greater than 
the source. 
SDEST < SSRC SF ≠ OF When a signed source is 
subtracted from a signed 
destination and the answer is 
negative with no overflow than 
the destination is smaller than 
the source. If however there is an 
overflow meaning that the sign 
has changed unexpectedly, the 
meanings are reversed and a 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
33 
positive number signals that the 
destination is smaller. 
SDEST ≤ SSRC ZF = 1 OR SF ≠ OF If the zero flag is set, it means 
that the source and destination 
are equal and if the sign and 
overflow flags differ it means that 
the destination is smaller as 
described above. 
SDEST ≥ SSRC SF = OF When a signed source is 
subtracted from a signed 
destination and the answer is 
positive with no overflow than the 
destination is greater than the 
source. When an overflow is there 
signaling that sign has changed 
unexpectedly, we interpret a 
negative answer as the signal 
that the destination is greater. 
SDEST > SSRC ZF = 0 AND SF = OF If the zero flag is not set, it means 
that the signed operands are not 
equal and if the sign and overflow 
match in addition to this it 
means that the destination is 
greater than the source. 
3.2. CONDITIONAL JUMPS 
For every interesting or meaningful situation of flags, a conditional jump is 
there. For example JZ and JNZ check the zero flag. If in a comparison both 
operands are same, the result of subtraction will be zero and the zero flag 
will be set. Thus JZ and JNZ can be used  to test equality. That is why there 
are renamed versions JE and JNE read as jump if equal or jump if not equal. 
They seem more logical in writing but mean exactly the same thing with the 
same opcode. Many jumps are renamed with two or three names for the 
same jump, so that the appropriate logic can be conveyed in assembly 
language programs. This renaming is done by Intel and is a standard for 
iAPX88. JC and JNC test the carry flag . For example we may need to test 
whether there was an overflow in the last unsigned addition or subtraction. 
Carry flag will also be set if two unsigned numbers are subtracted and the 
first is smaller than the second. Ther efore the renamed versions JB, JNAE, 
and JNB, JAE are there standing for jump if below, jump if not above or 
equal, jump if not below, and jump if above or equal respectively. The 
operation of all jumps can be seen from the following table. 
 
JC 
JB 
JNAE 
Jump if carry 
Jump if below 
Jump if not above or equal 
CF = 1 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation generated a 
carry or required a 
borrow. After a CMP it 
is taken if the 
unsigned destination is
 smaller than the 
unsigned source. 
JNC 
JNB 
JAE 
Jump if not carry 
Jump if not below 
Jump if above or equal 
CF = 0 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation did not 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
34 
generated a carry or 
required a borrow. After 
a CMP it is taken if the
 unsigned destination 
is larger or equal to  
the unsigned source.
 
JE 
JZ 
Jump if equal 
Jump if zero 
ZF = 1 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation produced a 
zero in its destination. 
After a CMP it is taken 
if both operands were 
equal. 
JNE 
JNZ 
Jump if not equal 
Jump if not zero 
ZF = 0 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation did not 
produce a zero in its 
destination. After a 
CMP it is taken if both 
operands were 
different.  
JA 
JNBE 
Jump if above 
Jump if not below or equal 
ZF = 0 AND 
CF = 0 
This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
unsigned destination is 
larger than the 
unsigned source. 
JNA 
JBE 
Jump if not above 
Jump if below or equal 
ZF = 1 OR 
CF = 1 
This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
unsigned destination is 
smaller than or equal 
to the unsigned 
source. 
JL 
JNGE 
Jump if less 
Jump if not greater or equal
 
SF ≠ OF This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
signed destination is 
smaller than the 
signed source. 
JNL 
JGE 
Jump if not less 
Jump if greater or equal 
SF = OF This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
signed destination is  
larger than or equal to 
the signed source. 
JG 
JNLE 
Jump if greater 
Jump if not less or equal 
ZF = 0 AND 
SF = OF 
This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
signed destination is  
larger than the signed 
source. 
JNG 
JLE 
Jump if not greater 
Jump if less or equal 
ZF = 1 OR 
SF ≠ OF 
This jump is taken 
after a CMP if the 
signed destination is 
smaller than or equal 
to the signed 
source. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
35 
JO Jump if overflow. OF = 1 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation changed the 
sign unexpectedly. 
JNO Jump if not overflow OF = 0 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation did not 
change the sign 
unexpectedly. 
JS Jump if sign SF = 1 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation produced a 
negative number in its 
destination.  
JNS Jump if not sign SF = 0 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation produced a 
positive number in its 
destination. 
JP 
JPE 
Jump if parity 
Jump if even parity 
PF = 1 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation produced a 
number in its 
destination that has 
even parity. 
JNP 
JPO 
Jump if not parity 
Jump if odd parity 
PF = 0 This jump is taken if 
the last arithmetic 
operation produced a 
number in its 
destination that has 
odd parity. 
JCXZ Jump if CX is zero CX = 0 This jump is taken if 
the CX register is zero. 
 
The CMP instruction sets the flags reflecting the relation of the destination 
to the source. This is important as when we say jump if above, then what is 
above what. The destination is above the source or the source is above the 
destination.  
The JA and JB instructions are related to unsigned numbers. That is our 
interpretation for the destination and source operands is unsigned. The 16th 
bit holds data and not the sign. In the JL and JG instructions standing for 
jump if lower and jump if greater respectively, the interpretation is signed. 
The 16th bit holds the sign and not the data. The difference between them 
will be made clear as an elaborate example will be given to explain the 
difference. 
One jump is special that it is not dependant on any flag. It is JCXZ, jump 
if the CX register is zero. This is because of the special treatment of the CX 
register as a counter. This jump is regardless of the zero flag. There is no 
counterpart or not form of this instruction.  
The adding numbers example of the last chapter can be a little simplified 
using the compare instruction on the BX register and eliminating the need 
for a separate counter as below. 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
36 
 Example 3.1  
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
; a program to add ten numbers without a separate counter 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  bx, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  ax, 0              ; initialize sum to zero 
 
l1:           add  ax, [num1+bx]      ; add number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to next index 
              cmp  bx, 20             ; are we beyond the last index 
              jne  l1                 ; if not add next number 
 
              mov  [total], ax        ; write back sum in memory 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
num1:         dw   10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 
total:        dw   0 
006 The format of memory access is still base + offset.  
008 BX is used as the array index as well as the counter. The offset of 
11th number will be 20, so as soon as BX becomes 20 just after the 
10th number has been added, the addition is stopped. 
009 The jump is displayed as JNZ in th e debugger even though we have 
written JNE in our example. This is because it is a renamed jump 
with the same opcode as JNZ and the debugger has no way of 
knowing the mnemonic that we used after looking just at the 
opcode. Also every code and data reference that we used till now is 
seen in the opcode as well. However for the jump instruction we see 
an operand of F2 in the opcode an d not 0116. This will be discussed 
in detail with unconditional jumps. It is actually a short relative 
jump and the operand is stored in the form of positive or negative 
offset from this instruction. 
 
With conditional branching in hand, there are just a few small things left 
in assembly language that fills some gaps. Now there is just imagination and 
the skill to conceive programs that can make you write any program.  
3.3. UNCONDITIONAL JUMP 
Till now we have been placing data at the end of code. There is no such 
restriction and we can define data anywhere in the code. Taking the previous 
example, if we place data at the start of code instead of at the end and we 
load our program in the debugger. We can see our data placed at the start 
but the debugger is intending to start execution at our data. The COM file 
definition said that the first executable instruction is at offset 0100 but we 
have placed data there instead of code. So the debugger will try to interpret 
t h a t  d a t a  a s  c o d e  a n d  s h o w e d  w h a t e v e r  i t  c o u l d  m a k e  u p  o u t  o f  t h o s e  
opcodes. 
We introduce a new instruction called JMP. It is the unconditional jump 
that executes regardless of the state of all flags. So we write an unconditional 
jump as the very first instruction of our program and jump to the next 
instruction that follows our data decl arations. This time 0100 contains a 
valid first instruction of our program. 
 
 Example 3.2  
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
; a program to add ten numbers without a separate counter 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start               ; unconditionally jump over data 
 
num1:         dw   10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 
total:        dw   0 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
37 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
 
start:        mov  bx, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  ax, 0              ; initialize sum to zero 
 
l1:           add  ax, [num1+bx]      ; add number to ax 
              add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to next index 
              cmp  bx, 20             ; are we beyond the last index 
              jne  l1                 ; if not add next number 
 
              mov  [total], ax        ; write back sum in memory 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
003 JMP jumps over the data declarations to the start label and 
execution resumes from there. 
 
3.4. RELATIVE ADDRESSING 
Inside the debugger the instruction is shown as JMP 0119 and the location 
0119 contains the original first instruction of the logic of our program. This 
jump is unconditional, it will always be  taken. Now looking at the opcode we 
see F21600 where F2 is the opcode and 1600 is the operand to it. 1600 is 
0016 in proper word order. 0119 is not given as a parameter rather 0016 is 
given.  
This is position relative addressing in contrast to absolute addressing. It is 
not telling the exact address rather it is telling how much forward or 
backward to go from the current position of IP in the current code segment. 
So the instruction means to add 0016 to the IP register. At the time of 
execution of the first instruction at 0100 IP was pointing to the next 
instruction at 0103, so after adding 16 it became 0119, the desired target 
location. The mechanism is important to  know, however all calculations in 
this mechanism are done by the assembler and by the processor. We just use 
a label with the JMP instruction and are ensured that the instruction at the 
target label will be the one to be executed. 
3.5. TYPES OF JUMP 
The three types of jump, near, short, and far, differ in the size of 
instruction and the range of memory they can jump to with the smallest 
short form of two bytes and a range of just 256 bytes to the far form of five 
bytes and a range covering the whole memory. 
 
 
Near Jump 
When the relative address stored with the instruction is in 16 bits as in the 
last example the jump is called a near jump. Using a near jump we can jump 
anywhere within a segment. If we add a large number it will wrap around to 
Near Jump 
EB Disp 
E9 Disp Low Disp High
EA IP Low IP High CS Low CS High
Short Jump 
Far Jump 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
38 
the lower part. A negative number actua lly is a large number and works this 
way using the wraparound behavior. 
Short Jump 
If the offset is stored in a single byte as in 75F2 with the opcode 75 and 
operand F2, the jump is called a short jump. F2 is added to IP as a signed 
byte. If the byte is negative the comple ment is negated from IP otherwise the 
byte is added. Unconditional jumps can be short, near, and far. The far type 
is yet to be discussed. Conditional jumps can only be short. A short jump 
can go +127 bytes ahead in code and -128 bytes backwards and no more. 
This is the limitation of a byte in singed representation. 
Far Jump 
Far jump is not position relative but is absolute. Both segment and offset 
must be given to a far jump. The previous two jumps were used to jump 
within a segment. Sometimes we may need to go from one code segment to 
another, and near and short jumps cannot take us there. Far jump must be 
used and a two byte segment and a two byte offset are given to it. It loads CS 
with the segment part and IP with the offset part. Execution therefore resumes 
from that location in physical memory. The three instructions that have a far 
form are JMP, CALL, and RET, are relate d to program control. Far capability 
makes intra segment control possible. 
3.6. SORTING EXAMPLE 
Moving ahead from our example of adding numbers we progress to a 
program that can sort a list of numbers using the tools that we have 
accumulated till now. Sorting can be ascending or descending like if the 
largest number comes at the top, followed by a smaller number and so on till 
the smallest number the sort will be called descending. The other order 
starting with the smallest number an d ending at the largest is called 
ascending sort. This is a common problem and many algorithms have been 
developed to solve it. One simple algorithm is the bubble sort algorithm.  
In this algorithm we compare consecutive numbers. If they are in required 
order e.g. if it is a descending sort and the first is larger then the second, 
then we leave them as it is and if they are not in order, we swap them. Then 
we do the same process for the next tw o numbers and so on till the last two 
are compared and possibly swapped.  
A complete iteration is called a pass over the array. We need N passes at 
least in the simplest algorithm if N is the number of elements to be sorted. A 
finer algorithm is to check if any swap was done in this pass and stop as 
soon as a pass goes without a swap. The array is now sorted as every pair of 
elements is in order. 
For example if our list of numbers is 60, 55, 45, and 58 and we want to 
sort them in ascending order, the first comparison will be of 60 and 55 and 
as the order will be reversed to 55 and 60. The next comparison will be of 60 
and 45 and again the two will be swapped. The next comparison of 60 and 58 
will also cause a swap. At the end of first pass the numbers will be in order 
of 55, 45, 58, and 60. Observe that the largest number has bubbled down to 
the bottom. Just like a bubble at bottom of water. In the next pass 55 and 45 
will be swapped. 55 and 58 will not be swapped and 58 and 60 will also not 
be swapped. In the next pass there will be no swap as the elements are in 
order i.e. 45, 55, 58, and 60. The passes will be stopped as the last pass did 
not cause any swap. The application of bubble sort on these numbers is 
further explained with the following illustration. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
39 
 
 
 Example 3.3  
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
; sorting a list of ten numbers using bubble sort 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
swap:         db   0 
 
start:        mov  bx, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swap], 0     ; rest swap flag to no swaps 
   
loop1:        mov  ax, [data+bx]      ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [data+bx+2]    ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
   
              mov  dx, [data+bx+2]    ; load second element in dx 
              mov  [data+bx+2], ax    ; store first number in second  
              mov  [data+bx], dx      ; store second number in first 
              mov  byte [swap], 1     ; flag that a swap has been done 
     
noswap:       add  bx, 2              ; advance bx to next index 
              cmp  bx, 18             ; are we at last index 
              jne  loop1              ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  byte [swap], 1     ; check if a swap has been done 
              je   start              ; if yes make another pass 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
60 55 45 58 
55 60 45 58 
Yes On
Yes On
55 45 60 58 Yes On
Off
55 45 58 60 
45 55 58 60 
Yes On
No On
45 55 58 60 No On
Off
45 55 58 60 
45 55 58 60 
No Off
No Off
45 55 58 60 No Off
OffPass 3 
Pass 2 
Pass 1 
No more passes since swap flag is Off
Swap Done Swap FlagState of Data 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
40 
003 The jump instruction is placed to skip over data. 
006 The swap flag can be stored in a register but as an example it is 
stored in memory and also to extend the concept at a later stage. 
011-012 One element is read in AX and it is compared with the next element 
because memory to memory comparisons are not allowed. 
013 If the JBE is changed to JB, not only the unnecessary swap on equal 
will be performed, there will be a major algorithmic flaw due to a 
logical error as in the case of equal elements the algorithm will never 
stop. JBE won’t swap in the case of equal elements. 
015-017 The swap is done using DX and AX registers in such a way that the 
values are crossed. The code uses the information that one of the 
elements is already in the AX register. 
021 This time BX is compared with 18 instead of 20 even though the 
number of elements is same. This is because we pick an element 
and compare it with the next element. When we pick the 9th element 
we compare it with the next element and this is the last comparison, 
since if we pick the 10th element we will compare it with the 11th 
element and there is no 11th element in our case. 
024-025 If a swap is done we repeat the whole process for possible more 
swaps. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe that the JBE is changed to JNA due to the 
same reason as discussed for JNE and JNZ. The passes change the data in 
the same manner as we presented in our illustration above. If JBE in the 
code is changed to JAE the sort will change from ascending to descending. 
For signed numbers we can use JLE and JGE respectively for ascending and 
descending sort. 
To clarify the difference of signed and unsigned jumps we change the data 
array in the last program to include some negative numbers as well. When 
JBE will be used on this data, i.e. with unsigned interpretation of the data 
and an ascending sort, the negative numbers will come at the end after the 
largest positive number. However JLE will bring the negative numbers at the 
very start of the list to bring them in  proper ascending order according to a 
signed interpretation, even though they are large in magnitude. The data 
used is shown as below. 
data:         dw 60, 55, 45, 50, -40, -35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
This data includes some signed numb ers as well. The JBE instruction will 
treat this data as an unsigned number and will cater only for the magnitude 
ignoring the sign. If the program is lo aded in the debugger, the numbers will 
appear in their hexadecimal equivale nt. The two numbers -40 and -35 are 
especially important as they are represented as FFD8 and FFDD. This data is 
not telling whether it is signed or unsigned. Our interpretation will decide 
whether it is a very large unsigned number or a signed number in two’s 
complement form.  
If the sorting algorithm is applied on the above data with JBE as the 
comparison instruction to sort in ascending order with unsigned 
interpretation, observe the comparisons of the two numbers FFD8 and 
FFDD. For example it will decide that FFDD > FFD8 since the first is larger 
in magnitude. At the end of sorting FFD D will be at the end of the list being 
declared the largest number and FFD8 will precede it to be the second 
largest. 
If however the comparison instructio n is changed to JLE and sorting is 
done on the same data it works similarly except on the two numbers FFDD 
and FFD8. This time JLE declares them to be smaller than every other 
number and also declares FFDD < FFD8. At the end of sorting, FFDD is 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
41 
declared to be the smallest number fo llowed by FFD8 and then 0000. This is 
in contrast to the last example where JBE was used. This happened because 
JLE interpreted our data as signed numbers, and as a signed number FFDD 
has its sign bit on signaling that it is a negative number in two’s complement 
form which is smaller than 0000 and every positive number. However JBE 
did not give any significance to the sign bit and included it in the magnitude. 
Therefore it declared the negative numbers to be the largest numbers.  
If the required interpretation was of signed numbers the result produced 
by JLE is correct and if the required interpretation was of unsigned numbers 
the result produced by JBE is correct. This is the very difference between 
signed and unsigned integers in higher level languages, where the compiler 
takes the responsibility of making th e appropriate jump depending on the 
type of integer used. But it is only at  this level that we can understand the 
actual mechanism going on. In assembly language, use of proper jump is the 
responsibility of the programmer, to conv ey the intentions to use the data as 
signed or as unsigned. 
The remaining possibilities of signed descending sort and unsigned 
descending sort can be done on the same lines and are left as an exercise. 
Other conditional jumps work in the same manner and can be studied from 
the reference at the end. Several will be discussed in more detail when they 
are used in subsequent chapters. 
EXERCISES 
1. Which registers are changed by the CMP instruction? 
2. What are the different types of jumps available? Describe position 
relative addressing. 
3. If AX=8FFF and BX=0FFF and “cmp ax, bx” is executed, which of the 
following jumps will be taken? Each part is independent of others. Also 
give the value of Z, S, and C flags. 
a. jg greater 
b. jl smaller 
c. ja above 
d. jb below 
4. Write a program to find the maximum number and the minimum 
number from an array of ten numbers.  
5. Write a program to search a particular element from an array using 
binary search. If the element is found set AX to one and otherwise to 
zero. 
6. Write a program to calculate the factorial of a number where factorial 
is defined as: 
factorial(x) = x*(x-1)*(x-2)*...*1 
factorial(0) = 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
4 
Bit Manipulations 
4.1. MULTIPLICATION ALGORITHM 
With the important capability of decision making in our repertoire we move 
on to the discussion of an algori thm, which will help us uncover an 
important set of instructions in our processor used for bit manipulations. 
Multiplication is a common process that we use, and we were trained to do 
in early schooling. Remember multiplying by a digit and then putting a cross 
and then multiplying with the next di git and putting two crosses and so on 
and summing the intermediate results in the end. Very familiar process but 
we never saw the process as an algorithm, and we need to see it as an 
algorithm to convey it to the processor.  
To highlight the important thing in the algorithm we revise it on two 4bit 
binary numbers. The numbers are 1101 i.e. 13 and 0101 i.e. 5. The answer 
should be 65 or in binary 01000001. Observe that the answer is twice as 
long as the multiplier and the multiplic and. The multiplication is shown in 
the following figure. 
 
    1101 = 13 
    0101 = 5 
    -----  
    1101  
   0000x  
  1101xx  
 0000xxx  
-------- 
01000001 = 65 
 
We take the first digit of the multiplier and multiply it with the 
multiplicand. As the digit is one the answ er is the multiplicand itself. So we 
place the multiplicand below the bar. Before multiplying with the next digit a 
cross is placed at the right most place on the next line and the result is 
placed shifted one digit left. However since the digit is zero, the result is zero. 
Next digit is one, multiplying with which, the answer is 1101. We put two 
crosses on the next line at the right most positions and place the result there 
shifted two places to the left. The fourth digit is zero, so the answer 0000 is 
placed with three crosses to its right. 
Observe the beauty of binary base, as no real multiplication is needed at 
the digit level. If the digit is 0 the answ er is 0 and if the digit is 1 the answer 
is the multiplicand itself. Also observe that for every next digit in the 
multiplier the answer is written shifted one more place to the left. No shifting 
for the first digit, once for the second , twice for the third and thrice for the 
fourth one. Adding all the intermediate answers the result is 01000001=65 
as desired. Crosses are treated as zero in this addition.  
Before formulating the algorithm for this problem, we need some more 
instructions that can shift a number so  that we use this instruction for our 
multiplicand shifting and also some way to check the bits of the multiplier 
one by one. 
4.2. SHIFTING AND ROTATIONS 
The set of shifting and rotation instructions is one of the most useful set in 
any processor’s instruction set. They simplify really complex tasks to a very 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
44 
neat and concise algorithm. The follow ing shifting and rotation operations 
are available in our processor. 
Shift Logical Right (SHR) 
The shift logical right operation inserts a zero from the left and moves 
every bit one position to the right and copies the rightmost bit in the carry 
flag. Imagine that there is a pipe filled to capacity with eight balls. The pipe is 
open from both ends and there is a basket at the right end to hold anything 
dropping from there. The operation of shift logical right is to force a white 
ball from the left end. The operation is depicted in the following illustration.  
 
 
 
White balls represent zero bits while black balls represent one bits. Sixteen 
bit shifting is done the same way with a pipe of double capacity. 
Shift Logical Left (SHL) / Shift Arithmetic Left (SAL) 
The shift logical left operation is the ex act opposite of shift logical right. In 
this operation the zero bit is inserted  from the right and every bit moves one 
position to its left with the most significant bit dropping into the carry flag. 
Shift arithmetic left is just another name for shift logical left. The operation is 
again exemplified with the following illustration of ball and pipes. 
 
 
Shift Arithmetic Right (SAR) 
A signed number holds the sign in its most significant bit. If this bit was 
one a logical right shifting will change the sign of this number because of 
insertion of a zero from the left. The sign of a signed number should not 
change because of shifting. 
The operation of shift arithmetic right is therefore to shift every bit one 
place to the right with a copy of the most significant bit left at the most 
significant place. The bit dropped from  the right is caught in the carry 
basket. The sign bit is retained in th is operation. The operation is further 
illustrated below. 
 
 
 
The left shifting operation is basica lly multiplication by 2 while the right 
shifting operation is division by two. However for signed numbers division by 
two can be accomplished by using shift arithmetic right and not shift logical 
right. The left shift operation is equiva lent to multiplication except when an 
important bit is dropped from the left. The overflow flag will signal this 
condition if it occurs and can be checked with JO. For division by 2 of a 
signed number logical right shifting will give a wrong answer for a negative 
number as the zero inserted from the left will change its sign. To retain the 
sign flag and still effectively divide by two the shift arithmetic right 
instruction must be used on signed numbers. 
1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 0C 
1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 C0 
1 1 1 0 1 0 0 0 C
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
45 
Rotate Right (ROR) 
In the rotate right operation every bi t moves one position to the right and 
the bit dropped from the right is inserted at the left. This bit is also copied 
into the carry flag. The operation can be understood by imagining that the 
pipe used for shifting has been molded such that both ends coincide. Now 
when the first ball is forced to move forward, every ball moves one step 
forward with the last ball entering the pipe from its other end occupying the 
first ball’s old position. The carry basket takes a snapshot of this ball leaving 
one end of the pipe and entering from the other.  
 
 
Rotate Left (ROL) 
In the operation of rotate left instruction, the most significant bit is copied 
to the carry flag and is inserted from the right, causing every bit to move one 
position to the left. It is the reverse of the rotate right instruction. Rotation 
can be of eight or sixteen bits. The following illustration will make the 
concept clear using the same pipe and balls example. 
 
 
Rotate Through Carry Right (RCR) 
In the rotate through carry right instruction, the carry flag is inserted from 
the left, every bit moves one position to the right, and the right most bit is 
dropped in the carry flag. Effectively this is a nine bit or a seventeen bit 
rotation instead of the eight or sixteen bit rotation as in the case of simple 
rotations.  
Imagine the circular molded pipe as used in the simple rotations but this 
time the carry position is part of the circle between the two ends of the pipe. 
Pushing the carry ball from the left causes every ball to move one step to its 
right and the right most bit occupying the carry place. The idea is further 
illustrated below. 
 
 
Rotate Through Carry Left (RCL) 
The exact opposite of rotate through carry right instruction is the rotate 
through carry left instruction. In its operation the carry flag is inserted from 
the right causing every bit to move one location to its left and the most 
significant bit occupying the carry flag. The concept is illustrated below in 
the same manner as in the last example. 
 
 
1 1 1 0 1 0 00 C 
1 1 1 0 1 0 00 C 
1 1 1 0 1 0 00 C 
1 1 1 0 1 0 00 C 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
46 
4.3. MULTIPLICATION IN ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 
In the multiplication algorithm disc ussed above we revised the way we 
multiplied number in lower classes, and gave an example of that method on 
binary numbers. We make a simple modification to the traditional algorithm 
before we proceed to formulate it in assembly language. 
In the traditional algorithm we calculate all intermediate answers and then 
sum them to get the final answer. If we add every intermediate answer to 
accumulate the result, the result will be same in the end, except that we do 
not have to remember a lot of intermediate answers during the whole 
multiplication. The multiplication with the new algorithm is shown below. 
 
    1101 = 13 Accumulated Result 
    0101 = 5 
    -----                      0 (Initial Value) 
    1101 = 13 0 + 13  = 13 
   0000x = 0  13 + 0  = 13 
  1101xx = 52 13 + 52 = 65 
 0000xxx = 0  65 + 0  = 65 (Answer) 
 
We try to identify steps of our algorithm. First we set the result to zero. 
Then we check the right most bit of multiplier. If it is one add the 
multiplicand to the result, and if it is zero perform no addition. Left shift the 
multiplicand before the next bit of multiplier is tested. The left shifting of the 
multiplicand is performed regardless of the value of the multiplier’s right 
most bit. Just like the crosses in trad itional multiplication are always placed 
to mark the ones, tens, thousands, etc. places. Then check the next bit and if 
it is one add the shifted value of the mu ltiplicand to the result. Repeat for as 
many digits as there are in the multiplier, 4 in our example. Formulating the 
steps of the algorithm we get: 
• Shift the multiplier to the right. 
• If CF=1 add the multiplicand to the result. 
• Shift the multiplicand to the left. 
• Repeat the algorithm 4 times. 
For an 8bit multiplication the algori thm will be repeated 8 times and for a 
sixteen bit multiplication it will be repeated 16 times, whatever the size of the 
multiplier is. 
The algorithm uses the fact that shifti ng right forces the right most bit to 
drop in the carry flag. If we test the carry flag using JC we are effectively 
testing the right most bit of the multiplier. Another shifting will cause the 
next bit to drop in the next iteration an d so on. So our task of checking bits 
one by one is satisfied using the shift operation. There are many other 
methods to do this bit testing as well, however we exemplify one of the 
methods in this example.  
In the first iteration there is no shifting just like there is no cross in 
traditional multiplication in the firs t pass. Therefore we placed the left 
shifting of the multiplicand after the addition step. However the right shifting 
of multiplier must be before the addi tion as the addition step’s execution 
depends upon its result.  
We introduce an assembly language program to perform this 4bit 
multiplication. The algorithm is extensible to more bits but there are a few 
complications, which are left to be discussed later. For now we do a 4bit 
multiplication to keep the algorithm simple. 
 
 Example 4.1  
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
; 4bit multiplication algorithm 
[org 0x100] 
              jmp  start 
                
multiplicand: db   13                 ; 4bit multiplicand (8bit space) 
multiplier:   db   5                  ; 4bit multiplier 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
47 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
result:       db   0                  ; 8bit result 
 
start:        mov  cl, 4              ; initialize bit count to four 
              mov  bl, [multiplicand] ; load multiplicand in bl 
              mov  dl, [multiplier]   ; load multiplier in dl 
 
checkbit:     shr  dl, 1              ; move right most bit in carry 
              jnc  skip               ; skip addition if bit is zero 
 
              add  [result], bl       ; accumulate result 
         
skip:         shl  bl, 1              ; shift multiplicand left 
              dec  cl                 ; decrement bit count 
              jnz  checkbit           ; repeat if bits left 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
04-06 
 
 
07 
 
 
14-16 
 
 
18 
 
19 
 
 
20 
 
The numbers to be multiplied are constants for now. The 
multiplication is four bit so the answer is stored in an 8bit register. 
If the operands were 8bit the answer would be 16bit and if the 
operands were 16bit the answer would be 32bit. Since eight bits can 
fit in a byte we have used 4bit multiplication as our first example. 
Since addition by zero means nothing we skip the addition step if 
the rightmost bit of the multiplier is zero. If the jump is not taken 
the shifted value of the multiplicand is added to the result. 
The multiplicand is left shifted in every iteration regardless of the 
multiplier bit. 
DEC is a new instruction but its operation should be immediately 
understandable with the knowledge gained till now. It simply 
subtracts one from its single operand.  
The JNZ instruction causes the algori thm to repeat till any bits of 
the multiplier are left 
 
Inside the debugger observe the working of the SHR and SHL instructions. 
The SHR instruction is effectively dividing its operand by two and the 
remainder is stored in the carry flag from where we test it. The SHL 
instruction is multiplying its operand by two so that it is added at one place 
more towards the left in the result. 
4.4. EXTENDED OPERATIONS 
We performed a 4bit multiplication to  explain the algorithm however the 
real advantage of the computer is when we ask it to multiply large numbers, 
Numbers whose multiplication takes real time. If we have an 8bit number we 
can do the multiplication in word registers, but are we limited to word 
operations? What if we want to multiply 32bit or even larger numbers? We 
are certainly not limited. Assembly language only provides us the basic 
building blocks. We build a plaza out of these blocks, or a building, or a 
classic piece of architecture is only dependant upon our imagination. With 
our logic we can extend these algorithms as much as we want. 
Our next example will be multiplication of 16bit numbers to produce a 
32bit answer. However for a 32bit answer we need a way to shift a 32bit 
number and a way to add 32bit numbers. We cannot depend on 16bit 
shifting as we have 16 significant bits in our multiplicand and shifting any 
bit towards the left may drop a valuable bit causing a totally wrong result. A 
valuable bit means any bit that is one. Dropping a zero bit doesn’t cause any 
difference. So we place the 16it number in 32bit space with the upper 16 bits 
zeroed so that the sixteen shift operations don’t cause any valuable bit to 
drop. Even though the numbers were 16bit we need 32bit operations to 
multiply correctly.  
To clarify this necessity, we take ex ample of a number 40000 or 9C40 in 
hexadecimal. In binary it is repres ented as 1001110001000000. To multiply 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
48 
by two we shift it one place to the left. The answer we get is 
0011100010000000 and the left most one is dropped in the carry flag. The 
answer should be the 17bit number 0x13880 but it is 0x3880, which are 
14464 in decimal instead of the expected 80000. We should be careful of this 
situation whenever shifting is used. 
Extended Shifting 
Using our basic shifting and rotation instructions we can effectively shift a 
32bit number in memory word by word. We cannot shift the whole number 
at once since our architecture is limit ed to word operations. The algorithm 
we use consists of just two instructions and we name it extended shifting. 
num1:         dd   40000 
              shl  word [num1], 1 
              rcl  word [num1+2], 1 
The DD directive reserves a 32bit space in memory, however the value we 
placed there will fit in 16bits. So we can safely shift the number left 16 times. 
The least significant word is accessib le at num1 and the most significant 
word is accessible at num1+2.  
The two instructions are carefully crafte d such that the first one shifts the 
lower word towards the left and the most significant bit of that word is 
dropped in carry. With the next instruction we push that dropped bit into the 
least significant bit of the next word effectively joining the two 16bit words. 
The final carry after the second instruction will be the most significant bit of 
the higher word, which for this number will always be zero. 
The following illustration will clarify the concept. The pipe on the right 
contains the lower half and the pipe on  the left contains the upper half. The 
first instruction forced a zero from the right into the lower half and the left 
most bit is saved in carry, and from there it is pushed into the upper half 
and the upper half is shifted as well. 
 
 
 
For shifting right the exact opposite is done however care must be taken to 
shift right the upper half first and then rotate through carry right the lower 
half for obvious reasons. The instructions to do this are. 
num1:         dd   40000 
              shr  word [num1+2], 1 
              rcr  word [num1], 1 
The same logic has worked. The shift placed the least significant bit of the 
upper half in the carry flag and it was pushed from right into the lower half. 
For a singed shift we would have used the shift arithmetic right instruction 
instead of the shift logical right instruction. 
The extension we have done is not limited to 32bits. We can shift a number 
of any size say 1024 bits. The second instruction will be repeated a number 
of times and we can achieve the desired effect. Using two simple instructions 
we have increased the capability of the operation to effectively an unlimited 
number of bits. The actual limit is the available memory as even the segment 
limit can be catered with a little thought. 
Extended Addition and Subtraction 
We also needed 32bit addition for multiplication of 16bit numbers. The 
idea of extension is same here. However we need to introduce a new 
instruction at this place. The instruct ion is ADC or “add with carry.” Normal 
addition has two operands and the second operand is added to the first 
1 1 1 0 1 0 00 0C
1 1 1 0 1 0 00C Å Step 2 
Step 1 Æ 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
49 
operand. However ADC has three operands. The third implied operand is the 
carry flag. The ADC instruction is specifically placed for extending the 
capability of ADD. Numbers of any size can be added using a proper 
combination of ADD and ADC. All basic building blocks are provided for the 
assembly language programmer, and the programmer can extend its 
capabilities as much as needed by using these fine instructions in 
appropriate combinations. 
Further clarifying the operation of AD C, consider an instruction “ADC AX, 
BX.” Normal addition would have just added BX to AX, however ADC first 
adds the carry flag to AX and then adds BX to AX. Therefore the last carry is 
also included in the result. 
The algorithm should be apparent by now. The lower halves of the two 
numbers to be added are first added with a normal addition. For the upper 
halves a normal addition would lose tr ack of a possible carry from the lower 
halves and the answer would be wrong. If a carry was generated it should go 
to the upper half. Therefore the upper halves are added with an addition with 
carry instruction.  
Since one operand must be in register, ax is used to read the lower and 
upper halves of the source one by one. The destination is directly updated. 
The set of instructions goes here. 
dest:         dd   40000 
src:          dd   80000 
              mov  ax, [src] 
              add  word [dest], ax 
              mov  ax, [src+2] 
              adc  word [dest+2], ax 
To further extend it more addition with carries will be used. However the 
carry from last addition will be wasted as there will always be a size limit 
where the results and the numbers are stored. This carry will remain in the 
carry flag to be tested for a possible overflow. 
For subtraction the same logic will be used and just like addition with 
carry there is an instruction to subtra ct with borrows called SBB. Borrow in 
the name means the carry flag and is used just for clarity. Or we can say 
that the carry flag holds the carry for addition instructions and the borrow 
for subtraction instructions. Also the carry is generated at the 17th bit and 
the borrow is also taken from the 17th bit. Also there is no single instruction 
that needs borrow and carry in their independent meanings at the same 
time. Therefore it is logical to use the same flag for both tasks. 
We extend subtraction with a very similar algorithm. The lower halves 
must be subtracted normally while the upper halves must be subtracted with 
a subtract with borrow instruction so that if the lower halves needed a 
borrow, a one is subtracted from the upper halves. The algorithm is as 
under. 
dest:         dd   40000 
src:          dd   80000 
              mov  ax, [src] 
              sub  word [dest], ax 
              mov  ax, [src+2] 
              sbb  word [dest+2], ax 
Extended Multiplication 
We use extended shifting and extended addition to formulate our algorithm 
to do extended multiplication. The multiplier is still stored in 16bits since we 
only need to check its bits one by one. The multiplicand however cannot be 
stored in 16bits otherwise on left shifting its significant bits might get lost. 
Therefore it has to be stored in 32bits and the shifting and addition used to 
accumulate the result must be 32bits as well. 
 
 Example 4.2  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
50 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
; 16bit multiplication 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start                
 
multiplicand: dd   1300               ; 16bit multiplicand 32bit space 
multiplier:   dw   500                ; 16bit multiplier 
result:       dd   0                  ; 32bit result 
 
start:        mov  cl, 16             ; initialize bit count to 16 
              mov  dx, [multiplier]   ; load multiplier in dx 
 
checkbit:     shr  dx, 1              ; move right most bit in carry 
              jnc  skip               ; skip addition if bit is zero 
 
              mov  ax, [multiplicand] 
              add  [result], ax       ; add less significant word 
              mov  ax, [multiplicand+2] 
              adc  [result+2], ax     ; add more significant word 
 
skip:         shl  word [multiplicand], 1  
              rcl  word [multiplicand+2], 1 ; shift multiplicand left 
              dec  cl                 ; decrement bit count 
              jnz  checkbit           ; repeat if bits left 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
05-07 
 
10 
 
15-18 
 
20-21 
The multiplicand and the result  are stored in 32bit space while 
the multiplier is stored as a word.  
The multiplier is loaded in DX wher e it will be shifted bit by bit. It 
can be directly shifted in memory as well. 
The multiplicand is added to the result using extended 32bit 
addition. 
The multiplicand is shifted left as a 32bit number using extended 
shifting operation. 
 
The multiplicand will occupy the space from 0103-0106, the multiplier will 
occupy space from 0107-0108 and the result will occupy the space from 
0109-010C. Inside the debugger observe the changes in these memory 
locations during the course of the algorithm. The extended shifting and 
addition operations provide the same effect as would be provided if there 
were 32bit addition and shifting operations available in the instruction set.  
At the end of the algorithm the result memory locations contain the value 
0009EB10 which is 65000 in decimal; the desired answer. Also observe that 
the number 00000514 which is 1300 in decimal, our multiplicand, has 
become 05140000 after being left shifted 16 times. Our extended shifting has 
given the same result as if a 32bit number is left shifted 16 times as a unit. 
There are many other important applicat ions of the shifting and rotation 
operations in addition to this exampl e of the multiplication algorithm. More 
examples will come in coming chapters. 
4.5. BITWISE LOGICAL OPERATIONS 
The 8088 processor provides us with a few logical operations that operate 
at the bit level. The logical operations are the same as discussed in computer 
logic design; however our perspective will be a little different. The four basic 
operations are AND, OR, XOR, and NOT.  
The important thing about these operations is that they are bitwise. This 
means that if “and ax, bx” instruction is given, then the operation of AND is 
applied on corresponding bits of AX and BX. There are 16 AND operations as 
a result; one for every bit of AX. Bit 0 of AX will be set if both its original 
value and Bit 0 of BX are set, bit 1 will be set if both its original value and 
Bit 1 of BX are set, and so on for the remaining bits. These operations are 
conducted in parallel on the sixteen bits. Similarly the operations of other 
logical operations are bitwise as well.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
51 
AND operation 
AND performs the logical bitwise and of the two 
operands (byte or word) and returns the result to the 
destination operand. A bit in the result is set if both 
corresponding bits of the original operands are set; 
otherwise the bit is cleared as shown in the truth table. 
Examples are “and ax, bx” and “and byte [mem], 5.” All 
possibilities that are legal for addition are also legal for the AND operation. 
The different thing is the bitwise behavior of this operation. 
OR operation 
 OR performs the logical bitwise “inclusive or” of the two 
operands (byte or word) and returns the result to the 
destination operand. A bit in the result is set if either or 
both corresponding bits in the original operands are set 
otherwise the result bit is cleared as shown in the truth 
table. Examples are “or ax, bx” and “or byte [mem], 5.”  
XOR operation 
 XOR (Exclusive Or) performs the logical bitwise 
“exclusive or” of the two operands and returns the result 
to the destination operand. A bit in the result is set if the 
corresponding bits of the original operands contain 
opposite values (one is set, the other is cleared) otherwise 
the result bit is cleared as shown in the truth table. XOR 
is a very important operation due to the property that it is a reversible 
operation. It is used in many cryptography algorithms, image processing, and 
in drawing operations. Examples are “xor ax, bx” and “xor byte [mem], 5.” 
NOT operation 
NOT inverts the bits (forms the one’s complement) of the byte or word 
operand. Unlike the other logical operations, this is a single operand 
instruction, and is not purely a logical operation in the sense the others are, 
but it is still traditionally counted in the same set. Examples are “not ax” and 
“not byte [mem]”. 
4.6. MASKING OPERATIONS 
Selective Bit Clearing 
Another use of AND is to make selective bits zero in its destination 
operand. The source operand is load ed with a mask containing one at 
positions which are retain their old value and zero at positions which are to 
be zeroed. The effect of applying this operation on the destination with mask 
in the source is to clear the desired bits. This operation is called masking. 
For example if the lower nibble is to be cleared then the operation can be 
applied with F0 in the source. The upper nibble will retain its old value and 
the lower nibble will be cleared. 
Selective Bit Setting 
The OR operation can be used as a masking operation to set selective bits. The 
bits in the mask are cleared at positions which are to retain their values, and 
are set at positions which are to be set. For example to set the lower nibble of 
the destination operand, the operation sh ould be applied with a mask of 0F 
in the source. The upper nibble will reta in its value and the lower nibble will 
be set as a result. 
X Y X and Y
 
0 0 0 
0 1 0 
1 0 0 
1 1 1 
X Y X or Y 
0 0 0 
0 1 1 
1 0 1 
1 1 1 
X Y X xor Y 
0 0 0 
0 1 1 
1 0 1 
1 1 0 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
52 
Selective Bit Inversion 
XOR can also be used as a masking op eration to invert selective bits. The 
bits in the mask are cleared at positions, which are to retain their values, 
and are set at positions, which are to be inverted. For example to invert the 
lower nibble of the destination operand, the operand should be applied with 
a mask of 0F in the source. The upper nibble will retain its value and the 
lower nibble will be set as a result. Compare this with NOT which inverts 
everything. XOR on the other hand allows inverting selective bits. 
Selective Bit Testing 
AND can be used to check whether particular bits of a number are set or 
n o t .  P r e v i o u s l y  w e  u s e d  s h i f t i n g  a n d  J C  t o  t e s t  b i t s  o n e  b y  o n e .  N o w  w e  
introduce another way to test bits, which is more powerful in the sense that 
any bit can be tested anytime and not necessarily in order. AND can be 
applied on a destination with a 1-bit in the desired position and a source, 
which is to be checked. If the destinat ion is zero as a result, which can be 
checked with a JZ instruction, the bit at the desired position in the source 
was clear.  
However the AND operation destroys the destination mask, which might be 
needed later as well. Therefore Intel provided us with another instruction 
analogous to CMP, which is non-destru ctive subtraction. This is the TEST 
instruction and is a non-destructive AN D operation. It doesn’t change the 
destination and only sets the flags according to the AND operation. By 
checking the flags, we can see if the desired bit was set or cleared. 
We change our multiplication algorithm to use selective bit testing instead 
of checking bits one by one using the shifting operations.  
 
 Example 4.3 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
; 16bit multiplication using test for bit testing 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start                
 
multiplicand: dd   1300               ; 16bit multiplicand 32bit space 
multiplier:   dw   500                ; 16bit multiplier 
result:       dd   0                  ; 32bit result 
 
start:        mov  cl, 16             ; initialize bit count to 16 
              mov  bx, 1              ; initialize bit mask 
 
checkbit:     test bx, [multiplier]   ; test right most bit 
              jz   skip               ; skip addition if bit is zero 
 
              mov  ax, [multiplicand] 
              add  [result], ax       ; add less significant word 
              mov  ax, [multiplicand+2] 
              adc  [result+2], ax     ; add more significant word 
 
skip:         shl  word [multiplicand], 1  
              rcl  word [multiplicand+2], 1 ; shift multiplicand left 
              shl  bx, 1              ; shift mask towards next bit 
              dec  cl                 ; decrement bit count 
              jnz  checkbit           ; repeat if bits left 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
12 
 
 
22-24 
The test instruction is used for bit testing. BX holds the mask and in 
every next iteration it is shifting left, as our concerned bit is now the 
next bit.  
We can do without counting in this example. We can stop as soon as 
our mask in BX becomes zero. These are the small tricks that 
assembly allows us to do and optimize our code as a result. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
53 
Inside the debugger observe that both the memory location and the mask in 
BX do not change as a result of TE ST instruction. Al so observe how our 
mask is shifting towards the left so th at the next TEST instruction tests the 
next bit. In the end we get the same result of 0009EB10 as in the previous 
example. 
EXERCISES 
1. Write a program to swap every pair of bits in the AX register. 
2. Give the value of the AX register and the carry flag after each of the 
following instructions. 
stc 
mov ax, <your rollnumber> 
adc ah, <first character of your name> 
cmc 
xor ah, al 
mov cl, 4 
shr al, cl 
rcr ah, cl 
3. Write a program to swap the nibbles in each byte of the AX register. 
4. Calculate the number of one bits in BX and complement an equal 
number of least significant bits in AX.  
HINT: Use the XOR instruction 
5. Write a program to multiply two 32bit numbers and store the answer 
in a 64bit location.  
6. Declare a 32byte buffer containing  random data. Consider for this 
problem that the bits in these 32 bytes are numbered from 0 to 255. 
Declare another byte that contains the starting bit number. Write a 
program to copy the byte starting at this starting bit number in the AX 
register. Be careful that the starting bit number may not be a multiple 
of 8 and therefore the bits of the desired byte will be split into two 
bytes.  
7. AX contains a number between 0-15. Write code to complement the 
corresponding bit in BX. For example if AX contains 6; complement the 
6th bit of BX. 
8. AX contains a non-zero number. Co unt the number of ones in it and 
store the result back in AX. Repeat the process on the result (AX) until 
AX contains one. Calculate in BX th e number of iterations it took to 
make AX one. For example BX should contain 2 in the following case: 
AX = 1100 0101 1010 0011 (input – 8 ones) 
AX = 0000 0000 0000 1000 (after first iteration – 1 one) 
AX = 0000 0000 0000 0001 (after second iteration – 1 one) STOP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
5 
Subroutines 
5.1. PROGRAM FLOW 
Till now we have accumulated the very basic tools of assembly language 
programming. A very important weapon  in our arsenal is the conditional 
jump instruction. During the course of last two chapters we used these tools 
to write two very useful algorithms  of sorting and multiplication. The 
multiplication algorithm is useful even  though there is a MUL instruction in 
the 8088 instruction set, which can multiply 8bit and 16bit operands. This is 
because of the extensibility of our algorithm, as it is not limited to 16bits and 
can do 32bit or 64bit multiplication with minor changes. 
Both of these algorithms will be used a number of times in any program of 
a reasonable size and complexity. An application does not only need to 
multiply at a single point in code; it  multiplies at a number of places. If 
multiplication or sorting is needed at 100 places in code, copying it 100 
times is a totally infeasible soluti on. Maintaining such a code is an 
impossible task.  
The straightforward solution to this problem using the concepts we have 
acquainted till now is to write the co de at one place with a label, and 
whenever we need to sort we jump to this label. But there is problem with 
this logic, and the problem is that after sorting is complete how the processor 
will know where to go back. The immediate answer is to jump back to a label 
following the jump to bubble sort. But we have jumped to bubble sort from 
100 places in code. Which of the 100 positions in code should we jump 
back? Jump back at the first invocation, but jump has a single fixed target. 
How will the second invocation work? Th e second jump to bubble sort will 
never have control back at the next line. 
Instruction are tied to one another forming an execution thread, just like a 
knitted thread where pieces of cotton of different sizes are twisted together to 
form a thread. This thread of execution is our program. The jump instruction 
breaks this thread permanently, making  a permanent diversion, like a turn 
on a highway. The conditional jump selects one of the two possible 
directions, like right or left turn on a road. So there is no concept of 
returning. 
However there are roundabouts on roads as well that take us back from 
where we started after having traveled on the boundary of the round. This is 
the concept of a temporary diversion. Two or more permanent diversions can 
t a k e us  ba c k f r om  w h e r e w e  s t a r t e d,  j us t  l i k e  t w o or  m or e  r oa d  t ur n s  c a n 
take us back to the starting point, bu t they are still permanent diversions in 
their nature. 
We need some way to implement the concept of temporary diversion in 
assembly language. We want to create a roundabout of bubble sort, another 
roundabout of our multiplication algori thm, so that we can enter into the 
roundabout whenever we need it and return back to wherever we left from 
after completing the round. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
56 
 
 
Key point in the above discussion is returning to where we left from, like a 
loop in a knitted thread. Diversion should be temporary and not permanent. 
The code of bubble sort written at on e place, multiply at another, and we 
temporarily divert to that place, thus avoiding a repetition of code at a 100 
places.  
CALL and RET 
In every processor, instructions are av ailable to divert temporarily and to 
divert permanently. The instructions for permanent diversion in 8088 are the 
jump instructions, while the instructio n for temporary diversion is the CALL 
instruction. The word call must be fa miliar to the readers from subroutine 
call in higher level languages. The CALL instruction allows temporary 
diversion and therefore reusability of code. Now we can place the code for 
bubble sort at one place and reuse it again and again. This was not possible 
with permanent diversion. Actua lly the 8088 permanent diversion 
mechanism can be tricked to achieve te mporary diversion. However it is not 
possible without getting into a lot of trouble. The key idea in doing it this way 
is to use the jump instruction form that takes a register as argument. 
Therefore this is not impossible but this is not the way it is done. 
The natural way to do this is to us e the CALL instruction followed by a 
label, just like JMP is followed by a label. Execution will divert to the code 
following the label. Till now the op eration has been similar to the JMP 
instruction. When the subroutine completes we need to return. The RET 
instruction is used for this purpose. The word return holds in its meaning 
that we are to return from where we came and need no explicit destination. 
Therefore RET takes no arguments and transfers control back to the 
instruction following the CALL that took us in this subroutine. The actual 
technical process that informs RET where to return will be discussed later 
after we have discussed the system stack. 
CALL takes a label as argument and execution starts from that label, until 
the RET instruction is encountered and it takes execution back to the 
instruction following the CALL. Both th e instructions are commonly used as 
a pair, however technically they are independent in their operation. The RET 
works regardless of the CALL and the CALL works regardless of the RET. If 
you CALL a subroutine it will not compla in if there is no RET present and 
similarly if you RET without being called it won’t complain. It is a logical pair 
and is used as a pair in every decent code. However sometimes we play tricks 
with the processor and we use CALL or  RET alone. This will become clear 
when we need to play such tricks in later chapters. 
Bubble Sort 
Swap 
Program 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
57 
Parameters 
We intend to write the bubble sort code at one place and CALL it whenever 
needed. An immediately visible problem is that whenever we call this 
subroutine it will sort the same array in the same order. However in a real 
application we will need to sort variou s arrays of various sizes. We might 
sometimes need an ascending sort and descending at other times. Similarly 
our data may be signed or unsigned. Such pieces of information that may 
change from invocation to invocation and should be passed from the caller to 
the subroutine are called parameters.  
There must be some way of passing these parameters to the subroutine. 
Revising the subroutine temporary flow breakage mechanism, the most 
straightforward way is to use registers. The CALL mechanism breaks the 
thread of execution and does not change  registers, except IP which must 
change for processor to start executi ng at another place, and SP whose 
change will be discussed in detail later. Any of the other registers can hold 
parameters for the subroutine. 
5.2. OUR FIRST SUBROUTINE 
N o w  w e  w a n t  t o  m o d i f y  t h e  b u b b l e  s o r t  c o d e  s o  t h a t  i t  w o r k s  a s  a  
subroutine. We place a label at the start of bubble sort code, which works as 
the anchor point and will be used in the CALL instruction to call the 
subroutine. We also place a RET at the end of the algorithm to return from 
where we called the subroutine. 
 
 Example 5.1 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
; bubble sort algorithm as a subroutine 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
swap:         db   0 
 
bubblesort:   dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swap], 0     ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
   
              mov  dx, [bx+si+2]      ; load second element in dx 
              mov  [bx+si], dx        ; store first number in second 
              mov  [bx+si+2], ax      ; store second number in first 
              mov  byte [swap], 1     ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  byte [swap], 1     ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
 
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
start:        mov  bx, data           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, 10             ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
08-09 
 
 
The routine has received the count of elements in CX. Since it makes 
one less comparison than the number of elements it decrements it. 
Then it multiplies it by two since this a word array and each element 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
58 
 
14 
 
 
 
32-37 
takes two bytes. Left shifting has been used to multiply by two. 
Base+index+offset addressing has been used. BX holds the start of 
array, SI the offset into it and an offset of 2 when the next element is 
to be read. BX can be directly changed but then a separate counter 
would be needed, as SI is directly compared with CX in our case. 
The code starting from the start label is our main program 
analogous to the main in the C language. BX and CX hold our 
parameters for the bubblesort subroutine and the CALL is made to 
invoke the subroutine. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe the same unsigned data that we are so 
used to now. The number 0103 is pass ed via BX to the subroutine which is 
the start of our data and the number 000A via CX which is the number of 
elements in our data. If we step over  the CALL instruction we see our data 
sorted in a single step and we are at the termination instructions. The 
processor has jumped to the bubblesort  routine, executed it to completion, 
and returned back from it but the proc ess was hidden due to the step over 
command. If however we trace into the CALL instruction, we land at the first 
instruction of our routine. At the end of the routine, when the RET 
instruction is executed, we immediat ely land back to our termination 
instructions, to be precise the instruction following the CALL.  
Also observe that with the CALL instruction SP is decremented by two from 
FFFE to FFFC, and the stack windows show s 0150 at its top. As the RET is 
executed SP is recovered and the 0150 is also removed from the stack. Match 
it with the address of the instructio n following the CALL which is 0150 as 
well. The 0150 removed from the stack by the RET instruction has been 
loaded into the IP register thereby resuming execution from address 0150. 
CALL placed where to return on the stack for the RET instruction. The stack 
is automatically used with the CALL and RET instructions. Stack will be 
explained in detail later, however the idea is that the one who is departing 
stores the address to return at a known place. This is the place using which 
CALL and RET coordinate. How this placed is actually used by the CALL and 
RET instructions will be described after the stack is discussed. 
After emphasizing reusability so much, it is time for another example 
which uses the same bubblesort routine on two different arrays of different 
sizes. 
 
 Example 5.2 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
; bubble sort subroutine called twice 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
data2:        dw   328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98 
              dw   888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5 
swap:         db   0 
 
bubblesort:   dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swap], 0     ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
   
              mov  dx, [bx+si+2]      ; load second element in dx 
              mov  [bx+si], dx        ; store first number in second 
              mov  [bx+si+2], ax      ; store second number in first 
              mov  byte [swap], 1     ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
59 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  byte [swap], 1     ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
 
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
start:        mov  bx, data           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, 10             ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov bx, data2           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov cx, 20              ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine again 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
05-07 
 
 
 
34-40 
There are two different data arrays declared. One of 10 elements and 
the other of 20 elements. The second array is declared on two lines, 
where the second line is continuation of the first. No additional label 
is needed since they are situated consecutively in memory. 
The other change is in the main where the bubblesort subroutine is 
called twice, once on the first array and once on the second. 
 
Inside the debugger observe that stepping over the first call, the first array 
is sorted and stepping over the second call the second array is sorted. If 
however we step in SP is decremented and the stack holds 0178 which is the 
address of the instruction following the call. The RET consumes that 0178 
and restores SP. The next CALL places 0181 on the stack and SP is again 
decremented. The RET consumes this number and execution resumes from 
the instruction at 0181. This is the coordinated function of CALL and RET 
using the stack. 
In both of the above examples, there is a shortcoming. The subroutine to 
sort the elements is destroying the registers AX, CX, DX, and SI. That means 
that the caller of this routine has to make sure that it does not hold any 
important data in these registers befo re calling this function, because after 
the call has returned the registers will be containing meaningless data for the 
caller. With a program containing thousands of subroutines expecting the 
caller to remember the set of modified registers for each subroutine is 
unrealistic and unreasonable. Also registers are limited in number, and 
restricting the caller on the use of register will make the caller’s job very 
tough. This shortcoming will be removed using the very important system 
stack. 
5.3. STACK 
Stack is a data structure that behaves in a first in last out manner. It can 
contain many elements and there is only one way in and out of the container. 
When an element is inserted it sits on top of all other elements and when an 
element is removed the one sitting at to p of all others is removed first. To 
visualize the structure consider a test  tube and put some balls in it. The 
second ball will come above the firs t and the third will come above the 
second. When a ball is taken out only the one at the top can be removed. The 
operation of placing an element on top of the stack is called pushing the 
element and the operation of removing an element from the top of the stack 
is called popping the element. The last thing pushed is popped out first; the 
last in first out behavior.  
We can peek at any ball inside the test tube but we cannot remove it 
without removing every ball on top of it. Similarly we can read any element 
from the stack but cannot remove it without removing everything above it. 
The stack operations of pushing and po pping only work at the top of the 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
60 
stack. This top of stack is contained in the SP register. The physical address 
of the stack is obtained by the SS: SP combination. The stack segment 
registers tells where the stack is located and the stack pointer marks the top 
of stack inside this segment.  
Whenever an element is pushed on the stack SP is decremented by two as 
the 8088 stack works on word sized elements. Single bytes cannot be pushed 
or popped from the stack. Also it is a decrementing stack. Another possibility 
is an incrementing stack. A decrementing stack moves from higher addresses 
to lower addresses as elements are added in it while an incrementing stack 
moves from lower addresses to higher addresses as elements are added. 
There is no special reason or argument in favor of one or another, and more 
or less depends on the choice of the designers. Another processor 8051 by 
the same manufacturer has an incrementing stack while 8088 has a 
decrementing one.  
Memory is like a shelf numbered as zero at the top and the maximum at 
the bottom. If a decrementing stack starts at shelf 5, the first item is placed 
in shelf 5, the next item is placed in shelf 4, the next in shelf 3 and so on. 
The operations of placing items on the stack and removing them from there 
are called push and pop. The push operation copies its operand on the stack, 
while the pop operation makes a copy from the top of the stack into its 
oper and. W hen an it em is push e d on a decrementing stack, the top of the 
stack is first decremented and the element is then copied into this space. 
With a pop the element at the top of the stack is copied into the pop operand 
and the top of stack is incremented afterwards. 
The basic use of the stack is to save things and recover from there when 
needed. For example we discussed the shortcoming in our last example that 
it destroyed the caller’s registers, and the callers are not supposed to 
remember which registers are destroyed by the thousand routines they use. 
Using the stack the subroutine can save the caller’s value of the registers on 
the stack, and recover them from there before returning. Meanwhile the 
subroutine can freely use the registers. From the caller’s point of view if the 
registers contain the same value before and after the call, it doesn’t matter if 
the subroutine used them meanwhile. 
Similarly during the CALL operation, the current value of the instruction 
pointer is automatically saved on the stack, and the destination of CALL is 
loaded in the instruction pointer. Execution therefore resumes from the 
destination of CALL. When the RET instruction is executed, it recovers the 
value of the instruction pointer from the stack. The next instruction executed 
is therefore the one following the CALL. Observe how playing with the 
instruction pointer affects the program flow.  
There is a form of the RET instruction called “RET n” where n is a numeric 
argument. After performing the operation of RET, it further increments the 
stack pointer by this number, i.e. SP is first incremented by two and then by 
n. Its function will become clear when parameter passing is discussed. 
Now we describe the operation of th e stack in CALL and RET with an 
example. The top of stack stored in th e stack pointer is initialized at 2000. 
The space above SP is considered empty and free. When the stack pointer is 
decremented by two, we took a word from the empty space and can use it for 
our purpose. The unit of stack operatio ns is a word. Some instructions push 
multiple words; however byte pushes cannot be made. Now the value 017B is 
stored in the word reserved on the stack. The RET will copy this value in the 
instruction pointer and increment the stack pointer by two making it 2000 
again, thereby reverting the operation of CALL.  
This is how CALL and RET behave for near calls. There is also a far version 
of these functions when the target routine is in another segment. This 
version of CALL takes a segment offset pair just like the far jump instruction. 
The CALL will push both the segment and the offset on the stack in this 
case, followed by loading CS and IP with  the values given in the instruction. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
61 
The corresponding instruction RETF w ill pop the offset in the instruction 
pointer followed by popping the segment in the code segment register. 
Apart from CALL and RET, the operations that use the stack are PUSH and 
POP. Two other operations that will be discussed later are INT and IRET. 
Regarding the stack, the operation of PUSH is similar to CALL however with 
a register other than the instruction pointer. For example “push ax” will push 
the current value of the AX register on  the stack. The operation of PUSH is 
shown below. 
SP Å SP – 2 
[SP] Å AX 
The operation of POP is the reverse of this. A copy of the element at the top 
of the stack is made in the operand, and the top of the stack is incremented 
afterwards. The operation of “pop ax” is shown below. 
AX Å [SP] 
SP Å SP + 2 
Making corresponding PUSH and POP op erations is the responsibility of 
the programmer. If “push ax” is followed by “pop dx” effectively copying the 
value of the AX register in the DX register, the processor won’t complain. 
Whether this sequence is logically correct or not should be ensured by the 
programmer. For example when PUSH and POP are used to save and restore 
registers from the stack, order must be correct so that the saved value of AX 
is reloaded in the AX register and not any other register. For this the order of 
POP operations need to be the reverse of the order of PUSH operations.  
Now we consider another example that is similar to the previous examples, 
however the code to swap the two elem ents has been extracted into another 
subroutine, so that the formation of stack can be observed during nested 
subroutine calls. 
 
 Example 5.3 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
; bubble sort subroutine using swap subroutine 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
data2:        dw   328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98 
              dw   888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5 
swapflag:     db   0 
 
swap:         mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load first number in ax 
              xchg ax, [bx+si+2]      ; exchange with second number 
              mov  [bx+si], ax        ; store second number in first 
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
bubblesort:   dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
 
              call swap               ; swaps two elements 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 1 ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  byte [swapflag], 1 ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
start:        mov  bx, data           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, 10             ; send count of elements in cx 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
62 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov bx, data2           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov cx, 20              ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine again 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
11 
 
 
 
 
13 
A new instruction XCHG has been introduced. The instruction 
swaps its source and its destinatio n operands however at most one 
of the operands could be in memory, so the other has to be loaded in 
a register. The instruction has reduced the code size by one 
instruction. 
The RET at the end of swap makes it a subroutine. 
 
Inside the debugger observe the use of stack by CALL and RET 
instructions, especially the nested CALL. 
5.4. SAVING AND RESTORING REGISTERS 
The subroutines we wrote till now have been destroying certain registers 
and our calling code has been carefully written to not use those registers. 
However this cannot be remembered for a good number of subroutines. 
Therefore our subroutines need to implement some mechanism of retaining 
the callers’ value of any registers used.  
The trick is to use the PUSH and POP operations and save the callers’ 
value on the stack and recover it from there on return. Our swap subroutine 
destroyed the AX register while the bubblesort subroutine destroyed AX, CX, 
and SI. BX was not modified in the subroutine. It had the same value at 
entry and at exit; it was only used by the subroutine. Our next example 
improves on the previous version by saving and restoring any registers that it 
will modify using the PUSH and POP operations.  
 
 Example 5.4 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
; bubble sort and swap subroutines saving and restoring registers 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
data2:        dw   328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98 
              dw   888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5 
swapflag:     db   0 
 
swap:         push ax                 ; save old value of ax 
 
              mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load first number in ax 
              xchg ax, [bx+si+2]      ; exchange with second number 
              mov  [bx+si], ax        ; store second number in first 
 
              pop  ax                 ; restore old value of ax 
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
bubblesort:   push ax                 ; save old value of ax 
              push cx                 ; save old value of cx 
              push si                 ; save old value of si 
 
              dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
63 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
              call swap               ; swaps two elements 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 1 ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  byte [swapflag], 1 ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
 
              pop  si                 ; restore old value of si 
              pop  cx                 ; restore old value of cx 
              pop  ax                 ; restore old value of ax 
              ret                     ; go back to where we came from 
 
start:        mov  bx, data           ; send start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, 10             ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov  bx, data2          ; send start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, 20             ; send count of elements in cx 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine again 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
19-21 When multiple registers are pushed, order is very important. If AX, 
C X ,  a n d  S I  a r e  p u s h e d  i n  t h i s  o r d e r ,  t h e y  m u s t  b e  p o p p e d  i n  t h e  
reverse order of SI, CX, and AX. This is again because the stack 
behaves in a Last In First Out manner. 
 
Inside the debugger we can observe that the registers before and after the 
CALL operation are exactly identical. Effectively the caller can assume the 
registers are untouched. By tracing into the subroutines we can observe how 
their value is saved on the stack by the PUSH instructions and recovered 
from their before exit. Saving and restoring registers this way in subroutines 
is a standard way and must be followed. 
PUSH 
PUSH decrements SP (the stack pointer) by two and then transfers a word 
from the source operand to the top of stack now pointed to by SP. PUSH 
often is used to place parameters on the stack before calling a procedure; 
more generally, it is the basic means of storing temporary data on the stack. 
POP 
POP transfers the word at the current top of stack (pointed to by SP) to the 
destination operand and then increments SP by two to point to the new top 
of stack. POP can be used to move temporary variables from the stack to 
registers or memory. 
Observe that the operand of PUSH is  called a source operand since the 
data is moving to the stack from the operand, while the operand of POP is 
called destination since data is moving from the stack to the operand. 
CALL 
CALL activates an out-of-line procedure, saving information on the stack to 
permit a RET (return) instruction in the procedure to transfer control back to 
the instruction following the CALL. For an  intra segment  direct CALL, SP is 
decremented by two and IP is pushed on to the stack. The target procedure’s 
relative displacement from the CALL instruction is then added to the 
instruction pointer. For an inter segmen t direct CALL, SP is decremented by 
two, and CS is pushed onto the stack.  CS is replaced by the segment word 
contained in the instruction. SP again is decremented by two. IP is pushed 
onto the stack and replaced by the offset word in the instruction. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
64 
The out-of-line procedure is the temporary division, the concept of 
roundabout that we discussed. Near calls are also called intra segment calls, 
while far calls are called inter-segment calls. There are also versions that are 
called indirect calls; however they will be discuss later when they are used. 
RET 
RET (Return) transfers control from a procedure back to the instruction 
following the CALL that activated the procedure. RET pops the word at the 
top of the stack (pointed to by regist er SP) into the instruction pointer and 
increments SP by two. If RETF (inter segment RET) is used the word at the 
top of the stack is popped into the IP register and SP is incremented by two. 
The word at the new top of stack is popped into the CS register, and SP is 
again incremented by two. If an optional pop value has been specified, RET 
adds that value to SP. This feature may be used to discard parameters 
pushed onto the stack before the execution of the CALL instruction.  
5.5. PARAMETER PASSING THROUGH STACK 
Due to the limited number of registers, parameter passing by registers is 
constrained in two ways. The maximum parameters a subroutine can receive 
are seven when all the general registers are used. Also, with the subroutines 
are themselves limited in their use of registers, and this limited increases 
when the subroutine has to make a nested call thereby using certain 
registers as its parameters. Due to this, parameter passing by registers is not 
expandable and generalizable. However this is the fastest mechanism 
available for passing parameters and is used where speed is important. 
Considering stack as an alternate, we observe that whatever data is placed 
there, it stays there, and across function calls as well. For example the 
bubble sort subroutine needs an arra y address and the count of elements. If 
we place both of these on the stack, and call the subroutine afterwards, it 
will stay there. The subroutine is invo ked with its return address on top of 
the stack and its parameters beneath it. 
To access the arguments from the stack, the immediate idea that strikes is 
to pop them off the stack. And this is  the only possibility using the given set 
of information. However the first thing popped off the stack would be the 
return address and not the arguments. This is because the arguments were 
first pushed on the stack and the su broutine was called afterwards. The 
arguments cannot be popped without first popping the return address. If a 
heaving thing falls on someone’s leg, the heavy thing is removed first and the 
leg is not pulled out to reduce the damage. Same is the case with our 
parameters on which the return address has fallen. 
To handle this using PUSH and POP, we must first pop the return address 
in a register, then pop the operands, and push the return address back on 
the stack so that RET will function norm ally. However so much effort doesn’t 
seem to pay back the price. Processor designers should have provided a 
logical and neat way to perform this operation. They did provided a way and 
infact we will do this without introducing any new instruction. 
Recall that the default segment association of the BP register is the stack 
segment and the reason for this association had been deferred for now. The 
reason is to peek inside the stack using the BP register and read the 
parameters without removing them and without touching the stack pointer. 
The stack pointer could not be used for this purpose, as it cannot be used in 
an effective address. It is automatically used as a pointer and cannot be 
explicitly used. Also the stack pointer is a dynamic pointer and sometimes 
changes without telling us in the background. It is just that whenever we 
touch it, it is where we expect it to be. The base pointer is provided as a 
replacement of the stack pointer so that we can peek inside the stack 
without modifying the structure of the stack. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
65 
When the bubble sort subroutine is called, the stack pointer is pointing to 
the return address. Two bytes below it is the second parameter and four 
bytes below is the first parameter. The stack pointer is a reference point to 
these parameters. If the value of SP is captured in BP, then the return 
address is located at [bp+0], the second parameter is at [bp+2], and the first 
parameter is at [bp+4]. This is because SP and BP both had the same value 
and they both defaulted to the same segment, the stack segment. 
This copying of SP into BP is like taking a snapshot or like freezing the 
stack at that moment. Even if more pushes are made on the stack 
decrementing the stack pointer, our reference point will not change. The 
parameters will still be accessible at the same offsets from the base pointer. 
If however the stack pointer increments beyond the base pointer, the 
references will become invalid. The base pointer will act as the datum point 
to access our parameters. However we have destroyed the original value of 
BP in the process, and this will cause problems in nested calls where both 
the outer and the inner subroutines need to access their own parameters. 
The outer subroutine will have its base  pointer destroyed after the call and 
will be unable to access its parameters.  
To solve both of these problems, we reach at the standard way of accessing 
parameters on the stack. The first two instructions of any subroutines 
accessing its parameters from the stack are given below. 
push bp 
mov  bp, sp 
As a result our datum point has shifted by a word. Now the old value of BP 
will be contained in [bp] and the return address will be at [bp+2]. The second 
parameters will be [bp+4] while the first one will be at [bp+6]. We give an 
example of bubble sort subroutine us ing this standard way of argument 
passing through stack. 
 
 Example 5.5 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
; bubble sort subroutine taking parameters from stack 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
data2:        dw   328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98 
              dw   888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5 
swapflag:     db   0 
 
bubblesort:   push bp                 ; save old value of bp 
              mov  bp, sp             ; make bp our reference point 
              push ax                 ; save old value of ax 
              push bx                 ; save old value of bx 
              push cx                 ; save old value of cx 
              push si                 ; save old value of si 
 
              mov  bx, [bp+6]         ; load start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; load count of elements in cx 
              dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 0 ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
 
              xchg ax, [bx+si+2]      ; exchange ax with second number 
              mov  [bx+si], ax        ; store second number in first 
              mov  byte [swapflag], 1 ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
66 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
              cmp  byte [swapflag], 1 ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
 
              pop  si                 ; restore old value of si 
              pop  cx                 ; restore old value of cx 
              pop  bx                 ; restore old value of bx 
              pop  ax                 ; restore old value of ax 
              pop  bp                 ; restore old value of bp 
              ret  4                  ; go back and remove two params 
 
start:        mov  ax, data  
              push ax                 ; place start of array on stack 
              mov  ax, 10  
              push ax                 ; place element count on stack 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, data2  
              push ax                 ; place start of array on stack 
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; place element count on stack 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine again 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
11 
 
 
45 
 
 
 
47-50 
The value of the stack pointer is captured in the base pointer. With 
further pushes SP will change but BP will not and therefore we will 
read parameters from bp+4 and bp+6. 
The form of RET that takes an argument is used causing four to be 
added to SP after the return address has been popped in the 
instruction pointer. This will effectively discard the parameters that 
are still there on the stack.  
We push the address of the array we want to sort followed by the 
count of elements. As immediate cannot be directly pushed in the 
8088 architecture, we first load it in the AX register and then push 
the AX register on the stack. 
 
Inside the debugger, concentrate on the operation of BP and the stack. The 
parameters are placed on the stack by the caller, the subroutine accesses 
them using the base pointer, and the special form of RET removes them 
without any extra instruction. The valu e of stack pointer of FFF6 is turned 
into FFFE by the RET instruction. This was the value in SP before any of the 
parameters was pushed. 
Stack Clearing by Caller or Callee 
Parameters pushed for a subroutine are a waste after the subroutine has 
returned. They have to be cleared from the stack. Either of the caller and the 
callee can take the responsibility of clearing them from there. If the callee 
has to clear the stack it cannot do this  easily unless RET n exists. That is 
why most general processors have this instruction. Stack clearing by the 
caller needs an extra instruction on behalf of the caller after every call made 
to the subroutine, unnecessarily increasi ng instructions in the program. If 
there are thousand calls to a subroutine the code to clear the stack is 
repeated a thousand times. Therefore the prevalent convention in most high 
level languages is stack clearing by the callee; even though the other 
convention is still used in some languages.  
If RET n is not available, stack clea ring by the callee is a complicated 
process. It will have to save the return address in a register, then remove the 
parameters, and then place back the return address so that RET will 
function. When this instruction was introduced in processors, only then high 
level language designers switched to stack clearing by the callee. This is also 
exactly why RET n adds n to SP after performing the operation of RET. The 
other way around would be totally useless for our purpose. Consider the 
stack condition at the time of RET and this will become clear why this will be 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
67 
useless. Also observe that RET n has discarded the arguments rather than 
popping them as they were no longer of any use either of the caller or the 
callee. 
The strong argument in favour of callee cleared stacks is that the 
arguments were placed on the stack for the subroutine, the caller did not 
needed them for itself, so the subroutine is responsible for removing them. 
Removing the arguments is important as  if the stack is not cleared or is 
partially cleared the stack will eventually become full, SP will reach 0, and 
thereafter wraparound producing unexp ected results. This is called stack 
overflow. Therefore clearing anything placed on the stack is very important.  
5.6. LOCAL VARIABLES 
Another important role of the stack is in the creation of local variables that 
are only needed while the subroutine is in execution and not afterwards. 
They should not take permanent space li ke global variables. Local variables 
should be created when the subroutine is called and discarded afterwards. 
So that the spaced used by them can be reused for the local variables of 
another subroutine. They only have meaning inside the subroutine and no 
meaning outside it.  
The most convenient place to store these variables is the stack. We need 
some special manipulation of the stack for this task. We need to produce a 
gap in the stack for our variables. This is explained with the help of the 
swapflag in the bubble sort example. 
The swapflag we have declared as a word occupying space permanently is 
only needed by the bubble sort subrou tine and should be a local variable. 
Actually the variable was introduced wi th the intent of making it a local 
variable at this time. The stack pointer will be decremented by an extra two 
bytes thereby producing a gap in which a word can reside. This gap will be 
used for our temporary, local, or automatic variable; however we name it. We 
can decrement it as much as we want  producing the desired space, however 
the decrement must be by an even number, as the unit of stack operation is 
a word. In our case we needed just one word. Also the most convenient 
position for this gap is immediately after saving the value of SP in BP. So that 
the same base pointer can be used to ac cess the local variables as well; this 
time using negative offsets. The standard way to start a subroutine which 
needs to access parameters and has local variables is as under. 
push bp 
mov  bp, sp 
sub  sp, 2 
The gap could have been created with a dummy push, but the subtraction 
makes it clear that the value pushed is not important and the gap will be 
used for our local variable. Also gap of any size can be created in a single 
instruction with subtraction. The para meters can still be accessed at bp+4 
and bp+6 and the swapflag can be accessed at bp-2. The subtraction in SP 
was after taking the snapshot; therefore BP is above the parameters but 
below the local variables. The parameters are therefore accessed using 
positive offsets from BP and the local variables are accessed using negative 
offsets.  
We modify the bubble sort subroutine to use a local variable to store the 
swap flag. The swap flag remembered whether a swap has been done in a 
particular iteration of bubble sort. 
 
 Example 5.6 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
; bubble sort subroutine using a local variable 
[org 0x0100]                      
              jmp start 
 
data:         dw   60, 55, 45, 50, 40, 35, 25, 30, 10, 0 
data2:        dw   328, 329, 898, 8923, 8293, 2345, 10, 877, 355, 98 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
68 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
              dw   888, 533, 2000, 1020, 30, 200, 761, 167, 90, 5 
 
bubblesort:   push bp                 ; save old value of bp 
              mov  bp, sp             ; make bp our reference point 
              sub sp, 2               ; make two byte space on stack 
              push ax                 ; save old value of ax 
              push bx                 ; save old value of bx 
              push cx                 ; save old value of cx 
              push si                 ; save old value of si 
 
              mov  bx, [bp+6]         ; load start of array in bx 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; load count of elements in cx 
              dec  cx                 ; last element not compared 
              shl  cx, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
mainloop:     mov  si, 0              ; initialize array index to zero 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; reset swap flag to no swaps 
 
innerloop:    mov  ax, [bx+si]        ; load number in ax 
              cmp  ax, [bx+si+2]      ; compare with next number 
              jbe  noswap             ; no swap if already in order 
 
              xchg ax, [bx+si+2]      ; exchange ax with second number 
              mov  [bx+si], ax        ; store second number in first 
              mov  word [bp-2], 1     ; flag that a swap has been done 
 
noswap:       add  si, 2              ; advance si to next index 
              cmp  si, cx             ; are we at last index 
              jne  innerloop          ; if not compare next two 
     
              cmp  word [bp-2], 1     ; check if a swap has been done   
              je   mainloop           ; if yes make another pass  
 
              pop  si                 ; restore old value of si 
              pop  cx                 ; restore old value of cx 
              pop  bx                 ; restore old value of bx 
              pop  ax                 ; restore old value of ax 
              mov  sp, bp             ; remove space created on stack 
              pop  bp                 ; restore old value of bp 
              ret  4                  ; go back and remove two params 
 
start:        mov  ax, data  
              push ax                 ; place start of array on stack 
              mov  ax, 10  
              push ax                 ; place element count on stack 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, data2  
              push ax                 ; place start of array on stack 
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; place element count on stack 
              call bubblesort         ; call our subroutine again 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
11 
 
23 
 
44 
A word gap has been created for swap flag. This is equivalent to a 
dummy push. The registers are pushed above this gap. 
The swapflag is accessed with [bp-2]. The parameters are accessed 
in the same manner as the last examples. 
We are removing the hole that we created. The hole is removed by 
restoring the value of SP that it had at the time of snapshot or at the 
value it had before the local variable was created. This can be 
replaced with “add sp, 2” however the one used in the code is 
preferred since it does not require to remember how much space for 
local variables was allocated in the start. After this operation SP 
points to the old value of BP from where we can proceed as usual. 
 
We needed memory to store the swap flag. The fact that it is in the stack 
segment or the data segment doesn’t bother us. This will just change the 
addressing scheme.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
69 
EXERCISES 
1. Replace the following valid instructio n with a single instruction that 
has the same effect. Don’t consider the effect on flags. 
    push word L1 
    jmp L2 
L1: 
2. Replace the following invalid instru ctions with a single instruction 
that has the same effect. 
a. pop  ip 
b. mov  ip, L5 
c. sub  sp, 2 
mov  [ss:sp], ax 
d. mov ax, [ss:sp] 
add sp, 2 
e. add  sp, 6 
mov  ip, [ss:sp-6] 
3. Write a recursive function to calculate the Fibonacci of a number. 
The number is passed as a parameter via the stack and the 
calculated Fibonacci number is returned in the AX register. A local 
variable should be used to store the return value from the first 
recursive call. Fibonacci function is defined as follows: 
Fibonacci(0) = 0 
Fibonacci(1) = 1 
Fibonacci(n) = Fibonacci(n-1) + Fibonacci(n-2) 
4. Write the above Fibonacci function iteratively.  
HINT: Use two registers to hold the current and the previous 
Fibonacci numbers in a loop. 
5. Write a function switch_stack meant to change the current stack and 
will be called as below. The function should destroy no registers. 
push word [new_stack_segment] 
push word [new_stack_offset] 
call switch_stack 
6. Write a function “addtoset” that takes offset of a function and 
remembers this offset in an array that can hold a maximum of 8 
offsets. It does nothing if there are already eight offsets in the set. 
Write another function “callset” that makes a call to all functions in 
the set one by one. 
7. Do the above exercise such that “callset” does not use a CALL or a 
JMP to invoke the functions.  
HINT: Setup the stack appropriatel y such that the RET will execute 
the first function, its RET execute the next and so on till the last RET 
returns to the caller of “callset.” 
8. Make an array of 0x80 bytes and treat it as one of 0x400 bits. Write 
a function myalloc that takes one argument, the number of bits. It 
finds that many consecutive zero bits in the array, makes them one, 
and returns in AX the index of the first bit. Write another function 
myfree that takes two arguments, index of a bit in the array, and the 
number of bits. It makes that many consecutive bits zero, whatever 
their previous values are, starting from the index in the first 
argument. 
9. [Circular Queue] Write functions to implement circular queues. 
Declare 16x32 words of data for 16  queues numbered from 0 to 15. 
Each queue has a front index, a rear index and 30 locations for data 
totaling to 32 words. Declare another word variable whose 16 bits 
correspond to the 16 queues and a 1 bit signals that the 
corresponding queue is used and a 0 bit signals that it is free. Write 
a function “qcreate” that returns a queue number after finding a free 
queue or -1 if it failed. Write a function “qdestroy” that marks the 
queue as free. Write two other func tions “qadd” and “qremove” that 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
70 
can add and remove items from the circular queue. The two 
functions return 0 if they failed and 1 otherwise. 
10. [Linked List] Declare 1024 nodes of four bytes each. The first 2 bytes 
will be used for data and the next 2 bytes for storing the offset of 
another node. Also declare a word variable “firstfree” to store the 
offset of the first free node. Write the following five functions: 
a. “init” chains all 1024 nodes in to a list with offset of first 
node in firstfree, offset of th e second node in the later two 
bytes of the first node and so on. The later two bytes of the 
last node contains zero.  
b. “createlist” returns the offset of the node stored in firstfree 
through AX. It sets firstfree to the offset stored in the later 
two bytes of that node, and it sets the later two bytes of that 
node to zero. 
c. “insertafter” takes two parameters, the offset of a node and 
a word data. It removes one node from freelist just like 
“createlist” and inserts it after the said node and updates 
the new node’s data part. 
d. “deleteafter” takes a node as its parameter and removes the 
node immediately after it in the linked list if there is one. 
e. “deletelist” takes a node as its parameters and traverses the 
linked list starting at this node and removes all nodes from 
it and add them back to the free list. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
6 
Display Memory 
The debugger gives a very close vision of the processor. That is why every 
program written till now was executed inside the debugger. Also the 
debugger is a very useful tool in assembly language program development, 
since many bugs only become visible when each instruction is independently 
monitored the way the debugger allows us to do. We will now be using the 
display screen in character mode, the way DOS uses this screen. The way we 
will access this screen is specific to the IBM PC. 
6.1. ASCII CODES 
The computer listens, sees, and speaks in numbers. Even a character is a 
number inside the computer. For example the keyboard is labeled with 
characters however when we press ‘A’, a specific number is transferred from 
the keyboard to the computer. Our program interprets that number as the 
character ‘A’. When the same number comes on display, the Video Graphics 
Adapter (VGA) in our computer shows the shape of ‘A’. Even the shape is 
stored in binary numbers with a one bit representing a pixel on the screen 
that is turned on and a zero bit representing a pixel that is not glowing. This 
example is considering a white on black display and no colors. This is the 
way a shape is drawn on the screen. The interpretation of ‘A’ is performed by 
the VGA card, while the monitor or CRT (cathode ray tube) only glows the 
pixels on and turns them off. The keyboard has a key labeled ‘A’ and 
pressing it the screen shows ‘A’ but all that happened inside was in 
numbers.  
An ‘A’ on any computer and any operating system is an ‘A’ on every other 
computer and operating system. This is because a standard numeric 
representation of all commonly used characters has been developed. This is 
called the ASCII code, where ASCII stands for American Standard Code for 
Information Interchange. The name depicts that this is a code that allows the 
interchange of information; ‘A’ written on one computer will remain an ‘A’ on 
another. The ASCII table lists all defined characters and symbols and their 
standardized numbers. All ASCII based computers use the same code. There 
are few other standards like EBCDIC an d gray codes, but ASCII has become 
the most prevalent standard and is used for Internet communication as well. 
It has become the de facto standard for global communication. The character 
mode displays of our computer use the ASCII standard. Some newer 
operating systems use a new standard Unicode but it is not relevant to us in 
the current discussion. 
Standard ASCII has 128 characters with numbers assigned from 0 to 127. 
When IBM PC was introduced, they extended the standard ASCII and defined 
128 more characters. Thus extending the total number of symbols from 128 
to 256 numbered from 0 to 255 fitting in an 8-bit byte. The newer characters 
were used for line drawing, window corners, and some non-English 
characters. The need for these characters was never felt on teletype 
terminals, but with the advent of IBM PC and its full screen display, these 
semi-graphics characters were the need of the day. Keep in mind that at that 
time there was no graphics mode available.  
The extended ASCII code is just a de facto industry standard but it is not 
defined by an organization like the standard ASCII. Printers, displays, and all 
other peripherals related to the IBM PC  understand the ASCII code. If the 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
72 
code for ‘A’ is sent to the printer, the printer will print the shape of ‘A’, if it is 
sent to the display, the VGA card will form the shape of ‘A’ on the CRT. If it is 
sent to another computer via the serial port, the other computer will 
understand that this is an ‘A’. 
The important thing to observe in the ASCII table is the contiguous 
arrangement of the uppercase alphabets (41-5A), the lowercase alphabets 
(61-7A), and the numbers (30-39). This  helps in certain operations with 
ASCII, for example converting the case of characters by adding or subtracting 
0x20 from it. It also helps in converting a digit into its ASCII representation 
by adding 0x30 to it. 
6.2. DISPLAY MEMORY FORMATION 
We will explore the working of the displa y with ASCII codes, since it is our 
immediately accessible hardware. When 0x40 is sent to the VGA card, it will 
turn pixels on and off in such a way that a visual representation of ‘A’ 
appears on the screen. It has no reality, just an interpretation. In later 
chapters we will program the VGA cont roller to display a new shape when 
the ASCII of ‘A’ is received by it.  
The video device is seen by the computer as a memory area containing the 
ASCII codes that are currently displayed on the screen and a set of I/O ports 
controlling things like the resolution, the cursor height, and the cursor 
position. The VGA memory is seen by the computer just like its own memory. 
There is no difference; rather the computer doesn’t differentiate, as it is 
accessible on the same bus as the system memory. Therefore if that 
appropriate block of the screen is cleared, the screen will be cleared. If the 
ASCII of ‘A’ is placed somewhere in that block, the shape of ‘A’ will appear on 
the screen at a corresponding place.  
This correspondence must be defined as the memory is a single 
dimensional space while the screen is two dimensional having 80 rows and 
25 columns. The memory is linearly ma pped on this two dimensional space, 
just like a two dimensional is mapped in linear memory. There is one word 
per character in which a byte is needed for the ASCII code and the other byte 
is used for the character’s attributes discussed later. Now the first 80 words 
will correspond to the first row of th e screen and the next 80 words will 
correspond to the next row. By making  the memory on the video controller 
accessible to the processor via the system bus, the processor is now in 
control of what is displayed on the screen.  
The three important things that we discussed are.  
• One screen location corresponds to a word in the video memory 
• The video controller memory is accessible to the processor like its 
own memory. 
• ASCII code of a character placed at a cell in the VGA memory will 
cause the corresponding ASCII shape to be displayed on the 
corresponding screen location. 
Display Memory Base Address 
The memory at which the video controller’s memory is mapped must be a 
standard, so that the program can be written in a video card independent 
manner. Otherwise if different vendors map their video memory at different 
places in the address space, as was the problem in the start, writing software 
was a headache. BIOS vendors had a pr oblem of dealing with various card 
vendors. The IBM PC text mode color display is now fixed so that system 
software can work uniformly. It was fixe d at the physical memory location of 
B8000. The first byte at this location  contains the ASCII for the character 
displayed at the top left of the video screen. Dropping the zero we can load 
the rest in a segment register to access the video memory. If we do something 
in this memory, the effect can be seen on the screen. For example we can 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
73 
write a virus that makes any character we write drop to the bottom of the 
screen. 
Attribute Byte 
The second byte in the word designated for one screen location holds the 
foreground and background colors for th e character. This is called its video 
attribute. So the pair of the ASCII code in one byte and the attribute in the 
second byte makes the word that corresponds to one location on the screen. 
The lower address contains the code while the higher one contains the 
attribute. The attribute byte as detailed below has the RGB for the 
foreground and the background. It has an intensity bit for the foreground 
color as well thus making 16 possible colors of the foreground and 8 possible 
colors for the background. When bit 7 is set the character keeps on blinking 
on the screen. This bit has some more interpretations like background 
intensity that has to be activated in the video controller through its I/O 
ports. 
 
 
7 – Blinking of foreground character 
6 – Red component of background color  
5 – Green component of background color  
4 – Blue component of background color  
3 – Intensity component of foreground color  
2 – Red component of foreground color  
1 – Green component of foreground color  
0 – Blue component of foreground color 
Display Examples 
Both DS and ES can be used to access the video memory. However we 
commonly keep DS for accessing our data, and load ES with the segment of 
video memory. Loading a segment register with an immediate operand is not 
allowed in the 8088 architecture. We therefore load the segment register via a 
general purpose register. Other methods are loading from a memory location 
and a combination of push and pop. 
mov  ax, 0xb800 
mov  es, ax 
This operation has opened a window to the video memory. Now the 
following instruction will print an ‘A’ on the top left of the screen in white 
color on black background. 
mov  word [es:0], 0x0741 
The segment override is used since ES  is pointing to the video memory. 
Since the first word is written to, the character will appear at the top left of 
the screen. The 41 that goes in the lower byte is the ASCII code for ‘A’. The 
07 that goes in the higher byte is the attribute with I=0, R=1, G=1, B=1 for 
the foreground, meaning white color in low intensity and R=0, G=0, B=0 for 
the background meaning black color and the most significant bit cleared so 
that there is no blinking. Now consider the following instruction. 
mov  word [es:160], 0x1230 
This is displayed 80 words after the st art and there are 80 characters in 
one screen row. Therefore this is displayed on the first column of the second 
line. The ASCII code used is 30, which represents a ‘0’ while the attribute 
byte is 12 meaning green color on blue background.  
We take our first example to clear the screen.  
 
 
 Example 6.1 
7 5 4 3 2 1 06 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
74 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
12 
13 
; clear the screen  
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, 0xb800         ; load video base in ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  di, 0              ; point di to top left column 
 
nextchar:     mov  word [es:di], 0x0720 ; clear next char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              cmp  di, 4000           ; has the whole screen cleared 
              jne  nextchar           ; if no clear next position 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
07 
 
 
08 
 
09 
The code for space is 20 while 07 is the normal attribute of low 
intensity white on black with no blinking. Even to clear the screen or 
put a blank on a location there is a numeric code. 
DI is incremented twice since each screen location corresponds to 
two byte in video memory. 
DI is compared with 80*25*2=4000. The last word location that 
corresponds to the screen is 3998. 
 
Inside the debugger the operation of clearing the screen cannot be 
observed since the debugger overwrites whatever is displayed on the screen. 
Directly executing the COM file from the command prompt *, we can see that 
the screen is cleared. The command prom pt that reappeared is printed after 
the termination of our application. This  is the first application that can be 
directly executed to see some output on the screen. 
6.3. HELLO WORLD IN ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE 
To declare a character in assembly language, we store its ASCII code in a 
byte. The assembler provides us with another syntax that doesn’t forces us to 
remember the ASCII code. The assembler also provides a syntax that 
simplifies declaration of consecutive ch aracters, usually called a string. The 
three ways used below are identical in their meaning. 
db   0x61, 0x62, 0x63 
db   'a', 'b', 'c' 
db   'abc' 
When characters are stored in any high level or low level language the 
actual thing stored in a byte is their ASCII code. The only thing the language 
helps in is a simplified declaration. 
Traditionally the first program in higher level languages is to print “hello 
world” on the screen. However due to the highly granular nature of assembly 
language, we are only now able to write it in assembly language. In writing 
this program, we make a generic routine that can print any string on the 
screen. 
 
 Example 6.2 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08 
09 
10 
11 
; hello world in assembly 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'hello world'      ; string to be printed 
length:       dw   11                 ; length of the string 
 
; subroutine to clear the screen 
clrscr:       push es 
              push ax 
              push di 
                                               
* R e m e m b e r  t h a t  i f  t h i s  e x a m p l e  i s  r u n  i n  a  D O S  w i n d o w  o n  s o m e  n e w e r  
operating systems, a full screen DOS application must be run before this 
program so that screen access is enabled. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
75 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  di, 0              ; point di to top left column 
 
nextloc:      mov  word [es:di], 0x0720 ; clear next char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              cmp  di, 4000           ; has the whole screen cleared 
              jne  nextloc            ; if no clear next position 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              ret 
 
; subroutine to print a string at top left of screen 
; takes address of string and its length as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  di, 0              ; point di to top left column 
              mov  si, [bp+6]         ; point si to string 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; load length of string in cx 
              mov  ah, 0x07           ; normal attribute fixed in al 
 
nextchar:     mov  al, [si]           ; load next char of string 
              mov  [es:di], ax        ; show this char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              add  si, 1              ; move to next char in string 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat the operation cx times 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  4 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push address of message 
              push word [length]      ; push message length 
              call printstr           ; call the printstr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
05-06 
 
 
09-25 
 
 
29-35 
 
37-42 
 
 
 
 
44-45 
 
 
The string definition syntax discussed above is used to declare a 
string “hello world” of 11 bytes and the length is stored in a separate 
variable. 
The code to clear the screen from the last example is written in the 
form of a subroutine. Since the su broutine had no parameters, only 
modified registers are saved and restored from the stack. 
The standard subroutine format with parameters received via stack 
and all registers saved and restored is used. 
ES is initialized to point to the video memory via the AX register. 
Two pointer registers are used; SI to point to the string and DI to 
point to the top left location of the screen. CX is loaded with the 
length of the string. Normal attrib ute of low intensity white on black 
with no blinking is loaded in the AH register.  
The next character from the string is loaded into AL. Now AH holds 
the attribute and AL the ASCII code of the character. This pair is 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
76 
 
46-47 
 
 
48 
 
50-56 
 
 
 
62 
written on the video memory using DI with the segment override 
prefix for ES to access the video memory segment.  
The string pointer is incremented by one while the video memory 
pointer is incremented by two since one char corresponds to a word 
on the screen. 
The loop instruction used is equiva lent to a combination of “dec cx” 
and “jnz nextchar.” The loop is executed CX times.  
The registers pushed on the stack are recovered in opposite order 
and the “ret 4” instruction removes the two parameters placed on 
the stack. 
Memory can be directly pushed on the stack. 
 
When the program is executed, screen is cleared and the greetings is 
displayed on the top left of the screen. This screen location and the attribute 
used were hard coded in the program and can also be made variable. Then 
we will be able to print anywhere on the screen. 
6.4. NUMBER PRINTING IN ASSEMBLY 
Another problem related to the display is printing numbers. Every high 
level language allows some simple way to print numbers on the screen. As we 
have seen, everything on the screen is a pair of ASCII code and its attribute 
and a number is a raw binary number and not a collection of ASCII codes. 
For example a 10 is stored as a 10 and not as the ASCII code of 1 followed by 
the ASCII code of 0. If this 10 is stor ed in a screen location, the output will 
be meaningless, as the character associate to ASCII code 10 will be shown on 
the screen. So there is a process that converts a number in its ASCII 
representation. This process works for any number in any base. We will 
discuss our examples with respect to the decimal base and later observe the 
effect of changing to different bases.  
Number Printing Algorithm 
The key idea is to divide the number by the base number, 10 in the case of 
decimal. The remainder can be from 0-9 and is the right most digit of the 
original number. The remaining digits fall in the quotient. The remainder can 
be easily converted into its ASCII equivalent and printed on the screen. The 
other digits can be printed in a similar manner by dividing the quotient again 
by 10 to separate the next digit and so on. 
However the problem with this approach is that the first digit printed is the 
right most one. For example 253 will be printed as 352. The remainder after 
first division was 3, after second division was 5 and after the third division 
was 2. We have to somehow correct the order so that the actual number 253 
is displayed, and the trick is to use the stack since the stack is a Last In 
First Out structure so if 3, 5, and 2 ar e pushed on it, 2, 5, and 3 will come 
out in this order. The steps of our algorithm are outlined below. 
• Divide the number by base (10 in case of decimal) 
• The remainder is its right most digit 
• Convert the digit to its ASCII representation (Add 0x30 to the 
remainder in case of decimal) 
• Save this digit on stack 
• If the quotient is non-zero repeat the whole process to get the next 
digit, otherwise stop 
• Pop digits one by one and print on screen left to right 
DIV Instruction 
The division used in the process is in teger division and not floating point 
division. Integer division gives an integer quotient and an integer remainder. 
A division algorithm is now needed. Fortunately or unfortunately there is a 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
77 
DIV instruction available in the 8088 processor. There are two forms of the 
DIV instruction. The first form divides a 32bit number in DX:AX by its 16bit 
operand and stores the 16bit quotient in  AX and the 16bit remainder in DX. 
The second form divides a 16bit number in AX by its 8bit operand and stores 
the 8bit quotient in AL and the 8bit remainder in AH. For example “DIV BL” 
has an 8bit operand, so the implied divide nd is 16bit and is stored in the AX 
register and “DIV BX” has a 16bit operand, so the implied dividend is 32bit 
and is therefore stored in the concatenation of the DX and AX registers. The 
higher word is stored in DX and the lower word in AX. 
If a large number is divided by a very small number it is possible that the 
quotient is larger than the space provided for it in the implied destination. In 
this case an interrupt is automatically  generated and the program is usually 
terminated as a result. This is called a divide overflow error; just like the 
calculator shows an –E– when the result cannot be displayed. This interrupt 
will be discussed later in the discussion of interrupts. 
DIV (divide) performs an unsigned division of the accumulator (and its 
extension) by the source operand. If the source operand is a byte, it is 
divided into the two-byte dividend assumed to be in registers AL and AH. The 
byte quotient is returned in AL, and the byte remainder is returned in AH. If 
the source operand is a word, it is di vided into the two- word dividend in 
registers AX and DX. The word quotient is returned in AX, and the word 
remainder is returned in DX. If the quotient exceeds the capacity of its 
destination register (FF for byte source, FFFF for word source), as when 
division by zero is attempted, a type 0 interrupt is generated, and the 
quotient and remainder are undefined. 
Number Printing Example 
The next example introduces a subr outine that can print a number 
received as its only argument at the top left of the screen using the algorithm 
just discussed. 
 
 Example 6.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005-022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
; number printing algorithm 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to print a number at top left of screen 
; takes the number to be printed as its parameter 
printnum:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; load number in ax 
              mov  bx, 10             ; use base 10 for division 
              mov  cx, 0              ; initialize count of digits 
 
nextdigit:    mov  dx, 0              ; zero upper half of dividend 
              div  bx                 ; divide by 10 
              add  dl, 0x30           ; convert digit into ascii value 
              push dx                 ; save ascii value on stack 
              inc  cx                 ; increment count of values  
              cmp  ax, 0              ; is the quotient zero 
              jnz  nextdigit          ; if no divide it again 
 
              mov  di, 0              ; point di to top left column 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
78 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
nextpos:      pop  dx                 ; remove a digit from the stack 
              mov  dh, 0x07           ; use normal attribute 
              mov [es:di], dx         ; print char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              loop nextpos            ; repeat for all digits on stack
 
              pop  di 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  2 
 
start:        call  clrscr            ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov ax, 4529             
              push ax                 ; place number on stack 
              call printnum           ; call the printnum subroutine 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21 
026-033 
 
The registers are saved as an essential practice. The only parameter 
received is the number to be printed. 
035-039 ES is initialized to video memory. AX holds the number to be 
printed. BX is the desired base, and can be loaded from a parameter. 
CX holds the number of digits push ed on the stack. This count is 
initialized to zero, incremented with every digit pushed and is used 
when the digits are popped one by one. 
041-042 DX must be zeroed as our dividend is in AX and we want a 32bit 
division. After the division  AX holds the quotient and DX holds the 
remainder. Actually the remainder is only in DL since the remainder 
can be from 0 to 9. 
043-045 The remainder is converted into its ASCII representation and saved 
on the stack. The count of digits on the stack is incremented as well. 
046-047 If the quotient is zero, all digits have been saved on the stack and if 
it is non-zero, we have to repeat the process to print the next digit. 
049 DI is initialized to point to the top left of the screen, called the cursor 
home. If the screen location is to become a parameter, the value 
loaded in DI will change. 
051-053 A digit is popped off the stack, the attribute b yte is appended to it 
and it is displayed on the screen. 
054-055 The next screen location is two bytes ahead so DI is incremented by 
two. The process is repeated CX times which holds the number of 
digits pushed on the stack. 
057-064 We pop the registers pushed and “ret 2” to discard the only 
parameter on the stack. 
066-070 The main program clears the screen and calls the printnum 
subroutine to print 4529 on the top left of the screen. 
 
When the program is executed 4529 is printed on the top left of the screen. 
This algorithm is versatile in that the base number can be changed and the 
printing will be in the desired base. For example if “mov bx, 10” is changed to 
“mov bx, 2” the output will be in binary as 001000110110001. Similarly 
changing it to “mov bx, 8” outputs the number in octal as 10661. Printing it 
in hexadecimal is a bit tricky, as the ASCII codes for A-F do not consecutively 
start after the codes for 0-9. Inside the debugger observe the working of the 
algorithm is just as described in the above illustration. The digits are 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
79 
separated one by one and saved on the stack. From bottom to top, the stack 
holds 0034, 0035, 0032, and 0039 after the first loop is completed. The next 
loop pops them one by one and routes them to the screen. 
6.5. SCREEN LOCATION CALCULATION 
Until now our algorithms used a fixed attribute and displayed at a fixed 
screen location. We will change that to use any position on the screen and 
any attribute. For mapping from the tw o dimensional coordinate system of 
the screen to the one dimensional memory, we need to multiply the row 
number by 80 since there are 80 columns per row and add the column 
number to it and again multiply by two since there are 2 bytes for each 
character.  
For this purpose the multiplication routine written previously can be used. 
However we introduce an instruction of the 8088 microprocessor at this time 
that can multiply 8bit or 16bit numbers. 
MUL Instruction 
MUL (multiply) performs an unsigned multiplication of the source operand 
and the accumulator. If the source operand is a byte, then it is multiplied by 
register AL and the double-length result is returned in AH and AL. If the 
source operand is a word, then it is multiplied by register AX, and the 
double-length result is returned in registers DX and AX. 
String Printing at Desired Location 
We modify the string printing program to take the x-position, the y-
position, and the attribute as parameters. The desired location on the screen 
can be calculated with the following formulae. 
location = ( hypos * 80 + epos ) * 2 
 
 Example 6.4 
01 
02 
03 
04 
05 
06 
07 
08-25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
44 
45 
46 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
; hello world at desired screen location  
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'hello world'      ; string to be printed 
length:       dw   11                 ; length of the string 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to print a string at top left of screen 
; takes x position, y position, string attribute, address of string  
; and its length as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  al, 80             ; load al with columns per row 
              mull  byte [bp+10]       ; multiply with y position 
              add  ax, [bp+12]        ; add x position 
              shl  ax, 1              ; turn into byte offset 
              mov  dial              ; point di to required location 
              mov  si, [bp+6]         ; point si to string 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; load length of string in cx 
              mov  ah, [bp+8]         ; load attribute in ah 
 
nextchar:     mov  al, [si]           ; load next char of string 
              mov  [es:di], ax        ; show this char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
80 
52 
53 
54 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
76 
77 
              add  si, 1              ; move to next char in string 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat the operation cx times 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  10 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 30         
              push ax                 ; push x position  
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; push y position  
              mov  ax, 1              ; blue on black attribute 
              push ax                 ; push attribute  
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push address of message 
              push word [length]      ; push message length 
              call printstr           ; call the printstr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
41 Push and pop operations always operate on words; however data 
can be read as a word or as a byte. For example we read the lower 
byte of the parameter y-position in this case. 
43 Shifting is used for multiplication by two, which should always be 
the case when multiplication or division by a power of two is desired. 
61 The subroutine had 5 parameters so “ret 10” is used.  
65-74 The main program pushes 30 as x-position, 20 as y-position 
meaning 30th column on 20th row. It pushes 1 as the attribute 
meaning low intensity blue on black with no blinking.  
 
When the program is executed hello world is displayed at the desired 
screen location in the desired color. Th e x-position, y-position, and attribute 
parameters can be changed and their effect be seen on the screen. The 
important difference in this example is the use of MUL instruction and the 
calculation of screen location given the x and y positions. 
EXERCISES 
1. Replace the following valid instructio n with a single instruction that 
has the same effect. Don’t consider the effect on flags. 
dec cx 
jnz L3 
2. Write an infinite loop that shows two asterisks moving from right and 
left centers of the screen to the middle and then back. Use two empty 
nested loops with large counters to introduce some delay so that the 
movement is noticeable. 
3. Write a function “printaddr” that takes two parameters, the segment 
and offset parts of an address, vi a the stack. The function should 
print the physical address corresponding to the segment offset pair 
passed at the top left of the screen. The address should be printed in 
hex and will therefore occupy exactly five columns. For example, 
passing 5600 and 7800 as parameters should result in 5D800 
printed at the top left of the screen. 
4. Write code that treats an array of 500 bytes as one of 4000 bits and 
for each blank position on the screen (i.e. space) sets the 
corresponding bit to zero and the rest to one. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
81 
5. Write a function “drawrect” that takes four parameters via the stack. 
The parameters are top, left, bottom, and right in this order. The 
function should display a rectangle on the screen using the 
characters + - and |. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
7 
String Instructions  
7.1. STRING PROCESSING 
Till now very simple instructions of the 8088 microproce ssor have been 
introduced. In this chapter we will disc uss a bit more powe rful instructions 
that can process blocks of data in one go. They are called block processing or 
string instructions. This is the appropriate place to discuss these 
instructions as we have just introd uced a block of memory, which is the 
video memory. The vision of this memory for the processor is just a block of 
memory starting at a special address. For example the clear screen operation 
initializes this whole block to 0720.  
There are just 5 block processing instructions in 8088. In the primitive 
form, the instructions themselves operate on a single cell of memory at one 
time. However a special prefix repeats the instruction in hardware called the 
REP prefix. The REP prefix allows these instructions to operate on a number 
of data elements in one instruction. This is not like a loop; rather this 
repetition is hard coded in the processor. The five instructions are STOS, 
LODS, CMPS, SCAS, and MOVS called store string, load string, compare 
string, scan string, and move string respectively. MOVS is the instruction 
that allows memory to memory moves, as was discussed in the exceptions to 
the memory to memory movement rule s. String instructions are complex 
instruction in that they perform a numb er of tasks against one instruction. 
And with the REP prefix they perform the task of a complex loop in one 
instruction. This causes drastic speed improvements in operations on large 
blocks of memory. The reduction in code size and the improvement in speed 
are the two reasons why these instructions were introduced in the 8088 
processor.  
There are a number of common things in these instructions. Firstly they 
all work on a block of data. DI and SI are used to access memory. SI and DI 
are called source index and destination index because of string instructions. 
Whenever an instruction needs a memory source, DS:SI holds the pointer to 
it. An override is possible that can change the association from DS but the 
default is DS. Whenever a string inst ruction needs a memory destination, 
ES:DI holds the pointer to it. No override is possible in this case. Whenever a 
byte register is needed, AL holds the value. Whenever a word register is used 
AX holds the value. For example STOS stores a register in memory so AL or 
AX is the register used and ES:DI points to the destination. The LODS 
instruction loads from memory to regist er so the source is pointed to by 
DS:SI and the register used is AL or AX. 
String instructions work on a block of data. A block has a start and an 
end. The instructions can work from the start towards the end and from the 
end towards the start. In fact they ca n work in both directions, and they 
must be allowed to work in both direct ions otherwise certain operations with 
overlapping blocks become impossible. This problem is discussed in detail 
later. The direction of movement is controlled with the Direction Flag (DF) in 
the flags register. If this flag is cleared the direction is from lower addresses 
towards higher addresses and if this flag is set the direction is from higher 
addresses to lower addresses. If DF is cleared, this is called the auto-
increment mode of string instruction, and if DF is set, this is called the auto-
decrement mode. There are two instructions to set and clear the direction 
flag. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
84 
cld ; clear direction flag 
std ; set direction flag 
Every string instruction has two variants; a byte variant and a word 
variant. For example the two variants of STOS are STOSB and STOSW. 
Similarly the variants for the other st ring instructions are attained by 
appending a B or a W to the instruction name. The operation of each of the 
string instructions and each of the repetition prefixes is discussed below. 
STOS 
STOS transfers a byte or word from register AL or AX to the string element 
addressed by ES:DI and updates DI to point to the next location. STOS is 
often used to clear a block of memory or fill it with a constant. 
The implied source will always be in AL or AX. If DF is clear, DI will be 
incremented by one or two depending of whether STOSB or STOSW is used. 
If DF is set DI will be decremented by one or two depending of whether 
STOSB or STOSW is used. If REP is used  before this instruction, the process 
will be repeated CX times. CX is calle d the counter register because of the 
special treatment given to it in the LOOP and JCXZ instructions and the REP 
set of prefixes. So if REP is used wi th STOS the whole block of memory will 
be filled with a constant value. REP will always decrement CX like the LOOP 
instruction and this cannot be changed with the direction flag. It is also 
independent of whether the byte or the word variant is used. It always 
decrements by one; therefore CX has count of repetitions and not the count 
of bytes.  
LODS 
LODS transfers a byte or word from the source location DS:SI to AL or AX 
and updates SI to point to the next location. LODS is generally used in a loop 
and not with the REP prefix since the value previously loaded in the register 
is overwritten if the instruction is re peated and only the last value of the 
block remains in the register. 
SCAS 
SCAS compares a source byte or word in register AL or AX with the 
destination string element addressed by ES:DI and updates the flags. DI is 
updated to point to the next location. SCAS is often used to locate equality or 
in-equality in a string through the use of an appropriate prefix.  
SCAS is a bit different from the other instructions. This is more like the 
CMP instruction in that it  does subtraction of its operands. The prefixes 
REPE (repeat while equal) and REPNE (rep eat while not equal) are used with 
this instruction. The instruction is used to locate a byte in AL in the block of 
memory. When the first equality or inequality is encountered; both have 
uses. For example this instruction can be used to search for a 0 in a null 
terminated string to calculate the leng th of the string. In this form REPNE 
will be used to repeat while the null is not there. 
MOVS 
M O V S  t r a n s f e r s  a  b y t e  o r  w o r d  f r o m the source location DS:SI to the 
destination ES:DI and updates SI and DI to point to the next locations. 
MOVS is used to move a block of memory. The DF is important in the case of 
overlapping blocks. For example when the source and destination blocks 
overlap and the source is below the destination copy must be done upwards 
while if the destination is below the source copy must be done downwards. 
We cannot perform both these copy operations properly if the direction flag 
was not provided. If the source is below the destination and an upwards copy 
is used the source to be copied is de stroyed. If however the copy is done 
downwards the portion of source destro yed is the one that has already been 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
85 
copied. Therefore we need the control of the direction flag to handle this 
problem. This problem is further detailed in a later example. 
CMPS 
CMPS subtracts the source location DS:SI from the destination location 
ES:DI. Source and Destination are unaffected. SI and DI are updated 
accordingly. CMPS compares two blocks of memory for equality or inequality 
of the block. It subtracts byte by byte or word by word. If used with a REPE 
or a REPNE prefix is repeats as long as the blocks are same or as long as 
they are different. For example it can be used for find a substring. A 
substring is a string that is contained in another string. For example “has” is 
contained in “Mary has a little lamp.” Using CMPS we can do the operation of 
a complex loop in a single instructio n. Only the REPE and REPNE prefixes 
are meaningful with this instruction.  
REP Prefix 
REP repeats the following string instru ction CX times. The use of CX is 
implied with the REP prefix. The decrement in CX doesn’t affect any flags and 
the jump is also independent of the flags, just like JCXZ. 
REPE and REPNE Prefixes 
REPE or REPZ repeat the following string instruction while the zero flag is 
set and REPNE or REPNZ repeat the following instruction while the zero flag 
is not set. REPE or REPNE are used with the SCAS or CMPS instructions. 
The other string instructions have no thing to do with the condition since 
they are performing no comparison. Also the initial state of flags before the 
string instruction does not affect the operation. The most complex operation 
of the string instruction is with these prefixes. 
7.2. STOS EXAMPLE – CLEARING THE SCREEN 
We take the example of clearing the screen and observe that how simple 
and fast this operation is with the string instructions. Even if there are three 
instructions in a loop they have to be fetched and decoded with every 
iteration and the time of three instruct ions is multiplied by the number of 
iterations of the loop. In the case of string instructions, many operations are 
short circuited. The instruction is fetched and decoded once and only the 
execution is repeated CX times. That  is why string instructions are so 
efficient in their operation. The program to clear the screen places 0720 on 
the 2000 words on the screen. 
 
 Example 7.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
; clear screen using string instructions 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
; subroutine to clear the screen 
clrscr:       push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              xor  di, di             ; point di to top left column 
              mov  ax, 0x0720         ; space char in normal attribute 
              mov  cx, 2000           ; number of screen locations 
 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
              rep  stosw              ; clear the whole screen 
 
              pop  di 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
86 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              ret 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
013 A space efficient way to zero a 16bit register  is to XOR it with itself. 
Remember that exclusive or results in a zero whenever the bits at 
the source and at the destination are same. This instruction takes 
just two bytes compared to “mov di, 0” which would take three. This 
is a standard way to zero a 16bit register. 
 
Inside the debugger the operation of the string instruction can be 
monitored. The trace into command can be used to monitor every repetition 
of the string instruction. However screen will not be cleared inside the 
debugger as the debugger overwrites its display on the screen so CX 
decrements with every iteration, DI increments by 2. The first access is made 
at B800:0000 and the second at B800: 0002 and so on. A complex and 
inefficient loop is replaced with a fast  and simple instruction that does the 
same operation many times faster. 
7.3. LODS EXAMPLE – STRING PRINTING 
The use of LODS with the REP prefix is not meaningful as only the last 
value loaded will remain in the register. It is normally used in a loop paired 
with a STOS instruction to do some block processing. We use LODS to pick 
the data, do the processing, and then use STOS to put it back or at some 
other place. For example in string printing, we will use LODS to read a 
character of the string, attach the attrib ute byte to it, and use STOS to write 
it on the video memory.  
The following example will print the string using string instructions. 
 
 Example 7.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008-027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
; hello world printing using string instructions 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'hello world'      ; string to be printed 
length:       dw   11                 ; length of string 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to print a string  
; takes the x position, y position, attribute, address of string and  
; its length as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  al, 80             ; load al with columns per row 
              mul  byte [bp+10]       ; multiply with y position 
              add  ax, [bp+12]        ; add x position 
              shl  ax, 1              ; turn into byte offset 
              mov  di,ax              ; point di to required location 
              mov  si, [bp+6]         ; point si to string 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; load length of string in cx 
              mov  ah, [bp+8]         ; load attribute in ah 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
87 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
nextchar:     lodsb                   ; load next char in al 
              stosw                   ; print char/attribute pair 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat for the whole string 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  10 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 30         
              push ax                 ; push x position  
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; push y position  
              mov  ax, 1              ; blue on black attribute 
              push ax                 ; push attribute  
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push address of message 
              push word [length]      ; push message length 
              call printstr           ; call the printstr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
051 Both operations are in auto increment mode. 
052-053 DS is automatically initialized to our segment. ES points to video 
memory. SI points to the address of our string. DI points to the 
screen location. AH holds the attribute. Whenever we read a 
character from the string in AL, the attribute byte is implicitly 
attached and the pair is present in AX. The same effect could not be 
achieved with a REP prefix as the REP will repeat LODS and then 
start repeating STOS, but we need to alternate them. 
054 CX holds the length of the string. Therefore LOOP repeats for each 
character of the string. 
 
Inside the debugger we observe how LODS and STOS alternate and CX is 
only used by the LOOP instruction. In the original code there were four 
instructions inside the loop; now there are only two. This is how string 
instructions help in reducing code size.  
7.4. SCAS EXAMPLE – STRING LENGTH 
Many higher level languages do not explicitly store string length; rather 
they use a null character, a character with an ASCII code of zero, to signal 
the end of a string. In assembly language programs, it is also easier to store 
a zero at the end of the string, instea d of calculating the length of string, 
which is very difficult process for long er strings. So we delegate length 
calculation to the processor and modify our string printing subroutine to 
take a null terminated string and no length. We use SCASB with REPNE and 
a zero in AL to find a zero byte in the string. In CX we load the maximum 
possible size, which is 64K bytes. However actual strings will be much 
smaller. An important thing regarding SC AS and CMPS is that if they stop 
due to equality or inequality, the index registers have already incremented. 
Therefore when SCAS will stop DI would be pointing past the null character.  
 
 Example 7.3 
001 
002 
; hello world printing with a null terminated string 
[org 0x0100] 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
88 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007-026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'hello world', 0    ; null terminated string  
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to print a string  
; takes the x position, y position, attribute, and address of a null  
; terminated string as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              push ds  
              pop  es                 ; load ds in es 
              mov  di, [bp+4]         ; point di to string 
              mov  cx, 0xffff         ; load maximum number in cx 
              xor  al, al             ; load a zero in al 
              repne scasb             ; find zero in the string 
              mov  ax, 0xffff         ; load maximum number in ax 
              sub  ax, cx             ; find change in cx 
              dec  ax                 ; exclude null from length 
              jz   exit               ; no printing if string is empty
 
              mov  cx, ax             ; load string length in cx 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  al, 80             ; load al with columns per row 
              mul  byte [bp+8]        ; multiply with y position 
              add  ax, [bp+10]        ; add x position 
              shl  ax, 1              ; turn into byte offset 
              mov  di,ax              ; point di to required location 
              mov  si, [bp+4]         ; point si to string 
              mov  ah, [bp+6]         ; load attribute in ah 
 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
nextchar:     lodsb                   ; load next char in al 
              stosw                   ; print char/attribute pair 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat for the whole string 
 
exit:         pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  8 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 30         
              push ax                 ; push x position  
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; push y position  
              mov  ax, 1              ; blue on black attribute 
              push ax                 ; push attribute  
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push address of message 
              call printstr           ; call the printstr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
039-040 Another way to load a segment register is to use a combination of 
push and pop. The processor doesn’t match pushes and pops. ES is 
equalized to DS in this pair of instructions. 
 
Inside the debugger observe the working of the code for length calculation 
after SCASB has completed its operation. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
89 
LES and LDS Instructions 
Since the string instructions need their source and destination in the form 
of a segment offset pair, there are two special instructions that load a 
segment register and a general purpose register from two consecutive 
memory locations. LES loads ES while LDS loads DS. Both these instructions 
have two parameters, one is the genera l purpose register to be loaded and 
the other is the memory location from which to load these registers. The 
major application of these instructions  is when a subroutine receives a 
segment offset pair as an argument and the pair is to be loaded in a segment 
and an offset register. According to Intel rules of significance the word at 
higher address is loaded in the segment register while the word at lower 
address is loaded in the offset register. As parameters segment should be 
pushed first so that it ends up at a higher address and the offset should be 
pushed afterwards. When loading the lower address will be given. For 
example “lds si, [bp+4]” will load SI from BP+4 and DS from BP+6. 
7.5. LES AND LDS EXAMPLE 
We modify the string length calculation subroutine to take the segment 
and offset of the string and use the LES instruction to load that segment 
offset pair in ES and DI. 
 
 Example 7.4 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007-026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
; hello world printing with length calculation subroutine 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'hello world', 0    ; null terminated string  
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to calculate the length of a string 
; takes the segment and offset of a string as parameters 
strlen:       push bp 
              mov  bp,sp 
              push es 
              push cx 
              push di 
 
              les  di, [bp+4]         ; point es:di to string 
              mov  cx, 0xffff         ; load maximum number in cx 
              xor  al, al             ; load a zero in al 
              repne scasb             ; find zero in the string 
              mov  ax, 0xffff         ; load maximum number in ax 
              sub  ax, cx             ; find change in cx 
              dec  ax                 ; exclude null from length 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  cx 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  4 
 
; subroutine to print a string  
; takes the x position, y position, attribute, and address of a null  
; terminated string as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              push ds                 ; push segment of string 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]   
              push ax                 ; push offset of string 
              call strlen             ; calculate string length 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
90 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
              cmp  ax, 0              ; is the string empty 
              jz   exit               ; no printing if string is empty
              mov  cx, ax             ; save length in cx 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  al, 80             ; load al with columns per row 
              mul  byte [bp+8]        ; multiply with y position 
              add  ax, [bp+10]        ; add x position 
              shl  ax, 1              ; turn into byte offset 
              mov  di,ax              ; point di to required location 
              mov  si, [bp+4]         ; point si to string 
              mov  ah, [bp+6]         ; load attribute in ah 
 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
nextchar:     lodsb                   ; load next char in al 
              stosw                   ; print char/attribute pair 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat for the whole string 
 
exit:         pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  8 
 
start:        call clrscr             ; call the clrscr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 30         
              push ax                 ; push x position  
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; push y position  
              mov  ax, 0x71           ; blue on white attribute 
              push ax                 ; push attribute  
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push address of message 
              call printstr           ; call the printstr subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
036 The LES instruction is used to load the DI register from BP+4 and 
the ES register from BP+6. 
065 The convention to return a value from a subroutine is to use the AX 
register. That is why AX is not saved and restored in the subroutine. 
 
Inside the debugger observe that the segment register is pushed followed 
by the offset. The higher address FFE6 contains the segment and the lower 
address FFE4 contains the offset. This is because we have a decrementing 
stack. Then observe the loading of ES and DI from the stack. 
7.6. MOVS EXAMPLE – SCREEN SCROLLING  
MOVS has the two forms MOVSB and MOVSW. REP allows the instruction 
to be repeated CX times allowing bloc ks of memory to be copied. We will 
perform this copy of the video screen.  
Scrolling is the process when all the lines on the screen move one or more 
lines towards the top of towards the bottom and the new line that appears on 
the top or the bottom is cleared. Sc rolling is a process on which string 
movement is naturally applicable. REP with MOVS will utilize the full 
processor power to do the scrolling in minimum time.  
In this example we want to scroll a variable number of lines given as 
argument. Therefore we have to calculate the source address, which is 160 
times the number of lines to clear. The destination address is 0, which is the 
top left of the screen. The lines that scroll up are discarded so the source 
pointer is placed after them. An equal number of lines at the bottom are 
cleared. These lines have actually been copied above. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
91 
 
 Example 7.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
; scroll up the screen 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
; subroutine to scroll up the screen 
; take the number of lines to scroll as parameter 
scrollup:     push bp 
              mov  bp,sp 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si   
              push di 
              push es 
              push ds 
 
              mov  ax, 80             ; load chars per row in ax 
              mul  byte [bp+4]        ; calculate source position 
              mov  si, ax             ; load source position in si 
              push si                 ; save position for later use 
              shl  si, 1              ; convert to byte offset 
              mov  cx, 2000           ; number of screen locations 
              sub  cx, ax             ; count of words to move 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  ds, ax             ; point ds to video base 
              xor  di, di             ; point di to top left column 
              cld                     ; set auto increment mode 
              rep  movsw              ; scroll up 
              mov  ax, 0x0720         ; space in normal attribute 
              pop  cx                 ; count of positions to clear 
              rep  stosw              ; clear the scrolled space 
 
              pop  ds 
              pop  es 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  bp 
              ret  2 
 
start:        mov  ax,5 
              push ax                 ; push number of lines to scroll 
              call scrollup           ; call the scroll up subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
The beauty of this example is that the two memory blocks are overlapping. 
If the source and destination in th e above algorithm are swapped in an 
expectation to scroll down the result is strange. For example if 5 lines were to 
scroll down, the top five lines of the screen are repeated on the whole screen. 
This is where the use of the direction flag comes in. 
When the source is five lines below the destination, the first five lines are 
copied on the first five lines of the dest ination. However the next five lines to 
be copied from the source have been destroyed in the process; because they 
were the same as the first five lines of the destination. The same is the 
problem with every set of five lines as the source is destroyed during the 
previous copy. In this situation we must go from bottom of the screen 
towards the top. Now the last five lines are copied to the last five lines of the 
destination. The next five lines are copi ed to next five lines of the destination 
destroying the last five lines of source; but now these lines are no longer 
needed and have been previously copied. Therefore the copy will be 
appropriately done in this case.  
We give an example of scrolling down with this consideration. Now we have 
to calculate the end of the block instead of the start. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
92 
 Example 7.6 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
; scroll down the screen 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
; subroutine to scrolls down the screen 
; take the number of lines to scroll as parameter 
scrolldown:   push bp 
              mov  bp,sp 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si   
              push di 
              push es 
              push ds 
 
              mov  ax, 80             ; load chars per row in ax 
              mul  byte [bp+4]        ; calculate source position 
              push ax                 ; save position for later use 
              shl  ax, 1              ; convert to byte offset 
              mov  si, 3998           ; last location on the screen 
              sub  si, ax             ; load source position in si 
              mov  cx, 2000           ; number of screen locations 
              sub  cx, ax             ; count of words to move 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  ds, ax             ; point ds to video base 
              mov  di, 3998           ; point di to lower right column 
              std                     ; set auto decrement mode 
              rep  movsw              ; scroll up 
              mov  ax, 0x0720         ; space in normal attribute 
              pop  cx                 ; count of positions to clear 
              rep  stosw              ; clear the scrolled space 
 
              pop  ds 
              pop  es 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  bp 
              ret  2 
 
start:        mov  ax,5 
              push ax                 ; push number of lines to scroll 
              call scrolldown         ; call scroll down subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
7.7. CMPS EXAMPLE – STRING COMPARISON 
For the last string instruction, we take string comparison as an example. 
The subroutine will take two segment offset pairs containing the address of 
the two null terminated strings. The subroutine will return 0 if the strings 
are different and 1 if they are same. The AX register will be used to hold the 
return value.  
 
 Example 7.7 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009-031 
032 
033 
034 
; comparing null terminated strings 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
msg1:         db   'hello world', 0  
msg2:         db   'hello WORLD', 0 
msg3:         db   'hello world', 0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to compare two strings 
; takes segment and offset pairs of two strings to compare 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
93 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
; returns 1 in ax if they match and 0 other wise 
strcmp:       push bp 
              mov  bp,sp 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
              push es 
              push ds 
 
              lds  si, [bp+4]         ; point ds:si to first string 
              les  di, [bp+8]         ; point es:di to second string 
 
              push ds                 ; push segment of first string 
              push si                 ; push offset of first string 
              call strlen             ; calculate string length 
              mov  cx, ax             ; save length in cx 
 
              push es                 ; push segment of second string 
              push di                 ; push offset of second string 
              call strlen             ; calculate string length 
              cmp  cx, ax             ; compare length of both strings 
              jne  exitfalse          ; return 0 if they are unequal 
  
              mov  ax, 1              ; store 1 in ax to be returned 
              repe cmpsb              ; compare both strings 
              jcxz exitsimple         ; are they successfully compared 
 
exitfalse:    mov  ax, 0              ; store 0 to mark unequal 
 
exitsimple:   pop  ds 
              pop  es 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bp 
              ret  8 
     
start:        push ds                 ; push segment of first string 
              mov  ax, msg1 
              push ax                 ; push offset of first string 
              push ds                 ; push segment of second string 
              mov  ax, msg2 
              push ax                 ; push offset of second string 
              call strcmp             ; call strcmp subroutine 
 
              push ds                 ; push segment of first string 
              mov  ax, msg1 
              push ax                 ; push offset of first string 
              push ds                 ; push segment of third string 
              mov  ax, msg3 
              push ax                 ; push offset of third string 
              call strcmp             ; call strcmp subroutine 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
005-007 Three strings are declared out of which two are equal and one is 
different. 
044-045 LDS and LES are used to load the pointers to the two strings in 
DS:SI and ES:DI. 
070 Since there are 4 parameters to the subroutine “ret 8” is used. 
 
I n s i d e  t h e  d e b u g g e r  w e  o b s e r v e  t h a t  R E P E  i s  s h o w n  a s  R E P .  T h i s  i s  
because REP and REPE are represented with the same prefix byte. When 
used with STOS, LODS, and MOVS it functions as REP and when used with 
SCAS and CMPS it functions as REPE.  
EXERCISES 
1. Write code to find the byte in AL in the whole megabyte of memory 
such that each memory location is compared to AL only once. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
94 
2. Write a far procedure to reverse an array of 64k words such that the 
first element becomes the last and the last becomes the first and so 
on. For example if the first word contained 0102h, this value is 
swapped with the last word. The next word is swapped with the 
second last word and so on. The routine will be passed two 
parameters through the stack; the segment and offset of the first 
element of the array. 
3. Write a near procedure to copy a given area on the screen at the 
center of the screen without using a temporary array. The routine will 
be passed top, left, bottom, and right in that order through the stack. 
The parameters passed will always be within range the height will be 
odd and the width will be even so that it can be exactly centered.  
4. Write code to find two segments in the whole memory that are exactly 
the same. In other words find two distinct values which if loaded in 
ES and DS then for every value of SI [DS:SI]=[ES:SI]. 
5. Write a function writechar that takes two parameters. The first 
parameter is the character to write and the second is the address of a 
memory area containing top, left, bottom, right, current row, current 
column, normal attribute, and cursor attribute in 8 consecutive 
bytes. These define a virtual window on the screen. 
The function writes the passed character at (current row, current 
column) using the normal attribute. It then increments current 
column, If current column goes outside the window, it makes it zero 
and increments current row. If current row gets out of window, it 
scrolls the window one line up, and blanks out the new line in the 
window. In the end, it sets the attribute of the new (current row, 
current column) to cursor attribute.  
6. Write a function “strcpy” that takes the address of two parameters via 
stack, the one pushed first is source and the second is the 
destination. The function should copy the source on the destination 
including the null character assuming that sufficient space is 
reserved starting at destination. 
 
--- Page Break ---
8 
Software Interrupts 
8.1. INTERRUPTS 
Interrupts in reality are events that occurred outside the processor and the 
processor must be informed about them. Interrupts are asynchronous and 
unpredictable. Asynchronous means that the interrupts occur, independent 
of the working of the processor, i.e. independent of the instruction currently 
executing. Synchronous events are those that occur side by side with 
another activity. Interrupts must be as ynchronous as they are generated by 
the external world which is unaware of the happenings inside the processor. 
True interrupts that occur in real time  are asynchronous with the execution. 
Also it is unpredictable at which time an interrupt will come. The two 
concepts of being unpredictable and asynchronous are overlapping. 
Unpredictable means the time at which an interrupt will come cannot be 
predicted, while asynchronous means that the interrupt has nothing to do 
with the currently executing instruction and the current state of the 
processor. 
The 8088 processor divides interrupts into two classes. Software interrupts 
and hardware interrupts. Hardware interrupts are the real interrupts 
generated by the external world as discussed above. Software interrupts on 
the contrary are not generated from outside the processor. They just provide 
an extended far call mechanism. Far call allows us to jump anywhere in the 
whole megabyte of memory. To return from the target we place both the 
segment and offset on the stack. Software interrupts show a similar 
behavior. It however pushes one more thing before both the segment and 
offset and that is the FLAGS register. Just like the far call loads new values 
in CS and IP, the interrupt call loads new values in CS, IP, and FLAGS. 
Therefore the only way to retain the value of original FLAGS register is to 
push and pop as part of interrupt ca ll and return instructions. Pushing and 
popping inside the routine will not work as the routine started with an 
already tampered value.  
The discussion of real time interrupts is deferred till the next chapter. They 
play the critical part in control app lications where external hardware must 
be control and events and changes therein must be appropriately responded 
by the processor. To generate an interrupt the INT instruction is used. The 
routine that executes in response to an INT instruction is called the interrupt 
service routine (ISR) or the interrupt handler.  Taking example from real time 
interrupts the routine to instruct an external hardware to close the valve of a 
boiler in response to an interrupt from the pressure sensor is an interrupt 
routine. 
The software interrupt mechanism in  8088 uses vectored interrupts 
meaning that the address of the interrupt routine is not directly mentioned 
in an interrupt call, rather the address is lookup up from a table. 8088 
provides a mechanism for mapping interrupts to interrupt handlers. 
Introducing a new entry in this mapping table is called hooking an interrupt.  
Syntax of the INT instruction is very simple. It takes a single byte 
argument varying from 0-255. This is  the interrupt number informing the 
processor, which interrupt is currently of  interest. This number correlates to 
the interrupt handler routine by a ro uting or vectoring mechanism. A few 
interrupt numbers in the start are reserved and we generally do not use 
them. They are related to the processor working. For example INT 0 is the 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
96 
divide by zero interrupt. A list of all reserved interrupts is given later. Such 
interrupts are programmed in the hardware to generate the designated 
interrupt when the specified condition arises. The remaining interrupts are 
provided by the processor for our use. Some of these were reserved by the 
IBM PC designers to interface user programs with system software like DOS 
and BIOS. This was the logical choice for them as interrupts provided a very 
flexible architecture. The remaining interrupts are totally free for use in user 
software.  
The correlation process from the interrupt number to the interrupt handler 
uses a table called interrupt vector table. Its location is fixed to physical 
memory address zero. Each entry of the table is four bytes long containing 
the segment and offset of the interrupt routine for the corresponding 
interrupt number. The first two bytes in the entry contain the offset and the 
next two bytes contain the segment. The little endian rule of putting the more 
significant part (segment) at a higher address is seen here as well. 
Mathematically offset of the interrupt n will be at nx4 while the segment will 
be at nx4+2. One entry in this table is called a vector. If the vector is changed 
for interrupt 0 then INT 0 will take execution to the new handler whose 
address is now placed at those four by tes. INT 1 vector occupies location 4, 
5, 6, and 7 and similarly vector for INT 2 occupies locations 8, 9, 10, and 11. 
As the table is located in RAM it can be changed anytime. Immediately after 
changing it the interrupt mapping is changed and now the interrupt will 
result in execution of the new routine.  This indirection gives the mechanism 
extreme flexibility.  
The operation of interrupt is same whether it is the result of an INT 
instruction (software interrupt) or it is generated by an external hardware 
which passes the interrupt number by a different mechanism. The currently 
executing instruction is completed, the current value of FLAGS is pushed on 
the stack, then the current code segment is pushed, then the offset of the 
next instruction is pushed. After this it automatically clears the trap flag and 
the interrupt flag to disallow further interrupts until the current routine 
finishes. After this it loads the word at nx4 in IP and the word at nx4+2 in CS 
if interrupt n was generated. As soon as these values are loaded in CS and IP 
execution goes to the start of the interrupt handler. When the handler 
finishes its work it uses the IRET instruction to return to the caller. IRET 
pops IP, then CS, and then FLAGS. The original value of IF and TF is 
restored which re-enables further interrupts. IF and TF will be discussed in 
detail in the discussion of real time interrupts. We have discussed three 
things till now. 
1. The INT and IRET instruction format and syntax 
2. The formation of IVT (interrupt vector table) 
3. Operation of the processor when an interrupt in generated 
Just as discussed in the subroutines chapter, the processor will not match 
interrupt calls to interrupt returns. If a RETF is used in the end of an ISR the 
processor will still return to the call er but the FLAGS will remain on the 
stack which will destroy the expectations of the caller with the stack. If we 
know what we are doing we may use such different combination of 
instructions. Generally we will use IRET to return from an interrupt routine. 
Apart from indirection the software in terrupt mechanism is similar to CALL 
and RET. Indirection is the major difference. 
The operation of INT can be written as: 
• sp ← sp-2 
• [sp] ← flag 
• sp ← sp-2 
• if ← 0 
• tf ← 0 
• [sp] ← cs 
• sp ← sp-2 
• 
[sp] ← ip 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
97 
• ip ← [0:N*4] 
• cs ← [0:N*4+2] 
 The operation of IRET can be written as: 
• ip ← [sp] 
• sp ← sp+2 
• cs ← [sp] 
• sp ← sp+2 
• flag ← [sp] 
• sp ← sp+2 
The above is the microcode descripti on of INT and IRET. To obey an 
assembly language instruction the pr ocessor breaks it down into small 
operations. By reading the microcode of  an instruction its working can be 
completely understood. 
The interrupt mechanism we have studied is an extended far call 
mechanism. It pushes FLAGS in addition to CS and IP and it loads CS and IP 
with a special mechanism of indirection. It is just like the table of contents 
that is located at a fixed position and allows going directly to chapter 3, to 
chapter 4 etc. If this association is changed in the table of contents the 
direction of the reader changes. For example if Chapter 2 starts at page 220 
while 240 is written in the table of contents, the reader will go to page 240 
and not 220. The table of contents entry is a vector to point to map the 
chapter number to page number. IVT has 256 chapters and the interrupt 
mechanism looks up the appropriate chapter number to reach the desired 
page to find the interrupt routine.  
Another important similarity is that ta ble of contents is always placed at 
the start of the book, a well known place. Its physical position is fixed. If 
some publishers put it at some place, others at another place, the reader will 
be unable to find the desired chapter. Similarly in 8088 the physical memory 
address zero is fixed for the IVT and it occupies exactly a kilobyte of memory 
as the 256x4=1K where 256 is the number of possible interrupt vectors while 
the size of one vector is 4 bytes. 
Interrupts introduce temporary breakage in the program flow, sometimes 
programmed (software interrupts) and un-programmed at other times 
(hardware interrupts). By hooking inte rrupts various system functionalities 
can be controlled. The interrupts reserved by the processor and having 
special functions in 8088 are listed below: 
• INT 0, Division by zero 
Meaning the quotient did not fit in the destination register. This is a bit 
different as this interrupt does not return to the next instruction, 
rather it returns to the same instruction that generated it, a DIV 
instruction of course. Here INT 0 is  automatically generated by a DIV 
when a specific situation arises, there is no INT 0 instruction. 
• INT 1, Trap, Single step Interrupt 
This interrupt is used in debugging with the trap flag. If the trap flag is 
set the Single Step Interrupt is generated after every instruction. By 
hooking this interrupt a debugger can get control after every 
instruction and display the registers etc. 8088 was the first processor 
that has this ability to support debugging. 
• INT 2, NMI-Non Maskable Interrupt 
Real interrupts come from outside the processor. INT 0 is not real as it 
is generated from inside. For real interrupts there are two pins in the 
processor, the INT pin and the NMI pin. The processor can be directed 
to listen or not to listen to the INT pin. Consider a recording studio, 
when the recording is going on, doors are closed so that no 
interruption occurs, and when there is a break, the doors are opened 
so that if someone is waiting outside can come it. However if there is an 
urgency like fire outside then the door must be broken and the 
recording must not be catered for. For such situations is the NMI pin 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
98 
which informs about fatal hardware failures in the system and is tied 
to interrupt 2. INT pin can be masked but NMI cannot be masked. 
• INT 3, Debug Interrupt 
The only special thing about this interrupt is that it has a single byte 
opcode and not a two byte combination where the second byte tells the 
interrupt number. This allows it to  replace any instruction whatsoever. 
It is also used by the debugger and will be discussed in detail with the 
debugger working. 
• INT 4, Arithmetic Overflow, change of sign bit 
The overflow flag is set if the sign bit unexpectedly changes as a result 
of a mathematical or logical instruction. However the overflow flag 
signals a real overflow only if the numbers in question are treated as 
signed numbers. So this interrupt is not automatically generated but 
as a result of a special instruction INTO (interrupt on overflow) if the 
overflow flag is set. Otherwise th e INTO instruction behaves like a NOP 
(no operation). 
These are the five interrupts reserved by Intel and are generally not used in 
our operations.  
8.2. HOOKING AN INTERRUPT 
To hook an interrupt we change the vector corresponding to that interrupt. 
As soon as the interrupt vector changes,  that interrupt will be routed to the 
new handler. Our first example is with  the divide by zero interrupt. The 
normal system defined behavior in response to divide by zero is to display an 
error message and terminate the program. We will change it to display our 
own message.  
 
 Example 8.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007-029 
030-049 
050-090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
; hooking divide by zero interrupt 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   'You divided something by zero.', 0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 050-090 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (printstr) ;;;;; 
 
; divide by zero interrupt handler 
myisrfor0:    push ax                 ; push all regs  
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push si 
              push di 
              push bp 
              push ds 
              push es 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; point ds to our data segment 
 
              call clrscr             ; clear the screen 
              mov  ax, 30 
              push ax                 ; push x position 
              mov  ax, 20 
              push ax                 ; push y position 
              mov  ax, 0x71           ; white on blue attribute 
              push ax                 ; push attribute 
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; push offset of message 
              call printstr           ; print message 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  ds 
              pop  bp 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
99 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
; subroutine to generate a divide by zero interrupt 
genint0:      mov  ax, 0x8432         ; load a big number in ax 
              mov  bl, 2              ; use a very small divisor  
              div  bl                 ; interrupt 0 will be generated  
              ret 
                 
start:        xor  ax, ax              
              mov  es, ax             ; load zero in es 
              mov  word [es:0*4], myisrfor0 ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:0*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2          
              call  genint0           ; generate interrupt 0 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21 
93-101 We often push all registers in an interrupt service routine just to be 
sure that no unintentional modifi cation to any register is made. 
Since any code may be interrupted  an unintentional modification 
will be hard to debug 
103-104 Since interrupt can be called from anywhere we are not sure about 
the value in DS so we reset it to our code segment. 
 
When this program is executed our desired message will be shown instead 
of the default message and the computer will hang thereafter. The first thing 
to observe is that there is no INT 0 call anywhere in the code. INT 0 was 
invoked automatically by an internal me chanism of the processor as a result 
of the DIV instruction producing a result that cannot fit in the destination 
register. Just by changing the vector we have changed the response of the 
system to divide overflow situations. 
However the system stuck instead of returning to the next instruction. 
This is because divide overflow is a special type of interrupt that returns to 
the same instruction instead of the next  instruction. This is why the default 
handler forcefully terminates the program instead of returning. Now the IRET 
will take control back to the DIV inst ruction which will again generate the 
same interrupt. So the computer is stuck in an infinite loop.  
8.3. BIOS AND DOS INTERRUPTS 
In IBM PC there are certain interrupts designated for user programs to 
communicate with system software to access various standard services like 
access to the floppy drive, hard drive, vga, clock etc. If the programmer does 
not use these services he has to unde rstand the hardware details like which 
particular controller is used and how it works. To avoid this and provide 
interoperability a software interface to basic hardware devices is provided 
except in very early computers. Since the manufacturer knows the hardware 
it burns the software to control its hardware in ROM. Such software is called 
firmware and access to this firmware is provided through specified 
interrupts. 
This basic interface to the hardware is called BIOS (basic input output 
services). When the computer is switched on, BIOS gets the control at a 
specified address. The messages at boot time on the screen giving BIOS 
version, detecting different hardware are from this code. BIOS has the 
responsibility of testing the basic hardwa re including video, keyboard, floppy 
drive, hard drive etc and a special program to bootstrap. Bootstrap means to 
load OS from hard disk and from there OS takes control and proceeds to load 
its components and display a command prompt in the end. There are two 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
100
important programs; BIOS and OS. OS services are high level and build upon 
the BIOS services. BIOS services are ve ry low level. A level further lower is 
only directly controlling the hardware. BIOS services provide a hardware 
independent layer above the hardware and OS services provide another 
higher level layer over the BIOS services. We have practiced direct hardware 
access with the video device directly without using BIOS or DOS. The layer of 
BIOS provides services like display a character, clear the screen, etc. All 
these layers are optional in that we can skip to whatever lower layer we want.  
The most logical way to provide access to firmware is to use the interrupt 
mechanism. Specific services are provided at specific interrupts. CALL could 
also have been used but in that case every manufacturer would be required 
to place specific routines at specific addresses, which is not a flexible 
mechanism. Interrupts provide standard interrupt number for the caller and 
flexibility to place the interrupt routine anywhere in the memory for the 
manufacturer. Now for the programmer it  is decided that video services will 
be provided at INT 10 but the actual address of the video services can and do 
vary on computers from different manu facturers. Any computer that is IBM 
compatible must make the video services accessible through INT 10. 
Similarly keyboard services are available at INT 16 and this is standard in 
every IBM compatible. Manufacturers place the code wherever they want and 
the services are exported through this interrupt.  
BIOS exports its various services through different interrupts. Keyboard 
services are exported through INT 16, parallel port services through INT 17 
and similarly others through different interrupts. DOS has a single entry 
point through INT 21 just like a pin hole  camera, this single entry points 
leads to a number of DOS services. So  how one interrupt provides a number 
of different services. A concept of serv ice number is used here which is a 
defecto standard in providing multiple  services through an interrupt. INT 10 
is for video services and each of character printing service, screen clearing 
service, cursor movement service etc. has a service number associated to it. 
So we say INT 10 service 0 is used for this purpose and INT 10 service 1 is 
used for that purpose etc. Service numbers for different standard services are 
also fixed for every IBM compatible. The concept of exported services through 
interrupts is expanded with the service numbering scheme. 
The service number is usually given in the AH register. Sometimes these 
256 services seem less. For example DOS exports thousands of services. So 
will be often seen an extension to a level further with sub-services. For 
examples INT 10 character generator services are all provided through a 
single service number and the services are distinguished with a sub-service 
number.  
The finally selected service would need some arguments for it to work. In 
interrupts arguments are usually not given through stack, rather registers 
are used. The BIOS and DOS specifications list which register contains 
which argument for a particular service of a particular interrupt. 
We will touch some important BIOS and DOS services and not cover it 
completely neither is it possible to  c o v e r  i t  i n  t h i s  s p a c e .  A  v e r y  
comprehensive reference of interrupts is  the Ralph Brown List. It is just a 
reference and not to be studied from end to end. All interrupts cannot be 
remembered and there is no need to remember them.  
The service number is almost always in AH while the sub-service number 
is in AL or BL and sometimes in other registers. The documentation of the 
service we are using will list which register should hold what when the 
interrupt is invoked for that particular service.  
Our first target using BIOS is video so  let us proceed to our first program 
that uses INT 10 service 13 to print a string on the screen. BIOS will work 
even if the video memory is not at B8000 (a very old video card) since BIOS 
knows everything about the hardware and is hardware specific.  
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
101
 Example 8.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
; print string using bios service 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
message:      db   'Hello World' 
 
start:        mov  ah, 0x13           ; service 13 - print string 
              mov  al, 1              ; subservice 01 – update cursor 
              mov  bh, 0              ; output on page 0 
              mov  bl, 7              ; normal attrib 
              mov  dx, 0x0A03         ; row 10 column 3 
              mov  cx, 11             ; length of string 
              push cs 
              pop  es                 ; segment of string  
              mov  bp, message        ; offset of string  
              int  0x10               ; call BIOS video service 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21               
007 The sub-service are versions of printstring that update and do not 
update the cursor after printing the string etc. 
008 Text video screen is in the form of pages which can be upto 32. At 
one time one page is visible which is by default the zeroth page 
unless we change it.  
 
When we execute it the string is prin ted and the cursor is updated as well. 
With direct access to video memory we had no control over the cursor. To 
control cursor a different mechanism to access the hardware was needed. 
Our next example uses the keyboard service to read a key. The 
combination of keyboard and video services is used in almost every program 
that we see and use. We will wait for four key presses; clear the screen after 
the first, and draw different strings after the next key presses and exiting 
after the last. We will use INT 16 service 1 for this purpose. This is a blocking 
service so it does not return until a key has been pressed. We also used the 
blinking attribute in this example. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
102
 
 Example 8.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009-028 
029-069 
070-092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
; print string and keyboard wait using BIOS services 
[org 0x100] 
              jmp  start 
 
msg1:         db   'hello world', 0          
msg2:         db   'hello world again', 0 
msg3:         db   'hello world again and again', 0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-024 FROM EXAMPLE 7.1 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 050-090 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (printstr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-050 FROM EXAMPLE 7.4 (strlen) ;;;;; 
 
start:        mov  ah, 0x10           ; service 10 – vga attributes 
              mov  al, 03             ; subservice 3 – toggle blinking 
              mov  bl, 01             ; enable blinking bit 
              int  0x10               ; call BIOS video service 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              call clrscr             ; clear the screen 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              mov  ax, 0               
              push ax                 ; push x position 
              mov  ax, 0      
              push ax                 ; push y position 
              mov  ax, 1              ; blue on black 
              push ax                 ; push attribute 
              mov  ax, msg1 
              push ax                 ; push offset of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              mov  ax, 0               
              push ax                 ; push x position 
              mov  ax, 0      
              push ax                 ; push y position 
              mov  ax, 0x71           ; blue on white 
              push ax                 ; push attribute 
              mov  ax, msg2 
              push ax                 ; push offset of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              mov  ax, 0               
              push ax                 ; push x position 
              mov  ax, 0      
              push ax                 ; push y position 
              mov  ax, 0xF4           ; red on white blinking 
              push ax                 ; push attribute 
              mov  ax, msg3 
              push ax                 ; push offset of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
099-100 This service has no parameters so only the service number is 
initialized in AH. This is the only service so there is no sub-service 
number as well. The ASCII code of the char pressed is returned in 
AL after this service.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
103
 
EXERCISES 
1. Write a TSR that forces a program to exit when it tries to become a 
TSR using INT 21h/Service 31h by converting its call into INT 
21h/Service 4Ch. 
2. Write a function to clear the screen whose only parameter is always 
zero. The function is hooked at interrupt 80h and may also be called 
directly both as a near call and as a far call. The function should 
detect how it is called and return appropriately. It is provided that the 
direction flag will be set before the function is called. 
3. Write a function that takes three parameters, the interrupt number 
(N) and the segment and offset of an interrupt handler XISR. The 
arguments are pushed in the order N, XISR’s offset and XISR’s 
segment. It is known that the first two instructions of XISR are 
PUSHF and CALL 0:0 followed by the rest of the interrupt handler. 
PUSHF instruction is of one byte and far call is of 5 bytes with the 
first byte being the op-code, the next two containing the target offset 
and the last two containing the targ et segment. The function should 
hook XISR at interrupt N and ch ain it to the interrupt handler 
previously hooked at N by manipulating the call 0:0 instruction 
placed near the start of XISR. 
4. Write a TSR that provide the circular queue services via interrupt 
0x80 using the code written in Exercise 5.XX. The interrupt 
procedure should call one of qc reate, qdestroy, qempty, qadd, 
qremove, and uninstall based on the value in AH. The uninstall 
function should restore the old interrupt 0x80 handler and remove 
the TSR from memory.  
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
9 
Real Time Interrupts and 
Hardware Interfacing  
9.1. HARDWARE INTERRUPTS 
The same mechanism as discussed in the previous chapter is used for real 
interrupts that are generated by external hardware. However there is a single 
pin outside the processor called the INT pin that is used by external 
hardware to generate interrupts. The detailed operation that happens outside 
the process when an interrupt is generated is complex and only a simplified 
view will be discussed here; the view that is relevant to an assembly language 
programmer. There are many external devices that need the processor’s 
attention like the keyboard , hard disk, floppy disk, sound card. All of them 
need real time interrupts at some point in their operation. For example if a 
program is busy in some calculations for three minutes the key strokes that 
are hit meanwhile should not be wasted. Therefore when a key is pressed, 
the INT signal is sent, an interrupt generated and the interrupt handler 
stores the key for later use. Similarly when the printer is busy printing we 
c a n n o t  s e n d  i t  m o r e  d a t a .  A s  s o o n  a s  i t  g e t s  f r e e  f r o m  t h e  p r e v i o u s  j o b  i t  
interrupts the processor to inform that it is free now. There are many other 
examples where the processor needs to be informed of an external event. If 
the processor actively monitors all devices instead of being automatically 
interrupted then it there won’t be any time to do meaningful work. 
Since there are many devices generating interrupts and there is only one 
pin going inside the processor and one pin cannot be technically derived by 
more than one source a controller is used in between called the 
Programmable Interrupt Controller (PIC).  It has eight input signals and one 
output signal. It assigns priorities to its eight input pins from 0 to 7 so that if 
more than one interrupt comes at the same times, the highest priority one is 
forwarded and the rest are held till that  is serviced. The rest are forwarded 
one by one according to priority after the highest priority one is completed. 
The original IBM XT computer had one PIC so there were 8 possible interrupt 
sources. However IBM AT and later computers have two PIC totaling 16 
possible interrupt sources. They are arrange is a special cascade master 
slave arrangement so that only one output signal comes towards the 
processor. However we will concentrate on the first interrupt controller only. 
The priority can be understood with the following example. Consider eight 
parallel switches which are all closed and connected to form the output 
signal. When a signal comes on one of the switches, it is passed on to the 
output and this switch and all below it are opened so that no further signals 
can pass through it. The higher priority switches are still closed and the 
signal on them can be forwarded. When the processor signals that it is 
finished with the processing the swit ches are closed again and any waiting 
interrupts may be forwarded. The way the processor signals ending of the 
interrupt service routine is by using a special mechanism discussed later. 
The eight input signals to the PIC are called Interrupt Requests (IRQ). The 
eight lines are called IRQ 0 to IRQ 7. These are the input lines of the 8451.
† 
For example IRQ 0 is derived by a timer device. The timer device keeps 
                                               
† 8259 is the technical number of the PIC. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
106
generating interrupts with a specified frequency. IRQ 1 is derived by the 
keyboard when generates an interrupts when a key is pressed or released. 
IRQ 2 is the cascading interrupt connected to the output of the second 8451 
in the machine. IRQ 3 is connected to serial port COM 2 while IRQ 4 is 
connected to serial port COM 1. IRQ 5 is used by the sound card or the 
network card or the modem. An IRQ conflict means that two devices in the 
system want to use the same IRQ line. IRQ 6 is used by the floppy disk drive 
while IRQ 7 is used by the parallel port.  
Each IRQ is mapped to a specific interrupt in the system. This is called the 
IRQ to INT mapping. IRQ 0 to IRQ 7 are consecutively mapped on interrupts 
8 to F. This mapping is done by the PIC and not the processor. The actual 
mechanism fetches one instruction from the PIC whenever the INT pin is 
signaled instead of the memory. We can program the PIC to generate a 
different set of interrupts on the same interrupt requests. From the 
perspective of an assembly language programmer an IRQ 0 is translated into 
an INT 8 without any such instruction in the program and that’s all. 
Therefore an IRQ 0, the highest priority interrupt, is generated by the timer 
chip at a precise frequency and the handler at INT 8 is invoked which 
updates the system time. A key press generates IRQ 1 and the INT 9 handler 
is invoked which stores this key. To handler the timer and keyboard 
interrupts one can replace the vectors corresponding to interrupt 8 and 9 
respectively. For example if the timer interrupt is replaced and the floppy is 
accessed by some program,  the floppy motor and its light will remain on for 
ever as in the normal case it is turned off by the timer interrupt after two 
seconds in anticipation that another floppy access might be needed 
otherwise the time motor takes to speed up will be needed again.
‡ 
We have seen that an interrupt request from a device enters the PIC as an 
IRQ, from there it reaches the INT pin of the processor, the processor 
receives the interrupt number from the PIC, generates the designated 
interrupt, and finally the interrupt handler gain control and can do whatever 
is desired. At the end of servicing the interrupt the handler should inform the 
PIC that it is completed so that lower priority interrupts can be sent from the 
PIC. This signal is called an End Of Interrupt (EOI) signal and is sent 
through the I/O ports of the interrupt controller.  
9.2. I/O PORTS 
There are hundreds of peripheral devices in the system, PIC is one 
example. The processor needs to communicate with them, give and take data 
from them, otherwise their presence is meaningless. Memory has a totally 
different purpose. It contains the program to be executed and its data. It 
does not control any hardware. For communicating with peripheral devices 
the processor uses I/O ports. There are only two operations with the external 
world possible, read or write. Similarly with I/O ports the processor can read 
or write an I/O port. When an I/O port is read or written to, the operation is 
not as simple as it happens in memory. Some hardware changes it 
functionality or performs some operation as a result.  
IBM PC has separate memory address space and peripheral address space. 
Some processors use memory mapped I/O in which case designated memory 
cells work as ports for specific devices. In case of Intel a special pin on the 
control bus signals whether the current read or write is from the memory 
address space or from the peripheral address space. The same address and 
data buses are used to select a port and to read or write data from that port. 
However with I/O only the lower 16 bits of the address bus are used meaning 
that there are a total of 65536 possible I/O ports. Now keyboard has special 
                                              
 
‡ The programs discussed from now onwards in the book must be executed 
in pure DOS and not in a DOS window so that we are in total control of the 
PIC and other devices. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
107
I/O ports designated to it, PIC has ot hers, DMA, sound card, network card, 
each has some ports.  
If the two address spaces are differentiated in hardware, they must also 
have special instructions to select the other address space. We have the IN 
and OUT instructions to read or write from the peripheral address space. 
When MOV is given the processor selects the memory address space, when 
IN is given the processor selects the peripheral address space.  
IN and OUT instructions 
The IN and OUT instructions have a byte form and a word form but the 
byte form is almost always used. The source register in OUT and destination 
register in IN is AL or AX depending on which form is used. The port number 
can be directly given in the instruction if it fits in a byte otherwise it has to 
be given in the DX register. Port numbers for specific devices are fixed by the 
IBM standard. For example 20 and 21 are for PIC, 60 to 64 for Keyboard, 378 
for the parallel port etc. A few example of IN and OUT are below: 
in al, 0x21 
mov dx, 0x378 
in al, dx 
out 0x21, al 
mov dx, 0x378 
out dx, al 
PIC Ports 
Programmable interrupt controller has two ports 20 and 21. Port 20 is the 
control port while port 21 is the interru pt mask register which can be used 
for selectively enabling or disabling inte rrupts. Each of the bits at port 21 
corresponds to one of the IRQ lines. We first write a small program to disable 
the keyboard using this port. As we know that the keyboard IRQ is 1, we 
place a 1 bit at its corresponding position. A 0 bit will enable an interrupt 
and a 1 bit disables it. As soon as we write it on the port keyboard interrupts 
will stop arriving and the keyboard will effectively be disabled. Even Ctrl-Alt-
Del would not work; the reset power button has to be used.   
 
 Example 9.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
; disable keyboard interrupt in PIC mask register 
[org 0x0100] 
              in   al, 0x21           ; read interrupt mask register 
              or   al, 2              ; set bit for IRQ2  
              out  0x21, al           ; write back mask register 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21  
  
 
After this three line mini program is executed the computer will not 
understand anything else. Its ears are closed. No keystrokes are making their 
way to the processor. Ports always make something happen on the system. A 
properly designed system can launch a missile on writing a bit on some port. 
Memory is simple in that it is all that  it is. In ports every bit has a meaning 
that changes something in the system.  
As we previously discussed every interrupt handler invoked because 
of an IRQ must signal an EOI otherw ise lower priority interrupts will 
remain disabled. 
Keyboard Controller 
We will go in further details of the keyboard and its relation to the 
computer. We will not discuss how the keyboard communicates with the 
keyboard controller in the computer rather we will discuss how the keyboard 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
108
controller communicates with the processor. Keyboard is a collection of 
labeled buttons and every button is designated a number (not the ASCII 
code). This number is sent to the processor whenever the key is pressed. 
From this number called the scan code the processor understands which key 
was pressed. For each key the scan code comes twice, once for the key press 
and once for the key release. Both are scan codes and differ in one bit only. 
The lower seven bits contain the key number while the most significant bit is 
clear in the press code and set in the release code. The IBM PC standard 
gives a table of the scan codes of all keys.  
If we press Shift-A resulting in a capital A on the screen, the controller has 
sent the press code of Shift, the press code of A, the release code of A, the 
release code of Shift and the interrupt  handler has understood that this 
sequence should result in the ASCII code  of ‘A’. The ‘A’ key always produces 
the same scan code whether or not sh ift is pressed. It is the interrupt 
handler’s job to remember that the press code of Shift has come and release 
code has not yet come and therefore to change the meaning of the following 
key presses. Even the caps lock key works the same way. 
An interesting thing is that the two shift keys on the left and right side of 
the keyboard produce different scan codes. The standard way implemented 
in BIOS is to treat that similarly. Th a t ’ s  w h y  w e  a l w a y s  t h i n k  o f  t h e m  a s  
identical. If we leave BIOS and talk directly with the hardware we can 
differentiate between left and right shift keys with their scan code. Now this 
scan code is available from the keyboard data port which is 60. The keyboard 
generates IRQ 1 whenever a key is pressed so if we hook INT 9 and inside it 
read port 60 we can tell which of the shift keys was hit. Our first program 
will do precisely this. It will output an L if the left shift key was pressed and 
R if the right one was pressed. The hooking method is the same as done in 
the previous chapter.  
 
 Example 9.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
; differentiate left and right shift keys with scancodes 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
              push es 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video memory 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read a char from keyboard port 
              cmp  al, 0x2a           ; is the key left shift 
              jne  nextcmp            ; no, try next comparison 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'L'   ; yes, print L at top left 
              jmp  nomatch            ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nextcmp:      cmp  al, 0x36           ; is the key right shift 
              jne  nomatch            ; no, leave interrupt routine 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'R'   ; yes, print R at top left 
 
nomatch:      mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  ax 
              iret 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
109
037 
038 
 
l1:           jmp  l1                 ; infinite loop 
033-036 CLI clears the interrupt flag to disable the interrupt system 
completely. The processor closes its ears and does not care about 
the state of the INT pin. Interrupt hooking is done in two 
instructions, placing the segment and placing the offset. If an 
interrupt comes in between and the vector is in an indeterminate 
state, the system will go to a junk address and eventually crash. So 
we stop all interruptions while changing a real time interrupt vector. 
We set the interrupt flag afterwards to renewable interrupts. 
038 The program hangs in an infinite loop. The only activity can be 
caused by a real time interrupt. The kbisr routine is not called from 
anywhere; it is only automatically invoked as a result of IRQ 1.  
 
When the program is executed the left and right shift keys can be 
distinguished with the L or R on the screen. As no action was taken for the 
rest of the keys, they are effectively disabled and the computer has to be 
rebooted. To check that the keyboard is actually disabled we change the 
program and add the INT 16 service 0 at the end to wait for an Esc key press. 
As soon as Esc is pressed we want to terminate our program. 
 
 Example 9.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005-029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
; attempt to terminate program with Esc that hooks keyboard interrupt 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-029 FROM EXAMPLE 9.2 (kbisr) ;;;;; 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
l1:           mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              cmp al, 27              ; is the Esc key pressed  
              jne l1                  ; if no, check for next key 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21 
  
 
When the program is executed the behavior is same. Esc does not work. 
This is because the original IRQ 1 handler was written by BIOS that read the 
scan code, converted into an ASCII code and stored in the keyboard buffer. 
The BIOS INT 16 read the key from there and gives in AL. When we hooked 
the keyboard interrupt BIOS is no longer in control, it has no information, it 
will always see the empty buffer and INT 16 will never return.  
Interrupt Chaining 
We can transfer control to the original BIOS ISR in the end of our routine. 
This way the normal functioning of INT 16 can work as well. We can retrieve 
the address of the BIOS routine by saving the values in vector 9 before 
hooking our routine. In the end of our routine we will jump to this address 
using a special indirect form of the JMP FAR instruction.  
 
 Example 9.4 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
110
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
; another attempt to terminate program with Esc that hooks  
; keyboard interrupt 
[org 0x100] 
              jmp  start 
 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old isr 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
              push es 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video memory 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read a char from keyboard port 
              cmp  al, 0x2a           ; is the key left shift 
              jne  nextcmp            ; no, try next comparison 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'L'   ; yes, print L at top left 
              jmp  nomatch            ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nextcmp:      cmp  al, 0x36           ; is the key right shift 
              jne  nomatch            ; no, leave interrupt routine 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'R'   ; yes, print R at top left 
 
nomatch:      ; mov  al, 0x20 
              ; out  0x20, al            
 
              pop es 
              pop ax 
              jmp far [cs:oldisr]     ; call the original ISR 
              ; iret 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov [oldisr], ax        ; save offset of old routine 
              mov ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov [oldisr+2], ax      ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
l1:           mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              cmp al, 27              ; is the Esc key pressed  
              jne l1                  ; if no, check for next key 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21  
027-028 EOI is no longer needed as the original BIOS routine will have it at 
its end.  
033 IRET has been removed and an unconditional jump is introduced. At 
time of JMP the stack has the ex act formation as was when the 
interrupt came. So the original BIOS  routine’s IRET will take control 
to the interrupted program. We have been careful in restoring every 
register we modified and retained the stack in the same form as it 
was at the time of entry into the routine. 
 
When the program is executed L and R are printed as desired and Esc 
terminates the program as well. Normal commands like DIR work now and 
shift keys still show L and R as our routine did even after the termination of 
our program. Now start some applicatio n like the editor, it open well but as 
soon as a key is pressed the computer crashes.  
Actually our hooking and chaining was fine. When Esc was pressed we 
signaled DOS that our program has terminated. DOS will take all our 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
111
memory as a result. The routine is still in memory and functioning but the 
memory is free according to DOS. As soon as we load EDIT the same memory 
is allocated to EDIT and our routine as overwritten. Now when a key is 
pressed our routine’s address is in the vector but at that address some new 
code is placed that is not intended to be an interrupt handler. That may be 
d a t a  o r  s o m e  p a r t  o f  t h e  E D I T  p r o g r a m .  T h i s  r e s u l t s  i n  c r a s h i n g  t h e  
computer.  
Unhooking Interrupt 
We now add the interrupt restoring part to our program. This code resets 
the interrupt vector to the value it had before the start of our program.  
 
 Example 9.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007-032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
; terminate program with Esc that hooks keyboard interrupt 
[org 0x100] 
              jmp  start 
 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old isr 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 005-029 FROM EXAMPLE 9.4 (kbisr) ;;;;; 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov [oldisr], ax        ; save offset of old routine 
              mov ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov [oldisr+2], ax      ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
l1:           mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; call BIOS keyboard service 
 
              cmp al, 27              ; is the Esc key pressed  
              jne l1                  ; if no, check for next key 
 
              mov ax, [oldisr]        ; read old offset in ax 
              mov bx, [oldisr+2]      ; read old segment in bx 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov [es:9*4], ax        ; restore old offset from ax 
              mov [es:9*4+2], bx      ; restore old segment from bx 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21  
9.3. TERMINATE AND STAY RESIDENT 
We change the display to show L only while the left shift is pressed and R 
only while the right shift is pressed to show the use of the release codes. We 
also changed that shift keys are not forwarded to BIOS. The effect will be 
visible with A and Shift-A both producing small ‘a’ but caps lock will work.  
There is one major difference from all the programs we have been writing 
till now. The termination is done usin g INT 21 service 31 instead of INT 21 
service 4C. The effect is that even after termination the program is there and 
is legally there. 
 
 Example 9.6 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
; TSR to show status of shift keys on top left of screen 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old isr 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
112
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
              push es 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video memory 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read a char from keyboard port 
              cmp  al, 0x2a           ; has the left shift pressed 
              jne  nextcmp            ; no, try next comparison 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'L'   ; yes, print L at first column 
              jmp  exit               ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nextcmp:      cmp  al, 0x36           ; has the right shift pressed 
              jne  nextcmp2           ; no, try next comparison 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], 'R'   ; yes, print R at second column 
              jmp  exit               ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nextcmp2:     cmp  al, 0xaa           ; has the left shift released 
              jne  nextcmp3           ; no, try next comparison 
 
              mov  byte [es:0], ' '   ; yes, clear the first column 
              jmp  exit               ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nextcmp3:     cmp  al, 0xb6           ; has the right shift released 
              jne  nomatch            ; no, chain to old ISR 
 
              mov  byte [es:2], ' '   ; yes, clear the second column 
              jmp  exit               ; leave interrupt routine 
 
nomatch:      pop  es 
              pop  ax 
              jmp  far [cs:oldisr]    ; call the original ISR 
 
exit:         mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov  [oldisr], ax       ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov  [oldisr+2], ax     ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
 
When this program is executed the command prompt immediately comes. 
DIR can be seen. EDIT can run and keyp resses do not result in a crash. And 
with all that left and right shift keys shown L and R on top left of the screen 
while they are pressed but the shift keys do not work as usual since we did 
not forwarded the key to BIOS. This is selective chaining. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
113
To understand Terminate 
and Stay Resident (TSR) 
programs the DOS memory 
formation and allocation 
procedure must be 
understood. At physical 
address zero is the interrupt 
vector table. Then are the 
BIOS data area, DOS data 
area, IO.SYS, MSDOS.SYS and 
other device drivers. In the end 
there is COMMAND.COM 
command interpreter. The 
remaining space is called the 
transient program area as 
programs are loaded and 
executed in this area and the 
space reclaimed on their exit. 
A freemem pointer in DOS 
points where the free memory 
begins. When DOS loads a 
program the freemem pointer is moved to the end of memory, all the 
available space is allocated to it, an d when it exits the freemem pointer 
comes back to its original place thereby reclaiming all space. This action is 
initiated by the DOS service 4C.  
The second method to legally terminate a program and give control back to 
DOS is using the service 31. Control is still taken back but the memory 
releasing part is modified. A portion of the allocated memory can be retained. 
So the difference in the two methods is that the freemem pointer goes back to 
the original place or a designated number of bytes ahead of that old position. 
Remember that our program crashed because the interrupt routine was 
overwritten. If we can tell DOS not to reclaim the memory of the interrupt 
routine, then it will not crash. In the last program we have told DOS to make 
a number of bytes resident. It becomes a part of the operation system, an 
extension to it. Just like DOSKEY
§ is an extension to the operation system.  
The number of paragraphs to reserve is given in the DX register. Paragraph 
is a unit just like byte, word, and do uble word. A paragraph is 16 bytes. 
Therefore we can reserve in multiple of 16 bytes. We write TSRs in such a 
way that the initialization code and data is located at the end as it is not 
necessary to make it resident and therefore to save space.  
To calculate the number of paragraphs a label is placed after the last line 
that is to be made resident. The value of that label is the number of bytes 
needed to be made resident. A simple division by 16 will not give the correct 
number of paras as we want our answer to be rounded up and not down. For 
example 100 bytes should need 7 pages but division gives 6 and a remainder 
of 4. A standard technique to get ro unded up integer division is to add 
divisor-1 to the dividend and then divide. So we add 15 to the number of 
bytes and then divide by 16. We use shifting for division as the divisor is a 
power of 2. We use a form of SHR that places the count in the CL register so 
that we can shift by 4 in just two instru ctions instead of 4 if we shift one by 
one.  
In our program anything after start label is not needed after the program 
has become a TSR. We can observe that our program has become a part of 
DOS by giving the following command. 
mem /c 
                                               
§ DOSKEY is a TSR that shows the previous commands on the command 
prompt with up and down arrows and allows editing of the command 
IVT 
BIOS Data Area, DOS Data 
Area, IO.SYS, MSDOS.SYS, 
Device Drivers 
COMMAND.COM 
Transient Program Area (TPA) 
0 
640K 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
114
This command displays all currently loaded drivers and the current state 
of memory. We will be able to see our program in the list of DOS drivers. 
9.4. PROGRAMMABLE INTERVAL TIMER 
Another very important peripheral device is the Programmable Interval 
Timer (PIT), the chip numbered 82 54. This chip has a precise input 
frequency of 1.19318 MHz. This frequency is fixed regardless of the processor 
clock. Inside the chip is a 16bit divisor which divides this input frequency 
and the output is connected to the IRQ 0 line of the PIC. The special number 
0 if placed in the divisor means a divisor of 65536 and not 0. The standard 
divisor is 0 unless we change it. Th erefore by default IRQ 0 is generated 
1193180/65536=18.2 times per second. This is called the timer tick. There is 
an interval of about 55ms between two timer ticks. The system time is 
maintained with the timer interrupt. This is the highest priority interrupt 
and breaks whatever is executing. Time can be maintained with this 
interrupt as this frequency is very precise and is part of the IBM standard. 
When writing a TSR we give control back to DOS so TSR activation, 
reactivation and action is solely interru pt based, whether this is a hardware 
interrupt or a software one. Control is never given back; it must be caught, 
just like we caught control by hook ing the keyboard interrupt. Our next 
example will hook the timer interrupt and display a tick count on the screen.  
 
 Example 9.7 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
; display a tick count on the top right of screen 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
tickcount:    dw   0 
 
; subroutine to print a number at top left of screen 
; takes the number to be printed as its parameter 
printnum:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; load number in ax 
              mov  bx, 10             ; use base 10 for division 
              mov  cx, 0              ; initialize count of digits 
 
nextdigit:    mov  dx, 0              ; zero upper half of dividend 
              div  bx                 ; divide by 10 
              add  dl, 0x30           ; convert digit into ascii value 
              push dx                 ; save ascii value on stack 
              inc  cx                 ; increment count of values  
              cmp  ax, 0              ; is the quotient zero 
              jnz  nextdigit          ; if no divide it again 
 
              mov  di, 140            ; point di to 70th column 
 
nextpos:      pop  dx                 ; remove a digit from the stack 
              mov  dh, 0x07           ; use normal attribute 
              mov  [es:di], dx        ; print char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              loop nextpos            ; repeat for all digits on stack 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
115
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  2 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ax 
 
              inc  word [cs:tickcount]; increment tick count 
              push word [cs:tickcount] 
              call printnum           ; print tick count 
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; end of interrupt 
 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:8*4], timer; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:8*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
 
When we execute the program the counter starts on the screen. Whatever 
we do, take directory, open EDIT, the debugger etc. the counter remains 
running on the screen. No one is giving  control to the program; the program 
is getting executed as a result of timer generating INT 8 after every 55ms.  
Our next example will hook both the keyboard and timer interrupts. When 
the shift key is pressed the tick count starts incrementing and as soon as the 
shift key is released the tick count stops. Both interrupt handlers are 
communicating through a common variable. The keyboard interrupt sets this 
variable while the timer interrupts modi fies its behavior according to this 
variable.  
 
 Example 9.8 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009-049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
; display a tick count while the left shift key is down 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
seconds:      dw   0 
timerflag:    dw   0 
oldkb:        dd   0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 007-047 FROM EXAMPLE 9.7 (printnum) ;;;;; 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read char from keyboard port 
              cmp  al, 0x2a           ; has the left shift pressed 
              jne  nextcmp            ; no, try next comparison 
 
              cmp  word [cs:timerflag], 1; is the flag already set 
              je   exit               ; yes, leave the ISR 
 
              mov  word [cs:timerflag], 1; set flag to start printing 
              jmp  exit               ; leave the ISR 
 
nextcmp:      cmp  al, 0xaa           ; has the left shift released 
              jne  nomatch            ; no, chain to old ISR 
 
              mov  word [cs:timerflag], 0; reset flag to stop printing 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
116
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
              jmp  exit               ; leave the interrupt routine 
 
nomatch:      pop  ax 
              jmp  far [cs:oldkb]     ; call original ISR 
 
exit:         mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ax 
 
              cmp  word [cs:timerflag], 1 ; is the printing flag set 
              jne  skipall            ; no, leave the ISR 
 
              inc  word [cs:seconds]  ; increment tick count 
              push word [cs:seconds]   
              call printnum           ; print tick count 
 
skipall:      mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov  [oldkb], ax        ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov  [oldkb+2], ax      ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov  word [es:8*4], timer ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:8*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+ 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
006 This flag is one when the timer interrupt should increment and zero 
when it should not.  
058-059 As the keyboard controller repeatedly generates the press code if the 
release code does not come in a specified time, we have placed a 
check to not repeatedly set it to one. 
058 Another way to access TSR data is using the CS override instead of 
initializing DS. It is common mistake not to initialize DS and also 
not put in CS override in a real time interrupt handler. 
 
When we execute the program and the shift key is pressed, the counter 
starts incrementing. When the key is released the counter stops. When it is 
pressed again the counter resumes counti ng. As this is made as a TSR any 
other program can be loaded and will work properly alongside the TSR. 
9.5. PARALLEL PORT 
Computers can control external hardware through various external ports 
like the parallel port, the serial po rt, and the new additions USB and 
FireWire. Using this, computers can be used to control almost anything. For 
our examples we will use the parallel port. The parallel port has two views, 
the connector that the external world sees and the parallel port controller 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
117
ports through which the processor communicates with the device connected 
to the parallel port.  
The parallel port connector is a 25pi n connector called DB-25. Different 
pins of this connector have different meanings. Some are meaningful only 
with the printer
**. This is a bidirectional port so there are some pins to take 
data from the processor to the parallel port and others to take data from the 
parallel port to the processor. Important pins for our use are the data pins 
from pin 2 to pin 9 that take data from the processor to the device. Pin 10, 
the ACK pin, is normally used by the printer to acknowledge the receipt of 
data and show the willingness to receive more data. Signaling this pin 
generates IRQ 7 if enabled in the PIC and in the parallel port controller. Pin 
18-25 are ground and must be connected  to the external circuit ground to 
provide the common reference point otherwise they won’t understand each 
other voltage levels. Like the datum poin t in a graph this is the datum point 
of an electrical circuit. The remaining pins are not of our concern in these 
examples. 
This is the external view of the parallel port. The processor cannot see 
these pins. The processor uses the I/O po rts of the parallel port controller. 
The first parallel port LPT1
†† has ports designated from 378 to 37A. The first 
port 378 is the data port. If we use the OUT instruction on this port, 1 bits 
result in a 5V signal on the corresponding pin and a 0 bits result in a 0V 
signal on the corresponding pin.  
Port 37A is the control port. Our intere st is with bit 4 of this port which 
enables the IRQ 7 triggering by the ACK pin. We have attached a circuit that 
connects 8 LEDs with the parallel port pins. The following examples sends 
the scancode of the key pressed to the parallel port so that it is visible on 
LEDs. 
 
 Example 9.9 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
; show scancode on external LEDs connected through parallel port 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old ISR 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
              push dx 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read char from keyboard port 
              mov  dx, 0x378 
              out  dx, al             ; write char to parallel port 
 
              pop  ax 
              pop  dx 
              jmp  far [cs:oldisr]    ; call original ISR 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov  [oldisr], ax       ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov  [oldisr+2], ax     ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
                                               
** The parallel port is most commonly used with the printer. However some 
new printers have started using the USB port. 
†† Older computer had more than one parallel port named LPT2 and having 
ports from 278-27A. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
118
032 
033 
034 
035 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
 
The following example uses the same LED circuit and sends data such that 
LEDs switch on and off turn by turn so that it looks like light is moving back 
and forth. 
 
 Example 9.10 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
; show lights moving back and forth on external LEDs  
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
signal:       db   1                  ; current state of lights 
direction:    db   0                  ; current direction of motion 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ax 
              push dx 
              push ds 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; initialize ds to data segment 
 
              cmp  byte [direction], 1; are moving in right direction 
              je   moveright          ; yes, go to shift right code 
 
              shl  byte [signal], 1   ; shift left state of lights 
              jnc  output             ; no jump to change direction  
 
              mov  byte [direction], 1; change direction to right 
              mov  byte [signal], 0x80; turn on left most light 
              jmp  output             ; proceed to send signal 
 
moveright:    shr  byte [signal], 1   ; shift right state of lights 
              jnc  output             ; no jump to change direction 
 
              mov  byte [direction], 0; change direction to left 
              mov  byte [signal], 1   ; turn on right most light 
 
output:       mov  al, [signal]       ; load lights state in al 
              mov  dx, 0x378          ; parallel port data port 
              out  dx, al             ; send light state of port 
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI on PIC 
 
              pop  ds 
              pop  dx 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:8*4], timer ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:8*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
 
We will now use the parallel port to co ntrol a slightly complicated circuit. 
This time we will also use the parallel port interrupt. We are using a 220 V 
bulb with AC input. AC current is 50Hz sine wave. We have made our circuit 
such that it triggers the parallel port interrupt whenever the since wave 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
119
crosses zero. We have control of passing the AC current to the bulb. We 
control it such that in every cycle only a fixed percentage of time the current 
passes on to the bulb. Using this we ca n control the intensity or glow of the 
bulb.  
Our first example will slowly turn on the bulb by increasing the power 
provided using the mechanism just described. 
 
 Example 9.11 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
; slowly turn on a bulb by gradually increasing the power provided 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
flag:         db   0                  ; next time turn on or turn off 
stop:         db   0                  ; flag to terminate the program 
divider:      dw   11000              ; divider for minimum intensity 
oldtimer:     dd   0                  ; space for saving old isr 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ax 
              push dx 
 
              cmp  byte [cs:flag], 0  ; are we here to turn off 
              je   switchoff          ; yes, go to turn off code 
 
switchon:     mov  al, 1 
              mov  dx, 0x378 
              out  dx, al             ; no, turn the bulb on 
 
              mov  ax, 0x0100 
              out  0x40, al           ; set timer divisor LSB to 0 
              mov  al, ah 
              out  0x40, al           ; set timer divisor MSB to 1 
              mov  byte [cs:flag], 0  ; flag next timer to switch off 
              jmp  exit               ; leave the interrupt routine 
 
switchoff:    xor  ax, ax 
              mov  dx, 0x378 
              out  dx, al             ; turn the bulb off 
 
exit:         mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              pop  dx 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
; parallel port interrupt service routine 
parallel:     push ax 
 
              mov  al, 0x30           ; set timer to one shot mode 
              out  0x43, al 
 
              cmp  word [cs:divider], 100; is the current divisor 100 
              je   stopit             ; yes, stop  
 
              sub  word [cs:divider], 10; decrease the divisor by 10 
              mov  ax, [cs:divider]    
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor LSB in timer 
              mov  al, ah 
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor MSB in timer 
              mov  byte [cs:flag], 1  ; flag next timer to switch on  
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
stopit:       mov  byte [stop], 1     ; flag to terminate the program 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
120
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:0x08*4] 
              mov  [oldtimer], ax     ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:0x08*4+2] 
              mov  [oldtimer+2], ax   ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:0x08*4], timer ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:0x08*4+2], cs  ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov  word [es:0x0F*4], parallel ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:0x0F*4+2], cs  ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov dx, 0x37A 
              in al, dx               ; parallel port control register 
              or al, 0x10             ; turn interrupt enable bit on 
              out dx, al              ; write back register 
 
              in al, 0x21             ; read interrupt mask register 
              and al, 0x7F            ; enable IRQ7 for parallel port 
              out 0x21, al            ; write back register 
 
recheck:      cmp byte [stop], 1      ; is the termination flag set 
              jne recheck             ; no, check again 
 
              mov dx, 0x37A            
              in al, dx               ; parallel port control register 
              and al, 0xEF            ; turn interrupt enable bit off 
              out dx, al              ; write back register 
 
              in al, 0x21             ; read interrupt mask register 
              or al, 0x80             ; disable IRQ7 for parallel port 
              out 0x21, al            ; write back regsiter 
 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov ax, [oldtimer]      ; read old timer ISR offset 
              mov [es:0x08*4], ax     ; restore old timer ISR offset 
              mov ax, [oldtimer+2]    ; read old timer ISR segment 
              mov [es:0x08*4+2], ax   ; restore old timer ISR segment 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21 
 
The next example is simply the opposite of the previous. It slowly turns the 
bulb off from maximum glow to no glow. 
 
 Example 9.12 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010-037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
; slowly turn off a bulb by gradually decreasing the power provided 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
flag:         db   0                  ; next time turn on or turn off 
stop:         db   0                  ; flag to terminate the program 
divider:      dw   0                  ; divider for maximum intensity 
oldtimer:     dd   0                  ; space for saving old isr 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 009-036 FROM EXAMPLE 9.11 (timer) ;;;;; 
 
; parallel port interrupt service routine 
parallel:     push ax 
 
              mov  al, 0x30           ; set timer to one shot mode 
              out  0x43, al 
 
              cmp  word [cs:divider], 11000; current divisor is 11000 
              je   stopit             ; yes, stop  
 
              add  word [cs:divider], 10; increase the divisor by 10 
              mov  ax, [cs:divider]    
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor LSB in timer 
              mov  al, ah 
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor MSB in timer 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
121
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
              mov  byte [cs:flag], 1  ; flag next timer to switch on  
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
stopit:       mov  byte [stop], 1     ; flag to terminate the program 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:0x08*4] 
              mov  [oldtimer], ax     ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:0x08*4+2] 
              mov  [oldtimer+2], ax   ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:0x08*4], timer ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:0x08*4+2], cs  ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov  word [es:0x0F*4], parallel ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:0x0F*4+2], cs  ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, 0x37A 
              in   al, dx             ; parallel port control register 
              or   al, 0x10           ; turn interrupt enable bit on 
              out  dx, al             ; write back register 
 
              in   al, 0x21           ; read interrupt mask register 
              and  al, 0x7F           ; enable IRQ7 for parallel port 
              out  0x21, al           ; write back register 
 
recheck:      cmp  byte [stop], 1     ; is the termination flag set 
              jne  recheck            ; no, check again 
 
              mov  dx, 0x37A            
              in   al, dx             ; parallel port control register 
              and  al, 0xEF           ; turn interrupt enable bit off 
              out  dx, al             ; write back register 
 
              in   al, 0x21           ; read interrupt mask register 
              or   al, 0x80           ; disable IRQ7 for parallel port 
              out  0x21, al           ; write back regsiter 
 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  ax, [oldtimer]     ; read old timer ISR offset 
              mov  [es:0x08*4], ax    ; restore old timer ISR offset 
              mov  ax, [oldtimer+2]   ; read old timer ISR segment 
              mov  [es:0x08*4+2], ax  ; restore old timer ISR segment 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
This example is a mix of the previous two. Here we can increase the bulb 
intensity with F11 and decrease it with F12. 
 
 Example 9.13 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009-036 
037 
038 
039 
; control external bulb intensity with F11 and F12 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
flag:         db   0                  ; next time turn on or turn off 
divider:      dw   100                ; initial timer divider 
oldkb:        dd   0                  ; space for saving old ISR 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 009-036 FROM EXAMPLE 9.11 (timer) ;;;;; 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
122
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
 
              in   al, 0x60             
              cmp  al, 0x57 
              jne  nextcmp 
              cmp  word [cs:divider], 11000 
              je   exitkb 
              add  word [cs:divider], 100 
              jmp  exitkb 
 
nextcmp:      cmp  al, 0x58 
              jne  chain 
              cmp  word [cs:divider], 100 
              je   exitkb 
              sub  word [cs:divider], 100 
              jmp  exitkb 
 
exitkb:       mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al 
 
              pop  ax 
              iret 
 
chain:        pop  ax 
              jmp  far [cs:oldkb] 
 
; parallel port interrupt service routine 
parallel:     push ax 
 
              mov  al, 0x30           ; set timer to one shot mode 
              out  0x43, al 
 
              mov  ax, [cs:divider]    
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor LSB in timer 
              mov  al, ah 
              out  0x40, al           ; load divisor MSB in timer 
              mov  byte [cs:flag], 1  ; flag next timer to switch on  
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
              pop  ax 
              iret                    ; return from interrupt 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  ax, [es:0x09*4] 
              mov  [oldkb], ax        ; save offset of old routine 
              mov  ax, [es:0x09*4+2] 
              mov  [oldkb+2], ax      ; save segment of old routine 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov word [es:0x08*4], timer ; store offset at n*4 
              mov [es:0x08*4+2], cs   ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov word [es:0x09*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov [es:0x09*4+2], cs   ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov word [es:0x0F*4], parallel ; store offset at n*4 
              mov [es:0x0F*4+2], cs   ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov  dx, 0x37A 
              in   al, dx             ; parallel port control register 
              or   al, 0x10           ; turn interrupt enable bit on 
              out  dx, al             ; write back register 
 
              in   al, 0x21           ; read interrupt mask register 
              and  al, 0x7F           ; enable IRQ7 for parallel port 
              out  0x21, al           ; write back register 
 
              mov  dx, start          ; end of resident portion 
              add  dx, 15             ; round up to next para 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  dx, cl             ; number of paras  
              mov  ax, 0x3100         ; terminate and stay resident 
              int  0x21 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
123
EXERCISES 
1. Suggest a reason for the following. The statements are all true. 
a. We should disable interrupts while hooking interrupt 8h. I.e. 
while placing its segment and offset in the interrupt vector 
table. 
b. We need not do this for interrupt 80h. 
c. We need not do this when hooking interrupt 8h from inside 
the interrupt handler of interrupt 80h. 
d. We should disable interrupts while we are changing the stack 
(SS and SP). 
e. EOI is not sent from an interrupt handler which does 
interrupt chaining. 
f. If no EOI is sent from interrupt 9h and no chaining is done, 
interrupt 8h still comes if the interrupt flag is on. 
g. After getting the size in bytes by putting a label at the end of a 
COM TSR, 0fh is added before dividing by 10h. 
h. Interrupts are disabled but divide by zero interrupt still 
comes. 
2. If no hardware interrupts are coming, what are all possible reasons? 
3. Write a program to make an asterisks travel the border of the screen, 
from upper left to upper right to lower right to lower left and back to 
upper left indefinitely, making each movement after one second. 
4. [Musical Arrow] Write a TSR to make an arrow travel the border of the 
screen from top left to top right to bottom right to bottom left and 
back to top left at the speed of 36.4 locations per second. The arrow 
should not destroy the data beneath it and should be restored as 
soon as the arrow moves forward. 
The arrow head should point in th e direction of movement using the 
characters > V < and ^. The journey should be accompanied by a 
different tone from the pc speaker for each side of the screen. Do 
interrupt chaining so that running the TSR 10 times produces 10 
arrows traveling at different locations. 
HINT: At the start you will need to reprogram channel 0 for 36.4 
interrupts per second, double the normal. You will have to reprogram 
channel 2 at every direction change, though you can enable the 
speaker once at the very start. 
5. In the above TSR hook the keyboard interrupt as well and check if 'q' 
is pressed. If not chain to the old interrupt, if yes restore everything 
and remove the TSR from memory. The effect should be that pressing 
'q' removes one moving arrow. If you do interrupt chaining when 
pressing 'q' as well, it will remove all arrows at once. 
6. Write a TSR to rotate the screen (scr oll up and copy the old top most 
line to the bottom) while F10 is pressed. The screen will keep rotating 
while F10 is pressed at 18.2 rows per second. As soon as F10 is 
released the rotation should stop and the original screen restored. A 
secondary buffer of only 160 bytes (one line of screen) can be used.  
7. Write a TSR that hooks software interrupt 0x80 and the timer 
interrupt. The software interrupt is called by other programs with the 
address of a far function in ES:DI and the number of timer ticks after 
which to call back that function in CX. The interrupt records this 
information and returns to the caller. The function will actually be 
called by the timer interrupt after the desired number of ticks. The 
maximum number of functions and their ticks can be fixed to 8.  
8. Write a TSR to clear the screen when CTRL key is pressed and restore it 
when it is released.  
9. Write a TSR to disable all writes to  the hard disk when F10 is pressed and re-
enable when pressed again like a toggle.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
124
HINT: To write to the hard disk programs call the BIOS service INT 0x13 with 
AH=3.  
10. Write a keyboard interrupt handler that disables the timer interrupt 
(no timer interrupt should come) while Q is pressed. It should be re-
enabled as soon as Q is released. 
11. Write a TSR to calculate the current typing speed of the user. Current 
typing speed is the number of characters typed by the user in the last 
five seconds. The speed should be represented by printing asterisks 
at the right border (80th column) of the screen starting from the 
upper right to the lower right corner (growing downwards). Draw n 
asterisks if the user typed n characters in the last five seconds. The 
count should be updated every second. 
12. Write a TSR to show a clock in the upper right corner of the screen in 
the format HH:MM:SS.DD where HH is hours in 24 hour format, MM 
is minutes, SS is seconds and DD is hundredth of second. The clock 
should beep twice for one second each time with half a second 
interval in between at the start of every minute at a frequency of your 
choice. 
 
HINT: IBM PC uses a Real Time Clock (RTC) chip to keep track of time 
while switched off. It provides clock and calendar functions through 
its two I/O ports 70h and 71h. It is used as follows: 
              mov  al, <command> 
              out  0x70, al        ; command byte written at first port 
              jmp  D1              ; waste one instruction time 
D1:           in   al, 0x71        ; result of command is in AL now 
Following are few commands 
00 Get current second 
02 Get current minute 
04 Get current hour 
All numbers returned by RTC are in BCD. E.g. if it is 6:30 the second 
and third command will return 0x30 and 0x06 respectively in al.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
10 
Debug Interrupts 
10.1. DEBUGGER USING SINGLE STEP INTERRUPT 
The use of the trap flag has been deferred till now. The three flags not used 
for mathematical operations are the direction flag, the interrupt flag and the 
trap flag. The direction and interrupt flags have been previously discussed. 
If the the trap flag is set, the after every instruction a type 1 interrupt will 
be automatically generated. When the IVT and reserved interrupts were 
discussed this was named as the single step interrupt. This is like the divide 
by zero interrupt which was never explicitly invoked but it came itself. The 
single step interrupt behaves in the same manner.  
The debugger is made using this interru pt. It allows one instruction to be 
executed and then return control to us. It has its display code and its code to 
wait for the key in the INT 1 handler. Therefore after every instruction the 
values of all registers are shown and the debugger waits for a key. Another 
interrupt used by the debugger is the break point interrupt INT 3. Apart from 
single stepping debugger has the breakpoint feature. INT 3 is used for this 
feature. INT 3 has a single byte opcode so it can replace any instruction. To 
put a breakpoint the instruction is replaced with INT 3 opcode and restored 
in the INT 3 handler. The INT 3 opcode is placed again by a single step 
interrupt that is set up for this purpose after the replaced instruction has 
been executed. 
There is no instruction to set or clear the trap flag like there are 
instructions for the interrupt and di rection flags. We use two special 
instructions PUSHF and POPF to push and pop the flag from the stack. We 
use PUSHF to place flags on the stack, change TF in this image on the stack 
and then reload into the flags register with POPF. The single step interrupt 
will come after the first instruction after POPF. The interrupt mechanism 
automatically clears IF and TF otherwise there would an infinite recursion of 
the single step interrupt. The TF is set in the flags on the stack so another 
interrupt will comes after one more instruction is executed after the return of 
the interrupt. 
The following example is a very elementary debugger using the trap flag 
and the single step interrupt.   
 
 Example 10.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009-026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
; single stepping using the trap flag and single step interrupt 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
flag:         db   0                  ; flag whether a key pressed 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old ISR 
names:        db   'FL =CS =IP =BP =AX =BX =CX =DX =SI =DI =DS =ES =' 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to print a number on screen 
; takes the row no, column no, and number to be printed as parameters 
printnum:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
126
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
              push dx 
              push di 
 
              mov  di, 80             ; load di with columns per row 
              mov  ax, [bp+8]         ; load ax with row number 
              mul  di                 ; multiply with columns per row 
              mov  di, ax             ; save result in di 
              add  di, [bp+6]         ; add column number 
              shl  di, 1              ; turn into byte count 
              add  di, 8              ; to end of number location 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; load number in ax 
              mov  bx, 16             ; use base 16 for division 
              mov  cx, 4              ; initialize count of digits 
 
nextdigit:    mov  dx, 0              ; zero upper half of dividend 
              div  bx                 ; divide by 10 
              add  dl, 0x30           ; convert digit into ascii value 
              cmp  dl, 0x39           ; is the digit an alphabet 
              jbe  skipalpha          ; no, skip addition 
              add  dl, 7              ; yes, make in alphabet code 
skipalpha:    mov  dh, 0x07           ; attach normal attribute 
              mov [es:di], dx         ; print char on screen 
              sub  di, 2              ; to previous screen location 
              loop nextdigit          ; if no divide it again 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  6 
 
; subroutine to print a string  
; takes row no, column no, address of string, and its length  
; as parameters 
printstr:     push bp 
              mov bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push si 
              push di 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
 
              mov  di, 80             ; load di with columns per row 
              mov  ax, [bp+10]        ; load ax with row number 
              mul  di                 ; multiply with columns per row 
              mov  di, ax             ; save result in di 
              add  di, [bp+8]         ; add column number 
              shl  di, 1              ; turn into byte count 
 
              mov  si, [bp+6]         ; string to be printed 
              mov  cx, [bp+4]         ; length of string 
              mov  ah, 0x07           ; normal attribute is fixed 
 
nextchar:     mov  al, [si]           ; load next char of string 
              mov  [es:di], ax        ; show next char on screen 
              add  di, 2              ; move to next screen location 
              add  si, 1              ; move to next char 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat the operation cx times 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
127
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  8 
 
; keyboard interrupt service routine 
kbisr:        push ax 
 
              in   al, 0x60           ; read a char from keyboard port 
              test al, 0x80           ; is it a press code 
              jnz  skipflag           ; no, leave the interrupt  
              add  byte [cs:flag], al ; yes, set flag to proceed 
 
skipflag:     mov  al, 0x20     
              out  0x20, al            
              pop  ax 
              iret 
 
; single step interrupt service routine 
trapisr:      push bp 
              mov bp, sp              ; to read cs, ip and flags 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push si 
              push di 
              push ds 
              push es 
 
              sti                     ; waiting for keyboard interrupt 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; initialize ds to data segment 
 
              mov  byte [flag], 0     ; set flag to wait for key 
              call clrscr             ; clear the screen 
 
              mov  si, 6              ; first register is at bp+6 
              mov  cx, 12             ; total 12 registers to print 
              mov  ax, 0              ; start from row 0 
              mov  bx, 5              ; print at column 5 
 
l3:           push ax                 ; row number 
              push bx                 ; column number  
              mov  dx, [bp+si] 
              push dx                 ; number to be printed 
              call printnum           ; print the number 
              sub  si, 2              ; point to next register  
              inc  ax                 ; next row number  
              loop l3                 ; repeat for the 12 registers 
 
              mov  ax, 0              ; start from row 0 
              mov  bx, 0              ; start from column 0 
              mov  cx, 12             ; total 12 register names 
              mov  si, 4              ; each name length is 4 chars 
              mov  dx, names          ; offset of first name in dx 
 
l1:           push ax                 ; row number  
              push bx                 ; column number  
              push dx                 ; offset of string 
              push si                 ; length of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
              add  dx, 4              ; point to start of next string  
              inc  ax                 ; new row number 
              loop l1                 ; repeat for 12 register names 
 
keywait:      cmp  byte [flag], 0     ; has a key been pressed 
              je   keywait            ; no, check again 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  ds 
              pop  di 
              pop  si 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
128
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
220 
221 
222 
              pop  bp 
              iret 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov ax, [es:9*4] 
              mov [oldisr], ax        ; save offset of old routine 
              mov ax, [es:9*4+2] 
              mov [oldisr+2], ax      ; save segment of old routine 
              mov word [es:1*4], trapisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov [es:1*4+2], cs      ; store segment at n*4+2 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              pushf                   ; save flags on stack 
              pop  ax                 ; copy flags in ax 
              or   ax, 0x100          ; set bit corresponding to TF 
              push ax                 ; save ax on stack 
              popf                    ; reload into flags register 
 
; the trap flag bit is on now, INT 1 will come after next instruction 
; sample code to check the working of our elementary debugger 
              mov  ax, 0 
              mov  bx, 0x10 
              mov  cx, 0x20 
              mov  dx, 0x40 
 
l2:           inc  ax 
              add  bx, 2 
              dec  cx 
              sub  dx, 2 
              jmp  l2 
 
10.2. DEBUGGER USING BREAKPOINT INTERRUPT 
We now write a debugger using INT 3.  This debugger stops at the same 
point every time where the breakpoint has been set up unlike the previous 
one which stopped at every instruction. The single step interrupt in this 
example is used only to restore the breakpoint interrupt which was removed 
by the breakpoint interrupt handler temporarily so that the original 
instruction can be executed. 
 
 Example 10.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011-028 
029-072 
073-114 
115-127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
; elementary debugger using breakpoint interrupt 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
flag:         db   0                  ; flag whether a key pressed 
oldisr:       dd   0                  ; space for saving old ISR 
names:        db   'FL =CS =IP =BP =AX =BX =CX =DX =SI =DI =DS =ES =' 
opcode:       db 0 
opcodepos:    dw 0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 008-025 FROM EXAMPLE 6.2 (clrscr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 116-128 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (kbisr) ;;;;; 
 
; single step interrupt service routine 
trapisr:      push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push ax 
              push di 
              push ds 
              push es 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; initialize ds to data segment 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
129
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]          
              mov  es, ax             ; load interrupted segment in es 
              mov  di, [opcodepos]    ; load saved opcode position 
              mov  byte [es:di], 0xCC ; reset the opcode to INT3 
              and  word [bp+6], 0xFEFF; clear TF in flags on stack 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  ds 
              pop  di 
              pop  ax 
              pop  bp 
              iret 
 
; breakpoint interrupt service routine 
debugisr:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp             ; to read cs, ip and flags 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push si 
              push di 
              push ds 
              push es 
 
              sti                     ; waiting for keyboard interrupt 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; initialize ds to data segment 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]          
              mov  es, ax             ; load interrupted segment in es 
              dec  word [bp+2]        ; decrement the return address 
              mov  di, [bp+2]         ; read the return address in di 
              mov  word [opcodepos], di ; remember the return position 
              mov  al, [opcode]       ; load the original opcode 
              mov  [es:di], al        ; restore original opcode there 
 
              mov  byte [flag], 0     ; set flag to wait for key 
              call clrscr             ; clear the screen 
 
              mov  si, 6              ; first register is at bp+6 
              mov  cx, 12             ; total 12 registers to print 
              mov  ax, 0              ; start from row 0 
              mov  bx, 5              ; print at column 5 
 
l3:           push ax                 ; row number 
              push bx                 ; column number  
              mov  dx, [bp+si] 
              push dx                 ; number to be printed 
              call printnum           ; print the number 
              sub  si, 2              ; point to next register  
              inc  ax                 ; next row number  
              loop l3                 ; repeat for the 12 registers 
 
              mov  ax, 0              ; start from row 0 
              mov  bx, 0              ; start from column 0 
              mov  cx, 12             ; total 12 register names 
              mov  si, 4              ; each name length is 4 chars 
              mov  dx, names          ; offset of first name in dx 
 
l1:           push ax                 ; row number  
              push bx                 ; column number  
              push dx                 ; offset of string 
              push si                 ; length of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
              add  dx, 4              ; point to start of next string  
              inc  ax                 ; new row number 
              loop l1                 ; repeat for 12 register names 
 
              or word [bp+6], 0x0100  ; set TF in flags image on stack 
 
keywait:      cmp  byte [flag], 0     ; has a key been pressed 
              je   keywait            ; no, check again 
 
              pop es 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
130
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
220 
221 
222 
223 
224 
225 
226 
227 
228 
229 
230 
231 
232 
233 
234 
235 
236 
237 
238 
239 
240 
241 
242 
243 
244 
245 
246 
247 
248 
249 
250 
251 
252 
              pop ds 
              pop di 
              pop si 
              pop dx 
              pop cx 
              pop bx 
              pop ax 
              pop bp 
              iret 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  word [es:1*4], trapisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:1*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              mov  word [es:3*4], debugisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:3*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              cli                     ; disable interrupts 
              mov  word [es:9*4], kbisr ; store offset at n*4 
              mov  [es:9*4+2], cs     ; store segment at n*4+2 
              sti                     ; enable interrupts 
 
              mov si, l2              ; load breakpoint position in si 
              mov al, [cs:si]         ; read opcode at that position 
              mov [opcode], al        ; save opcode for later use 
              mov byte [cs:si], 0xCC  ; change opcode to INT3 
 
; breakpoint is set now, INT3 will come at l2 on every iteration 
; sample code to check the working of our elementary debugger 
              mov ax, 0 
              mov bx, 0x10 
              mov cx, 0x20 
              mov dx, 0x40 
 
l2:           inc ax 
              add bx, 2 
              dec cx 
              sub dx, 2 
              jmp l2 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
11 
Multitasking 
11.1. CONCEPTS OF MULTITASKING 
To experience the power of assembly language we introduce how to 
implement multitasking. We observed in  the debugger that our thread of 
instructions was broken by the debu gger; it got the control, used all 
registers, displayed an elaborate interface, waited for the key, and then 
restored processor state to what was immediately before interruption. Our 
program resumed as if nothing happened. The program execution was in the 
same logical flow.  
If we have two different programs A and B. Program A is broken, its state 
saved, and returned to B instead of A. By looking at the instruction set, we 
can immediately say that nothing can stop us from doing that. IRET will 
r e t u r n  t o  w h a t e v e r  C S  a n d  I P  i t  f i n d s  o n  t h e  s t a c k .  N o w  B  i s  i n t e r r u p t e d  
s o m e h o w ,  i t s  s t a t e  s a v e d ,  a n d  w e  r e t u r n  b a c k  t o  A .  A  w i l l  h a v e  n o  w a y  o f  
knowing that it was interrupted as its entire environment has been restored. 
It never knew the debugger took contro l when it was debugged. It sill has no 
way of gaining this knowledge. If this work of breaking and restoring 
programs is done at high speed the us er will feel that all the programs are 
running at the same time where actually they are being switched to and forth 
at high speed. 
In essence multitasking is simple, even though we have to be extremely 
careful when implementing it. The environment of a program in the very 
simple case is all its registers and stack. We will deal with stack later. Now to 
get control from the program without the program knowing about it, we can 
use the IRQ 0 highest priority interrupt that is periodically coming to the 
processor.  
Now we present a very basic example of multitasking. We have two 
subroutines written in assembly language. All the techniques discussed here 
are applicable to code written in high er level languages as well. However the 
code to control this multitasking canno t be easily written in a higher level 
language so we write it in assembly language. The two subroutines rotate 
bars by changing characters at the two corners of the screen and have 
infinite loops. By hooking the timer interrupt and saving and restoring the 
registers of the tasks one by one, it appears that both tasks are running 
simultaneously. 
 
 Example 11.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
; elementary multitasking of two threads  
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
              ;   ax,bx,ip,cs,flags storage area 
taskstates:   dw   0, 0, 0, 0, 0      ; task0 regs 
              dw   0, 0, 0, 0, 0      ; task1 regs 
              dw   0, 0, 0, 0, 0      ; task2 regs 
 
current:      db   0                  ; index of current task 
chars:        db   '\|/-'             ; shapes to form a bar 
 
; one task to be multitasked 
taskone:      mov  al, [chars+bx]     ; read the next shape 
              mov  [es:0], al         ; write at top left of screen 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
132
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
              inc  bx                 ; increment to next shape 
              and  bx, 3              ; taking modulus by 4 
              jmp  taskone            ; infinite task 
 
; second task to be multitasked 
tasktwo:      mov  al, [chars+bx]     ; read the next shape 
              mov  [es:158], al       ; write at top right of screen 
              inc  bx                 ; increment to next shape 
              and  bx, 3              ; taking modulus by 4 
              jmp  tasktwo            ; infinite task 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ax 
              push bx 
 
              mov  bl, [cs:current]   ; read index of current task 
              mov  ax, 10             ; space used by one task  
              mul  bl                 ; multiply to get start of task 
              mov  bx, ax             ; load start of task in bx 
 
              pop  ax                 ; read original value of bx 
              mov  [cs:taskstates+bx+2], ax ; space for current task 
              pop  ax                 ; read original value of ax 
              mov  [cs:taskstates+bx+0], ax ; space for current task 
              pop  ax                 ; read original value of ip 
              mov  [cs:taskstates+bx+4], ax ; space for current task 
              pop  ax                 ; read original value of cs 
              mov  [cs:taskstates+bx+6], ax ; space for current task 
              pop  ax                 ; read original value of flags 
              mov  [cs:taskstates+bx+8], ax ; space for current task 
 
              inc  byte [cs:current]  ; update current task index 
              cmp  byte [cs:current], 3 ; is task index out of range 
              jne  skipreset          ; no, proceed 
              mov  byte [cs:current], 0 ; yes, reset to task 0 
 
skipreset:    mov  bl, [cs:current]   ; read index of current task 
              mov  ax, 10             ; space used by one task  
              mul  bl                 ; multiply to get start of task 
              mov  bx, ax             ; load start of task in bx 
               
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              push word [cs:taskstates+bx+8] ; flags of new task 
              push word [cs:taskstates+bx+6] ; cs of new task 
              push word [cs:taskstates+bx+4] ; ip of new task 
              mov  ax, [cs:taskstates+bx+0]  ; ax of new task 
              mov  bx, [cs:taskstates+bx+2]  ; bx of new task 
              iret                    ; return to new task 
 
start:        mov  word [taskstates+10+4], taskone ; initialize ip 
              mov  [taskstates+10+6], cs     ; initialize cs 
              mov  word [taskstates+10+8], 0x0200 ; initialize flags 
              mov  word [taskstates+20+4], tasktwo ; initialize ip 
              mov  [taskstates+20+6], cs     ; initialize cs 
              mov  word [taskstates+20+8], 0x0200 ; initialize flags 
              mov  word [current], 0         ; set current task index 
 
              xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax                    ; point es to IVT base  
              cli                             
              mov  word [es:8*4], timer 
              mov  [es:8*4+2], cs            ; hook timer interrupt 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax                    ; point es to video base 
              xor  bx, bx                    ; initialize bx for tasks 
              sti 
 
              jmp $                          ; infinite loop 
 
The space where all registers of a task are stored is called the process 
control block or PCB. Actual PCB cont ains a few more things that are not 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
133
relevant to us now. INT 08 that is saving and restoring the registers is called 
the scheduler and the whole event is called a context switch.  
11.2. ELABORATE MULTITASKING 
In our next example we will save all 14 registers and the stack as well. 28 
bytes are needed by these registers in the PCB. We add some more space to 
make the size 32, a power of 2 for easy calculations. One of these words is 
used to form a linked list of the PCBs so that strict ordering of active PCBs is 
not necessary. Also in this example we have given every thread its own stack. 
Now threads can have function calls, parameters and local variables etc. 
Another important change in this example is that the creation of threads is 
now dynamic. The thread registration code initializes the PCB, and adds it to 
the linked list so that the scheduler will give it a turn.  
 
 Example 11.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014-057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
; multitasking and dynamic thread registration  
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
; PCB layout: 
; ax,bx,cx,dx,si,di,bp,sp,ip,cs,ds,ss,es,flags,next,dummy 
;  0, 2, 4, 6, 8,10,12,14,16,18,20,22,24,  26 , 28 ,  30 
 
pcb:          times 32*16 dw 0        ; space for 32 PCBs 
stack:        times 32*256 dw 0       ; space for 32 512 byte stacks 
nextpcb:      dw   1                  ; index of next free pcb 
current:      dw   0                  ; index of current pcb 
lineno:       dw   0                  ; line number for next thread 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;; 
 
; mytask subroutine to be run as a thread 
; takes line number as parameter 
mytask:       push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              sub  sp, 2              ; thread local variable 
              push ax 
              push bx 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; load line number parameter 
              mov  bx, 70             ; use column number 70 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; initialize local variable  
 
printagain:   push ax                 ; line number  
              push bx                 ; column number  
              push word [bp-2]        ; number to be printed 
              call printnum           ; print the number  
              inc  word [bp-2]        ; increment the local variable 
              jmp  printagain         ; infinitely print 
 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              mov  sp, bp 
              pop  bp 
              ret 
 
; subroutine to register a new thread 
; takes the segment, offset, of the thread routine and a parameter  
; for the target thread subroutine 
initpcb:      push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push si 
 
              mov  bx, [nextpcb]      ; read next available pcb index 
              cmp  bx, 32             ; are all PCBs used 
              je   exit               ; yes, exit 
               
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
134
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
              mov  cl, 5               
              shl  bx, cl             ; multiply by 32 for pcb start 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+8]         ; read segment parameter 
              mov  [pcb+bx+18], ax    ; save in pcb space for cs  
              mov  ax, [bp+6]         ; read offset parameter 
              mov  [pcb+bx+16], ax    ; save in pcb space for ip 
 
              mov  [pcb+bx+22], ds    ; set stack to our segment 
              mov  si, [nextpcb]      ; read this pcb index 
              mov  cl, 9               
              shl  si, cl             ; multiply by 512  
              add  si, 256*2+stack    ; end of stack for this thread 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; read parameter for subroutine 
              sub  si, 2              ; decrement thread stack pointer 
              mov  [si], ax           ; pushing param on thread stack 
              sub  si, 2              ; space for return address 
              mov  [pcb+bx+14], si    ; save si in pcb space for sp 
 
              mov  word [pcb+bx+26], 0x0200 ; initialize thread flags 
              mov  ax, [pcb+28]       ; read next of 0th thread in ax 
              mov  [pcb+bx+28], ax    ; set as next of new thread 
              mov  ax, [nextpcb]      ; read new thread index    
              mov  [pcb+28], ax       ; set as next of 0th thread 
              inc  word [nextpcb]     ; this pcb is now used 
 
exit:         pop  si 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  bp 
              ret  6 
 
; timer interrupt service routine 
timer:        push ds 
              push bx 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; initialize ds to data segment 
 
              mov  bx, [current]      ; read index of current in bx 
              shl  bx, 1 
              shl  bx, 1 
              shl  bx, 1 
              shl  bx, 1 
              shl  bx, 1              ; multiply by 32 for pcb start 
              mov  [pcb+bx+0], ax     ; save ax in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+4], cx     ; save cx in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+6], dx     ; save dx in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+8], si     ; save si in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+10], di    ; save di in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+12], bp    ; save bp in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+24], es    ; save es in current pcb 
 
              pop  ax                 ; read original bx from stack 
              mov  [pcb+bx+2], ax     ; save bx in current pcb 
              pop  ax                 ; read original ds from stack 
              mov  [pcb+bx+20], ax    ; save ds in current pcb 
              pop  ax                 ; read original ip from stack 
              mov  [pcb+bx+16], ax    ; save ip in current pcb 
              pop  ax                 ; read original cs from stack 
              mov  [pcb+bx+18], ax    ; save cs in current pcb 
              pop  ax                 ; read original flags from stack 
              mov  [pcb+bx+26], ax    ; save cs in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+22], ss    ; save ss in current pcb 
              mov  [pcb+bx+14], sp    ; save sp in current pcb 
 
              mov  bx, [pcb+bx+28]    ; read next pcb of this pcb 
              mov  [current], bx      ; update current to new pcb 
              mov  cl, 5              
              shl  bx, cl             ; multiply by 32 for pcb start 
 
              mov  cx, [pcb+bx+4]     ; read cx of new process 
              mov  dx, [pcb+bx+6]     ; read dx of new process 
              mov  si, [pcb+bx+8]     ; read si of new process 
              mov  di, [pcb+bx+10]    ; read diof new process 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
135
176 
177 
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
              mov  bp, [pcb+bx+12]    ; read bp of new process 
              mov  es, [pcb+bx+24]    ; read es of new process 
              mov  ss, [pcb+bx+22]    ; read ss of new process 
              mov  sp, [pcb+bx+14]    ; read sp of new process 
 
              push word [pcb+bx+26]   ; push flags of new process 
              push word [pcb+bx+18]   ; push cs of new process 
              push word [pcb+bx+16]   ; push ip of new process 
              push word [pcb+bx+20]   ; push ds of new process 
 
              mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al           ; send EOI to PIC 
 
              mov  ax, [pcb+bx+0]     ; read ax of new process 
              mov  bx, [pcb+bx+2]     ; read bx of new process 
              pop  ds                 ; read ds of new process 
              iret                    ; return to new process 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to IVT base  
 
              cli 
              mov  word [es:8*4], timer 
              mov  [es:8*4+2], cs     ; hook timer interrupt 
              sti 
 
nextkey:      xor ah, ah              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int 0x16                ; bios keyboard services 
 
              push cs                 ; use current code segment 
              mov  ax, mytask        
              push ax                 ; use mytask as offset 
              push word [lineno]      ; thread parameter 
              call initpcb            ; register the thread 
 
              inc  word [lineno]      ; update line number  
              jmp  nextkey            ; wait for next keypress 
  
 
  When the program is executed the threads display the numbers 
independently. However as keys are pressed and new threads are registered, 
there is an obvious slowdown in the sp eed of multitasking. To improve that, 
we can change the timer interrupt freq uency. The following can be used to 
set to an approximately 1ms interval. 
mov  ax, 1100 
out  0x40, al 
mov  al, ah 
out  0x40, al 
This makes the threads look faster. However the only real change is that 
the timer interrupt is now coming more frequently. 
11.3. MULTITASKING KERNEL AS TSR 
The above examples had the multitasking code and the multitasked code 
in one program. Now we separate the multitasking kernel into a TSR so that 
it becomes an operation system extensio n. We hook a software interrupt for 
the purpose of registering a new thread. 
 
 Example 11.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
; multitasking kernel as a TSR 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
; PCB layout: 
; ax,bx,cx,dx,si,di,bp,sp,ip,cs,ds,ss,es,flags,next,dummy 
;  0, 2, 4, 6, 8,10,12,14,16,18,20,22,24,  26 , 28 ,  30 
 
pcb:          times 32*16 dw 0        ; space for 32 PCBs 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
136
010 
011 
012 
013 
014-073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
stack:        times 32*256 dw 0       ; space for 32 512 byte stacks 
nextpcb:      dw   1                  ; index of next free pcb 
current:      dw   0                  ; index of current pcb 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 133-192 FROM EXAMPLE 11.2 (timer) ;;;;; 
 
; software interrupt to register a new thread 
; takes parameter block in ds:si 
; parameter block has cs, ip, ds, es, and param in this order 
initpcb:      push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push di 
 
              mov  bx, [cs:nextpcb]   ; read next available pcb index 
              cmp  bx, 32             ; are all PCBs used 
              je   exit               ; yes, exit 
               
              mov  cl, 5               
              shl  bx, cl             ; multiply by 32 for pcb start 
 
              mov  ax, [si+0]         ; read code segment parameter 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+18], ax ; save in pcb space for cs  
              mov  ax, [si+2]         ; read offset parameter 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+16], ax ; save in pcb space for ip 
              mov  ax, [si+4]         ; read data segment parameter 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+20], ax ; save in pcb space for ds  
              mov  ax, [si+6]         ; read extra segment parameter 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+24], ax ; save in pcb space for es 
 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+22], cs ; set stack to our segment 
              mov  di, [cs:nextpcb]   ; read this pcb index 
              mov  cl, 9               
              shl  di, cl             ; multiply by 512  
              add  di, 256*2+stack    ; end of stack for this thread 
              mov  ax, [si+8]         ; read parameter for subroutine 
              sub  di, 2              ; decrement thread stack pointer 
              mov  [cs:di], ax        ; pushing param on thread stack 
              sub  di, 4              ; space for far return address 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+14], di ; save di in pcb space for sp 
 
              mov  word [cs:pcb+bx+26], 0x0200 ; initialize flags 
              mov  ax, [cs:pcb+28]    ; read next of 0th thread in ax 
              mov  [cs:pcb+bx+28], ax ; set as next of new thread 
              mov  ax, [cs:nextpcb]   ; read new thread index    
              mov  [cs:pcb+28], ax    ; set as next of 0th thread 
              inc  word [cs:nextpcb]  ; this pcb is now used 
 
exit:         pop  di 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              iret 
 
start:        xor ax, ax 
              mov es, ax              ; point es to IVT base 
 
              mov word [es:0x80*4], initpcb 
              mov [es:0x80*4+2], cs   ; hook software int 80 
              cli 
              mov word [es:0x08*4], timer 
              mov [es:0x08*4+2], cs   ; hook timer interrupt 
              sti 
 
              mov dx, start 
              add dx, 15 
              mov cl, 4 
              shr dx, cl 
 
              mov ax, 0x3100          ; terminate and stay resident 
              int 0x21              
 
The second part of our example is a simple program that has the threads 
to be registered with the multitasking kernel using its exported services. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
137
 Example 11.4 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012-055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
; multitasking TSR caller 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
; parameter block layout: 
; cs,ip,ds,es,param 
;  0, 2, 4, 6,  8 
 
paramblock:   times 5 dw 0            ; space for parameters  
lineno:       dw   0                  ; line number for next thread 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to be run as a thread 
; takes line number as parameter 
mytask:       push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              sub  sp, 2              ; thread local variable 
              push ax 
              push bx 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]         ; load line number parameter 
              mov  bx, 70             ; use column number 70 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; initialize local variable  
 
printagain:   push ax                 ; line number  
              push bx                 ; column number  
              push word [bp-2]        ; number to be printed 
              call printnum           ; print the number  
              inc  word [bp-2]        ; increment the local variable 
              jmp  printagain         ; infinitely print 
 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              mov  sp, bp 
              pop  bp 
              retf 
 
start:        mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; bios keyboard services 
 
              mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  ax, [lineno]        
              mov  [paramblock+8], ax ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
 
              inc  word [lineno]      ; update line number 
              jmp  start              ; wait for next key 
 
We introduce yet another use of the multitasking kernel with this new 
example. In this example three different sort of routines are multitasked by 
the same kernel instead of repeatedly registering the same routine. 
 
 Example 11.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
; another multitasking TSR caller 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
; parameter block layout: 
; cs,ip,ds,es,param 
;  0, 2, 4, 6,  8 
 
paramblock:   times 5 dw 0            ; space for parameters  
lineno:       dw   0                  ; line number for next thread 
chars:        db '\|/-'               ; chracters for rotating bar 
message:      db 'moving hello'       ; moving string 
message2:     db '            '       ; to erase previous string 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
138
014 
015 
016-059 
060-101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
messagelen:   dw 12                   ; length of above strings 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;; 
 
; subroutine to run as first thread 
mytask:       push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              sub  sp, 2              ; thread local variable 
              push ax 
              push bx 
 
              xor  ax, ax             ; use line number 0 
              mov  bx, 70             ; use column number 70 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; initialize local variable  
 
printagain:   push ax                 ; line number  
              push bx                 ; column number  
              push word [bp-2]        ; number to be printed 
              call printnum           ; print the number  
              inc  word [bp-2]        ; increment the local variable 
              jmp  printagain         ; infinitely print 
 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              mov  sp, bp 
              pop  bp 
              retf 
 
; subroutine to run as second thread 
mytask2:      push ax 
              push bx 
              push es 
 
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax             ; point es to video base 
              xor  bx, bx             ; initialize to use first shape 
 
rotateagain:  mov  al, [chars+bx]     ; read current shape 
              mov  [es:40], al        ; print at specified place 
              inc  bx                 ; update to next shape 
              and  bx, 3              ; take modulus with 4 
              jmp  rotateagain        ; repeat infinitely 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              retf 
 
; subroutine to run as third thread 
mytask3:      push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              sub  sp, 2              ; thread local variable 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; initialize line number to 0 
 
nextline:     push word [bp-2]        ; line number 
              mov  bx, 50              
              push bx                 ; column number 50 
              mov  ax, message 
              push ax                 ; offset of string 
              push word [messagelen]  ; length of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string 
 
              mov  cx, 0x100            
waithere:     push cx                 ; save outer loop counter 
              mov  cx, 0xffff           
              loop $                  ; repeat ffff times 
              pop  cx                 ; restore outer loop counter 
              loop waithere           ; repeat 0x100 times 
 
              push word [bp-2]        ; line number  
              mov  bx, 50             ; column number 50 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
139
175 
176 
177 
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
              push bx   
              mov  ax, message2     
              push ax                 ; offset of blank string 
              push word [messagelen]  ; length of string 
              call printstr           ; print the string  
 
              inc  word [bp-2]        ; update line number 
              cmp  word [bp-2], 25    ; is this the last line 
              jne  skipreset          ; no, proceed to draw 
              mov  word [bp-2], 0     ; yes, reset line number to 0 
 
skipreset:    jmp  nextline           ; proceed with next drawing 
 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              mov  sp, bp 
              pop  bp 
              retf 
 
start:        mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
               
              mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask2 ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
 
              mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask3 ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
 
              jmp $ 
 
EXERCISES 
1. Change the multitasking kernel such that a new two byte variable is 
introduced in the PCB. This variable contains the number of turns 
this process should be given. For example if the first PCB contains 20 
in this variable, the switch to second process should occur after 20 
timer interrupts (approx one second at default speed) and similarly 
the switch from second to thir d process should occur after the 
number given in the second process’s PCB.  
2. Change the scheduler of the multitasking kernel to enque the current 
process index a ready queue, and dequeue the next process index 
from it, and assign it to current. Therefore the next field of the PCB is 
no longer used. Use queue functions from Exercise 5.XX. 
3. Add a function in the multitasking kernel to fork the current process 
through a software interrupt. Fork should allocate a new PCB and 
copy values of all registers of the caller’s PCB to the new PCB. It 
should allocate a stack and change SS, SP appropriately in the new 
PCB. It has to copy the caller’s stack on the newly allocated stack. It 
will set AX in the new PCB to 0 and in the old PB to 1 so that both 
threads can identify which is the creator and which is the created 
process and can act accordingly. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
140
4. Add a function in the multitasking kernel accessible via a software 
interrupt that allows the current process to terminate itself.  
5. Create a queue in the multitasking kernel called kbQ. This queue 
initially empty will contain characters typed by the user. Hook the 
keyboard interrupt for getting user keys. Convert the scan code to 
ASCII if the key is from a-z or 0-9 and enque it in kbQ. Ignore all 
other scan codes. Write a function checkkey accessible via a software 
interrupt that returns the process in AX a value removed from the 
queue. It waits if there is no key in the queue. Be aware of enabling 
interrupts if you wait here. 
6. Modify the multitasking kernel such  that the initial process displays 
at the last line of the screen whatever is typed by the user and clears 
that line on enter. If the user types quit followed by enter restore 
e v e r y t h i n g  t o  n o r m a l  a s  i t  w a s  b e f o r e  t h e  m u l t i t a s k i n g  k e r n e l  w a s  
there. If the user types start followed by enter, start one more rotating 
bar on the screen. The first rotating bar should appear in the upper 
left, the next in the second column, then third and so on. The bar 
color should be white. The user can type the commands ‘white’, ‘red’, 
and ‘green’ to change the color of new bars. 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
12 
Video Services 
12.1. BIOS VIDEO SERVICES 
The Basic Input Output System (BIOS) provides services for video, 
keyboard, serial port, parallel port, time etc. The video services are exported 
via INT 10. We will discuss some very simple services. Video services are 
classified into two broad categories; graphics mode services and text mode 
services. In graphics mode a location in video memory corresponds to a dot 
on the screen. In text mode this relation is not straightforward. The video 
memory holds the ASCII of the character to be shown and the actual shape is 
read from a font definition stored elsewhere in memory. We first present a list 
of common video services used in text mode. 
 
INT 10 - VIDEO - SET VIDEO MODE 
AH = 00h 
AL = desired video mode  
 
Some common video modes include 40x 25 text mode (mode 0), 80x25 text 
mode (mode 2), 80x50 text mode (mode 3), and 320x200 graphics mode 
(mode D).  
 
INT 10 - VIDEO - SET TEXT-MODE CURSOR SHAPE 
AH = 01h 
CH = cursor start and options 
CL = bottom scan line containing cursor (bits 0-4) 
INT 10 - VIDEO - SET CURSOR POSITION 
AH = 02h 
BH = page number 
    0-3 in modes 2&3 
    0-7 in modes 0&1 
    0 in graphics modes 
DH = row (00h is top) 
DL = column (00h is left) 
INT 10 - VIDEO - SCROLL UP WINDOW 
AH = 06h 
AL = number of lines by which to scroll up (00h = clear entire window) 
BH = attribute used to write blank lines at bottom of window 
CH, CL = row, column of window's upper left corner 
DH, DL = row, column of window's lower right corner 
INT 10 - VIDEO - SCROLL DOWN WINDOW 
AH = 07h 
AL = number of lines by which to scroll down (00h=clear entire window) 
BH = attribute used to write blank lines at top of window 
CH, CL = row, column of window's upper left corner 
DH, DL = row, column of window's lower right corner 
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE CHARACTER AND ATTRIBUTE AT CURSOR POSITION 
AH = 09h 
AL = character to display 
BH = page number 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
142
BL = attribute (text mode) or color (graphics mode) 
CX = number of times to write character 
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE CHARACTER ONLY AT CURSOR POSITION 
AH = 0Ah 
AL = character to display 
BH = page number  
BL = attribute (text mode) or color (graphics mode) 
CX = number of times to write character 
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE STRING 
AH = 13h 
AL = write mode 
   bit 0: update cursor after writing 
   bit 1: string contains alternating characters and attributes 
   bits 2-7: reserved (0) 
BH = page number 
BL = attribute if string contains only characters 
CX = number of characters in string 
DH, DL = row, column at which to start writing 
ES:BP -> string to write 
Chargen Services 
In our first example we will read the font definition in memory and change 
it to include a set of all on pixels in the last line showing an effect of 
underline on all character including spac e. An 8x16 font is stored in 16 
bytes. A sample character and the corresponding 16 values stored in the font 
information are shown for the character ‘A’. We 
start with two services from the chargen subset 
of video services that we are going to use. 
 
INT 10 - VIDEO - GET FONT INFORMATION 
AX = 1130h 
BH = pointer specifier 
Return:  
ES:BP = specified pointer 
CX = bytes/character of on-screen font  
DL = highest character row on screen 
INT 10 - TEXT-MODE CHARGEN 
AX = 1110h 
ES:BP -> user table 
CX = count of patterns to store 
DX = character offset into map 2 block 
BL = block to load in map 2 
BH = number of bytes per character pattern 
 
We will use 6 as the pointer specifier which means the 8x16 font stored in 
ROM. 
 
 Example 12.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
; put underlines on screen font 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
font:         times 256*16 db 0       ; space for font 
 
start:        mov  ax, 0x1130         ; service 11/30 – get font info 
              mov  bx, 0x0600         ; ROM 8x16 font 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
              mov  si, bp             ; point si to rom font data 
              mov  di, font           ; point di to space for font 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
143
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
              mov  cx, 256*16         ; font size  
              push ds                  
              push es                  
              pop  ds                 ; ds:si to rom font data 
              pop  es                 ; es:di to space for font 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
              rep  movsb              ; copy font 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; restore ds to data segment 
 
              mov  si, font-1         ; point si before first char 
              mov  cx, 0x100          ; total 256 characters 
change:       add  si, 16             ; one character has 16 bytes 
              mov  byte [si], 0xFF    ; change last line to all ones 
              loop change             ; repeat for each character 
 
              mov  bp, font           ; es:bp points to new font 
              mov  bx, 0x1000         ; bytes per char & block number 
              mov  cx, 0x100          ; number of characters to change 
              xor  dx, dx             ; first character to change 
              mov  ax, 0x1110         ; service 11/10 – load user font 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
              mov ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int 0x21 
 
Our second example is similar to the last example however in this case we 
are doing something funny on the screen. We are reversing the shapes of all 
the characters on the screen. 
 
 Example 12.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
; reverse each character of screen font 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
font:         times 256*16 db 0       ; space for font 
 
start:        mov  ax, 0x1130         ; service 11/30 – get font info 
              mov  bx, 0x0600         ; ROM 8x16 font 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
              mov  si, bp             ; point si to rom font data 
              mov  di, font           ; point di to space for font 
              mov  cx, 256*16         ; font size  
              push ds                  
              push es                  
              pop  ds                 ; ds:si to rom font data 
              pop  es                 ; es:di to space for font 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
              rep  movsb              ; copy font 
 
              push cs 
              pop  ds                 ; restore ds to data segment 
 
              mov si, font            ; point si to start of font 
change:       mov al, [si]            ; read one byte 
              mov cx, 8                
inner:        shl al, 1               ; shift left with MSB in carry 
              rcr bl, 1               ; rotate right using carry 
              loop inner              ; repeat eight times 
              mov [si], bl            ; write back reversed byte 
              inc si                  ; next byte of font 
              cmp si, font+256*16     ; is whole font reversed 
              jne change              ; no, reverse next byte 
 
              mov  bp, font           ; es:bp points to new font 
              mov  bx, 0x1000         ; bytes per char & block number 
              mov  cx, 0x100          ; number of characters to change 
              xor  dx, dx             ; first character to change 
              mov  ax, 0x1110         ; service 11/10 – load user font 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
144
042 
043 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
Graphics Mode Services 
We will take an example of using graphics mode video services as well. We 
will draw a line across the screen using the following service. 
 
INT 10 - VIDEO - WRITE GRAPHICS PIXEL 
AH = 0Ch 
BH = page number 
AL = pixel color 
CX = column 
DX = row 
 
 Example 12.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
; draw line in graphics mode 
[org 0x0100] 
              mov  ax, 0x000D         ; set 320x200 graphics mode 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x0C07         ; put pixel in white color 
              xor  bx, bx             ; page number 0 
              mov  cx, 200            ; x position 200 
              mov  dx, 200            ; y position 200 
 
l1:           int  0x10               ; bios video services 
              dec  dx                 ; decrease y position 
              loop l1                 ; decrease x position and repeat 
 
              mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – get keystroke 
              int  0x16               ; bios keyboard services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x0003         ; 80x25 text mode 
              int  0x10               ; bios video services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
12.2. DOS VIDEO SERVICES 
Services of DOS are more cooked and at a higher level than BIOS. They 
provide less control but make routine tasks much easier. Some important 
DOS services are listed below. 
 
INT 21 - READ CHARACTER FROM STANDARD INPUT, WITH ECHO 
AH = 01h 
Return: AL = character read 
INT 21 - WRITE STRING TO STANDARD OUTPUT 
AH = 09h 
DS:DX -> $ terminated string 
INT 21 - BUFFERED INPUT 
AH = 0Ah 
DS:DX -> dos input buffer 
 
The DOS input buffer has a special format where the first byte stores the 
maximum characters buffer can hold, the second byte holds the number of 
characters actually read on return, and the following space is used for the 
actual characters read. We start will an example of reading a string with 
service 1 and displaying it with service 9. 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
145
 Example 12.4 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
; character input using dos services 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp start 
 
maxlength:    dw   80                 ; maximum length of input 
message:      db   10, 13, 'hello $'  ; greetings message 
buffer:       times 81 db 0           ; space for input string 
 
start:        mov  cx, [maxlength]    ; load maximum length in cx 
              mov  si, buffer         ; point si to start of buffer 
 
nextchar:     mov  ah, 1              ; service 1 – read character 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              cmp  al, 13             ; is enter pressed 
              je   exit               ; yes, leave input 
              mov  [si], al           ; no, save this character 
              inc  si                 ; increment buffer pointer 
              loop nextchar           ; repeat for next input char 
 
exit:         mov  byte [si], '$'     ; append $ to user input 
 
              mov  dx, message        ; greetings message 
              mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – write string 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  dx, buffer         ; user input buffer 
              mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – write string 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
Our next example uses the more cooked buffered input service of DOS and 
using the same service 9 to print the string. 
 
 Example 12.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
; buffer input using dos services 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
message:      db   10,13,'hello ', 10, 13, '$' 
buffer:       db   80                 ; length of buffer 
              db   0                  ; number of character on return 
              times 80 db 0           ; actual buffer space 
 
start:        mov  dx, buffer         ; input buffer 
              mov  ah, 0x0A           ; service A – buffered input 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  bh, 0               
              mov  bl, [buffer+1]     ; read actual size in bx 
              mov  byte [buffer+2+bx], '$' ; append $ to user input 
 
              mov  dx, message        ; greetings message 
              mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – write string 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  dx, buffer+2       ; user input buffer 
              mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – write string 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
More detail of DOS and BIOS interru pts is available in the Ralf Brown 
Interrupt List. 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
13 
Secondary Storage 
13.1. PHYSICAL FORMATION 
A floppy disk is a circular plate with a fine coating of magnetic material 
over it. The plate is enclosed in a plastic jacket which has a cover that can 
slide to expose the magnetic surface. The drive motor attaches itself to the 
central piece and rotates the plate. Two heads on both sides can read the 
magnetically encoded data on the disk.  
If the head is fixed and the motor rotates the disk the readable area on the 
disk surface forms a circle called a track. Head moved to the next step forms 
another track and so on. In hard disks the same structure is extended to a 
larger number of tracks and plates. The tracks are further cut vertically into 
sectors. This is a logical division of th e area on the tracks. Each sector holds 
512 bytes of data. A standard floppy disk has 80 tracks and 18 sectors per 
track with two heads, one on each side totallying to 2880 sectors or 1440 KB 
of data. Hard disks have varying number of heads and tracks pertaining to 
their different capacities. 
 
 
 
BIOS sees the disks as a combination of  sectors, tracks, and heads, as a 
raw storage device without concern to whether it is reading a file or directory. 
BIOS provides the simplest and most  powerful interface to the storage 
medium. However this raw storage is meaningless to the user who needs to 
store his files and organize them into directories. DOS builds a logical 
structure on this raw storage space to provide these abstractions. This 
logical formation is read and interpreted by DOS. If another file system is 
build on the same storage medium the interpretations change. Main units of 
the DOS structure are the boot sector in head 0, track 0, and sector 1, the 
first FAT starting from head 0, track 0, sector 2, the second copy of FAT 
starting from head 0, track 0, sector 11, and the root directory starting from 
head 1, track 0, sector 2. The area from head 0, track 1, sector 16 to head 1, 
track 79, sector 18 is used for storing the data of the files. Among this we will 
be exploring the directory structure furt her. The 32 sectors reserved for the 
root directory contain 512 directory entries. The format of a 32 byte directory 
entry is shown below. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
148
+00 Filename (8 bytes) 
+08 Extension (3 bytes) 
+0B Flag Byte (1 byte) 
+0C Reserved (1 byte) 
+0D Creation Date/Time (5 bytes) 
+12 Last Accessed Data (2 bytes) 
+14 Starting Cluster High Word (2 bytes) for FAT32 
+16 Time (2 bytes) 
+18 Date (2 bytes) 
+1A Starting Cluster Low Word (2 bytes) 
+1C File Size (4 bytes) 
13.2. STORAGE ACCESS USING BIOS 
We will be using BIOS disk services to directly see the data stored in the 
directory entries by DOS. For this purpose we will be using the BIOS disk 
services.  
 
INT 13 - DISK - RESET DISK SYSTEM 
AH = 00h 
DL = drive  
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
INT 13 - DISK - READ SECTOR(S) INTO MEMORY 
AH = 02h 
AL = number of sectors to read (must be nonzero) 
CH = low eight bits of cylinder number 
CL = sector number 1-63 (bits 0-5) 
     high two bits of cylinder (bits 6-7, hard disk only) 
DH = head number 
DL = drive number (bit 7 set for hard disk) 
ES:BX -> data buffer 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
AL = number of sectors transferred  
INT 13 - DISK - WRITE DISK SECTOR(S) 
AH = 03h 
AL = number of sectors to write (must be nonzero) 
CH = low eight bits of cylinder number 
CL = sector number 1-63 (bits 0-5) 
     high two bits of cylinder (bits 6-7, hard disk only) 
DH = head number 
DL = drive number (bit 7 set for hard disk) 
ES:BX -> data buffer 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
AL = number of sectors transferred 
INT 13 - DISK - GET DRIVE PARAMETERS 
AH = 08h 
DL = drive (bit 7 set for hard disk) 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
CH = low eight bits of maximum cylinder number 
CL = maximum sector number (bits 5-0) 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
149
     high two bits of maximum cylinder number (bits 7-6) 
DH = maximum head number 
DL = number of drives 
ES:DI -> drive parameter table (floppies only) 
 
 
 Example 13.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
; floppy directory using bios services 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
sector:       times 512 db 0          ; space for directory sector 
entryname:    times 11 db 0           ; space for a file name 
              db   10, 13, '$'        ; new line and terminating $ 
 
start:        mov  ah, 0              ; service 0 – reset disk system 
              mov  dl, 0              ; drive A: 
              int  0x13               ; bios disk services 
              jc   error              ; if error, terminate program 
 
              mov  ah, 2              ; service 2 – read sectors 
              mov  al, 1              ; count of sectors  
              mov  ch, 0              ; cyliner 
              mov  cl, 2              ; sector 
              mov  dh, 1              ; head 
              mov  dl, 0              ; drive A: 
              mov  bx, sector         ; buffer to read sector 
              int  0x13               ; bios disk services 
              jc   error              ; if error, terminate program 
 
              mov  bx, 0              ; start from first entry 
nextentry:    mov  di, entryname      ; point di to space for filename 
              mov  si, sector         ; point si to sector 
              add  si, bx             ; move ahead to desired entry 
              mov  cx, 11             ; one filename is 11 bytes long 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
              rep  movsb              ; copy filename 
 
              mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – output string 
              mov  dx, entryname      ; filename to be printed 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              add  bx, 32             ; point to next dir entry 
              cmp  bx, 512            ; is last entry in this sector  
              jne  nextentry          ; no, print next entry 
 
error:        mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
With the given services and the bits  allocated for heads, tracks, and 
sectors only 8GB disks can be accessed. This limitation can be overcome by 
using INT 13 extensions that take a linear 64bit sector number and handle 
all the head, track, sector conversion themselves. The important services in 
this category are listed below. 
 
INT 13 - INT 13 Extensions - EXTENDED READ 
AH = 42h 
DL = drive number 
DS:SI -> disk address packet 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
     disk address packet's block count field set to number of blocks 
     successfully transferred 
INT 13 - INT 13 Extensions - EXTENDED WRITE 
AH = 43h 
AL = write flags 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
150
DL = drive number 
DS:SI -> disk address packet  
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AH = error code 
     disk address packet's block count field set to number of blocks 
     successfully transferred 
 
The format of the disk address packet used above is as follows. 
 
Offset Size Description  
 00h BYTE size of packet = 10h 
 01h BYTE reserved (0) 
 02h WORD number of blocks to transfer 
 04h DWORD -> transfer buffer 
 08h QWORD starting absolute block number 
 
Hard disks have a different formation from floppy disks in that there is a 
partition table at the start that allows several logical disks to be maintained 
within a single physical disk. The phys ical sector 0 holds the master boot 
record and a partition table towards the end. The first 446 bytes contain 
MBR, then there are 4 16 byte partition entries and then there is a 2 byte 
signature. A partition table entry has the following format. 
 
Byte 0 – 0x80 for active 0x00 for inactive 
Byte 1-3 – Starting CHS 
Byte 4 – Partition Type 
Byte 5-7 – Ending CHS 
Byte 8-B – Starting LBA 
Byte C-F – Size of Partition 
 
Some important partition types are listed below. 
 
00 Unused Entry 
01 FAT12 
05 Extended Partition 
06 FAT16 
0b FAT32 
0c FAT32 LBA 
0e FAT16 LBA 
0f Extended LBA 
07 NTFS 
 
Extended partition type signals that the specified area is treated as a 
complete hard disk with its own part ition table and partitions. Therefore 
extended partitions allow a recursion in partitioning and consequently an 
infinite number of partitions are possible. The following program reads the 
partition tables (primary and extended) using recursion and displays in an 
indented form all partitions present on the first hard disk in the system. 
 
 Example 13.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
; a program to display the partition table 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start           
                                   
dap:          db   0x10, 0        ; disk address packet 
              dw   1 
              dd   0, 0, 0 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
151
008 
009-026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
 
msg:          times 17 db ' ' 
              db   10, 13, '$' 
fat12:        db   'FAT12...$' 
fat16:        db   'FAT16...$' 
fat32:        db   'FAT32...$' 
ntfs:         db   'NTFS....$' 
extended:     db   'EXTEND..$' 
unknown:      db   'UNKNOWN.$' 
 
partypes:     dw   0x1, fat12     ; table of known partition types 
              dw   0x5, extended 
              dw   0x6, fat16 
              dw   0xe, fat16 
              dw   0xb, fat32 
              dw   0xc, fat32 
              dw   0x7, ntfs 
              dw   0xf, extended 
              dw   0x0, unknown 
 
; subroutine to print a number in a string as hex 
; takes address of string and a 16bit number as parameter 
printnum:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push di 
 
              mov  di, [bp+6]          ; string to store the number 
              add  di, 3 
 
              mov  ax, [bp+4]          ; load number in ax 
              mov  bx, 16              ; use base 16 for division 
              mov  cx, 4 
 
nextdigit:    mov  dx, 0 
              div  bx                  ; divide by 16 
              add  dl, 0x30            ; convert into ascii value 
              cmp  dl, 0x39 
              jbe  skipalpha 
 
              add  dl, 7 
 
skipalpha:    mov  [di], dl            ; update char in string 
              dec  di 
              loop nextdigit 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  dx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  bp 
              ret  4 
 
; subroutine to print the start and end of a partition 
; takes the segment and offset of the partition table entry 
printpart:    push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push es 
              push ax 
              push di 
 
              les  di, [bp+4]          ; point es:di to dap 
 
              mov  ax, msg 
              push ax 
              push word [es:di+0xA] 
              call printnum            ; print first half of start 
 
              add  ax, 4 
              push ax 
              push word [es:di+0x8] 
              call printnum            ; print second half of start 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
152
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
156 
157 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
163 
164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 
170 
171 
172 
173 
174 
175 
176 
177 
 
              add  ax, 5 
              push ax 
              push word [es:di+0xE] 
              call printnum            ; print first half of end 
 
              add  ax, 4 
              push ax 
              push word [es:di+0xC] 
              call printnum            ; print second half of end 
 
              mov  dx, msg 
              mov  ah, 9 
              int  0x21                ; print the whole on the screen 
 
              pop  di 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              pop  bp 
              ret  4 
 
; recursive subroutine to read the partition table 
; take indentation level and 32bit absolute block number as parameters 
readpart:     push bp 
              mov  bp, sp 
              sub  sp, 512             ; local space to read sector 
              push ax 
              push bx 
              push cx 
              push dx 
              push si 
 
              mov  ax, bp 
              sub  ax, 512 
              mov  word [dap+4], ax    ; init dest offset in dap 
              mov  [dap+6], ds         ; init dest segment in dap 
              mov  ax, [bp+4] 
              mov  [dap+0x8], ax       ; init sector no in dap 
              mov  ax, [bp+6] 
              mov  [dap+0xA], ax       ; init second half of sector no 
 
              mov  ah, 0x42            ; read sector in LBA mode 
              mov  dl, 0x80            ; first hard disk 
              mov  si, dap             ; address of dap 
              int  0x13                ; int 13 
 
              jc   failed              ; if failed, leave 
 
              mov  si, -66             ; start of partition info 
nextpart:     mov  ax, [bp+4]          ; read relative sector number 
              add  [bp+si+0x8], ax     ; make it absolute 
              mov  ax, [bp+6]          ; read second half  
              adc  [bp+si+0xA], ax     ; make seconf half absolute 
 
              cmp  byte [bp+si+4], 0   ; is partition unused 
              je   exit 
 
              mov  bx, partypes        ; point to partition types 
              mov  di, 0 
nextmatch:    mov  ax, [bx+di]          
              cmp  [bp+si+4], al       ; is this partition known 
              je   found               ; yes, so print its name 
              add  di, 4               ; no, try next entry in table 
              cmp  di, 32              ; are all entries compared 
              jne  nextmatch           ; no, try another 
 
found:        mov  cx, [bp+8]          ; load indentation level 
              jcxz noindent            ; skip if no indentation needed 
indent:       mov  dl, ' ' 
              mov  ah, 2               ; display char service 
              int  0x21                ; dos services 
              loop indent              ; print required no of spaces 
 
noindent:     add  di, 2 
              mov  dx, [bx+di]         ; point to partition type name 
              mov  ah, 9               ; print string service 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
153
178 
179 
180 
181 
182 
183 
184 
185 
186 
187 
188 
189 
190 
191 
192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
              int  0x21                ; dos services 
 
              push ss 
              mov  ax, bp 
              add  ax, si 
              push ax                  ; pass partition entry address 
              call printpart           ; print start and end from it 
 
              cmp  byte [bp+si+4], 5   ; is it an extended partition 
              je   recurse             ; yes, make a recursive call 
 
              cmp  byte [bp+si+4], 0xf ; is it an extended partition 
              jne  exit                ; yes, make a recursive call 
 
recurse:      mov  ax, [bp+8] 
              add  ax, 2               ; increase indentation level 
              push ax 
              push word [bp+si+0xA]    ; push partition type address 
              push word [bp+si+0x8] 
              call readpart            ; recursive call 
 
exit:         add  si, 16              ; point to next partition entry 
              cmp  si, -2              ; gone past last entry 
              jne  nextpart            ; no, read this entry 
 
failed:       pop  si 
              pop  dx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              mov  sp, bp 
              pop  bp 
              ret  6 
 
start:        xor  ax, ax 
              push ax                  ; start from zero indentation 
              push ax                  ; main partition table at 0 
              push ax 
              call readpart            ; read and print it 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00          ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
13.3. STORAGE ACCESS USING DOS 
BIOS provides raw access to the storage medium while DOS gives a more 
logical view and more cooked services. Everything is a file. A directory is a 
specially organized file that is interpreted by the operating system itself. A 
list of important DOS services for file manipulation is given below. 
 
INT 21 - CREATE OR TRUNCATE FILE 
AH = 3Ch 
CX = file attributes 
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = file handle or error code 
INT 21 - OPEN EXISTING FILE 
AH = 3Dh 
AL = access and sharing modes  
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename 
CL = attribute mask of files to look for (server call only) 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = file handle or error code 
INT 21 - CLOSE FILE 
AH = 3Eh 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
154
BX = file handle 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code  
INT 21 - READ FROM FILE  
AH = 3Fh 
BX = file handle 
CX = number of bytes to read 
DS:DX -> buffer for data 
Return:  
CF = error flag  
AX = number of bytes actually read or error code 
INT 21 - WRITE TO FILE  
AH = 40h 
BX = file handle 
CX = number of bytes to write 
DS:DX -> data to write 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = number of bytes actually written or error code 
INT 21 - DELETE FILE 
AH = 41h 
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename (no wildcards, but see notes) 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code 
INT 21 - SET CURRENT FILE POSITION 
AH = 42h 
AL = origin of move 
BX = file handle 
CX:DX = offset from origin of new file position 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
DX:AX = new file position in bytes from start of file 
AX = error code in case of error 
INT 21 - GET FILE ATTRIBUTES 
AX = 4300h 
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
CX = file attributes  
AX = error code 
INT 21 - SET FILE ATTRIBUTES 
AX = 4301h 
CX = new file attributes  
DS:DX -> ASCIZ filename 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code  
 
We will use some of these services to  find that two files are same in 
contents or different. We will read the file names from the command prompt. 
The command string is passed to the program in the program segment prefix 
located at offset 0 in the current segment. The area from 0-7F contains 
information for DOS, while the command tail length is stored at 80. From 81 
to FF, the actual command tail is stored terminated by a CR (Carriage 
Retrun). 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
155
 Example 13.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
; file comparison using dos services 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
filename1:    times 128 db 0          ; space for first filename 
filename2:    times 128 db 0          ; space for second filename 
handle1:      dw   0                  ; handle for first file 
handle2:      dw   0                  ; handle for second file 
buffer1:      times 4096 db 0         ; buffer for first file 
buffer2:      times 4096 db 0         ; buffer for second file 
 
format:       db   'Usage error: diff <filename1> <filename2>$' 
openfailed:   db   'First file could not be opened$' 
openfailed2:  db   'Second file could not be opened$' 
readfailed:   db   'First file could not be read$' 
readfailed2:  db   'Second file could not be read$' 
different:    db   'Files are different$' 
same:         db   'Files are same$' 
 
start:        mov  ch, 0               
              mov  cl, [0x80]         ; command tail length in cx 
              dec  cx                 ; leave the first space 
              mov  di, 0x82           ; start of command tail in di 
              mov  al, 0x20           ; space for parameter separation 
              cld                     ; auto increment mode 
              repne scasb             ; search space 
              je   param2             ; if found, proceed 
              mov  dx, format         ; else, select error message 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to error printing 
 
param2:       push cx                 ; save original cx 
              mov  si, 0x82           ; set si to start of param 
              mov  cx, di             ; set di to end of param 
              sub  cx, 0x82           ; find param size in cx 
              dec  cx                 ; excluding the space 
              mov  di, filename1      ; set di to space for filename 1 
              rep  movsb              ; copy filename there 
              mov  byte [di], 0       ; terminate filename with 0 
              pop  cx                 ; restore original cx  
              inc  si                 ; go to start of next filename 
              mov  di, filename2      ; set di to space for filename 2 
              rep  movsb              ; copy filename there 
              mov  byte [di], 0       ; terminate filename with 0 
 
              mov  ah, 0x3d           ; service 3d – open file 
              mov  al, 0              ; readonly mode 
              mov  dx, filename1      ; address of filename 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
              jnc  open2              ; if no error, proceed 
              mov  dx, openfailed     ; else, select error message 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to error printing 
 
open2:        mov [handle1], ax       ; save handle for first file 
              mov  ah, 0x3d           ; service 3d – open file 
              mov  al, 0              ; readonly mode 
              mov  dx, filename2      ; address of filename 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
              jnc  store2             ; if no error, proceed 
              mov  dx, openfailed2    ; else, select error message 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to error printing 
 
store2:       mov  [handle2], ax      ; save handle for second file 
 
readloop:     mov  ah, 0x3f           ; service 3f – read file 
              mov  bx, [handle1]      ; handle for file to read 
              mov  cx, 4096           ; number of bytes to read 
              mov  dx, buffer1        ; buffer to read in 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
              jnc  read2              ; if no error, proceed 
              mov  dx, readfailed     ; else, select error message 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to error printing 
 
read2:        push ax                 ; save number of bytes read 
              mov  ah, 0x3f           ; service 3f – read file 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
156
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
              mov  bx, [handle2]      ; handle for file to read 
              mov  cx, 4096           ; number of bytes to read 
              mov  dx, buffer2        ; buffer to read in 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
              jnc  check              ; if no error, proceed 
              mov  dx, readfailed2    ; else, select error message 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to error printing 
 
check:        pop  cx                 ; number of bytes read of file 1 
              cmp  ax, cx             ; are number of byte same 
              je   check2             ; yes, proceed to compare them 
              mov  dx, different      ; no, files are different 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to message printing 
 
check2:       test ax, ax             ; are zero bytes read 
              jnz  compare            ; no, compare them 
              mov  dx, same           ; yes, files are same 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to message printing 
 
compare:      mov  si, buffer1        ; point si to file 1 buffer 
              mov  di, buffer2        ; point di to file 2 buffer  
              repe cmpsb              ; compare the two buffers 
              je   check3             ; if equal, proceed 
              mov  dx, different      ; else, files are different 
              jmp  error              ; proceed to message printing 
 
check3:       cmp  ax, 4096           ; were 4096 bytes read 
              je   readloop           ; yes, try to read more 
              mov  dx, same           ; no, files are same 
 
error:        mov  ah, 9              ; service 9 – output message 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ah, 0x3e           ; service 3e – close file 
              mov  bx, [handle1]      ; handle of file to close 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ah, 0x3e           ; service 3e – close file 
              mov  bx, [handle2]      ; handle of file to close 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4c00         ; terminate program 
              int  0x21 
 
Another interesting service that DOS pr ovides regarding files is executing 
them. An important point to understand here is that whenever a program is 
executed in DOS all available memory is allocated to it. No memory is 
available to execute any new programs . Therefore memory must be freed 
using explicit calls to DOS for this purpose before a program is executed. 
Important services in this regard are listed below. 
 
INT 21 - ALLOCATE MEMORY 
AH = 48h 
BX = number of paragraphs to allocate 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = segment of allocated block or error code in case of error 
BX = size of largest available block in case of error 
INT 21 - FREE MEMORY 
AH = 49h 
ES = segment of block to free 
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code 
INT 21 - RESIZE MEMORY BLOCK 
AH = 4Ah 
BX = new size in paragraphs 
ES = segment of block to resize 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
157
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code 
BX = maximum paragraphs available for specified memory block 
INT 21 - LOAD AND/OR EXECUTE PROGRAM 
AH = 4Bh 
AL = type of load (0 = load and execute) 
DS:DX -> ASCIZ program name (must include extension) 
ES:BX -> parameter block  
Return:  
CF = error flag 
AX = error code 
 
The format of parameter block is as follows. 
 
Offset Size Description  
 00h WORD segment of environment to copy for child process  
(copy caller's environment if 0000h) 
 02h DWORD pointer to command tail to be copied into child's PSP 
 06h DWORD pointer to first FCB to be copied into child's PSP 
 0Ah DWORD pointer to second FCB to be copied into child's PSP 
 0Eh DWORD (AL=01h) will hold subprogram's initial SS:SP on return 
 12h DWORD (AL=01h) will hold entry point (CS:IP) on return 
 
As an example we will use the multitasking kernel client from the 
multitasking chapter and modify it such that after running all three threads 
it executes a new instance of the comm and prompt instead of indefinitely 
hanging around. 
 
 Example 13.4 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019-062 
063-104 
104-127 
128-146 
147-192 
193 
194 
195 
196 
197 
198 
199 
200 
201 
202 
203 
204 
; another multitasking TSR caller 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
; parameter block layout: 
; cs,ip,ds,es,param 
;  0, 2, 4, 6,  8 
 
paramblock:   times 5 dw 0            ; space for parameters  
lineno:       dw   0                  ; line number for next thread 
chars:        db '\|/-'               ; chracters for rotating bar 
message:      db 'moving hello'       ; moving string 
message2:     db '            '       ; to erase previous string 
messagelen:   dw 12                   ; length of above strings 
tail:         db ' ',13 
command:      db 'COMMAND.COM', 0 
execblock:    times 11 dw 0 
 
;;;;; COPY LINES 028-071 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printnum) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 073-114 FROM EXAMPLE 10.1 (printstr) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 103-126 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 128-146 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask2) ;;;;; 
;;;;; COPY LINES 148-193 FROM EXAMPLE 11.5 (mytask3) ;;;;; 
 
start:        mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
               
              mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask2 ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
158
205 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 
213 
214 
215 
216 
217 
218 
219 
220 
221 
222 
223 
224 
225 
226 
227 
228 
229 
230 
231 
232 
233 
234 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
 
              mov  [paramblock+0], cs ; code segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+2], mytask3 ; offset parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+4], ds ; data segment parameter 
              mov  [paramblock+6], es ; extra segment parameter 
              mov  word [paramblock+8], 0 ; parameter for thread 
              mov  si, paramblock     ; address of param block in si 
              int  0x80               ; multitasking kernel interrupt 
 
              mov  ah, 0x4a           ; service 4a – resize memory 
              mov  bx, end            ; end of memory retained 
              add  bx, 15             ; rounding up 
              mov  cl, 4 
              shr  bx, cl             ; converting into paras 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              mov  ah, 0x4b           ; service 4b - exec 
              mov  al, 0              ; load and execute 
              mov  dx, command        ; command to be executed 
              mov  bx, execblock      ; address of execblock 
              mov  word [bx+2], tail  ; offset of command tail 
              mov  [bx+4], ds         ; segment of command tail 
              int  0x21               ; dos services 
 
              jmp $                   ; loop infinitely if returned 
end: 
 
13.4. DEVICE DRIVERS 
Device drivers are operating system ex tensions that become part of the 
operating system and extend its services to new devices. Device drivers in 
DOS are very simple. They just have their services exposed through the file 
system interface.  
Device driver file starts with a header containing a link to the next driver in 
the first four bytes followed by a device attribute word. The most important 
bit in the device attribute word is bit 15 which dictates if it is a character 
device or a block device. If the bit is zero the device is a character device and 
otherwise a block device. Next word in the header is the offset of a strategy 
routine, and then is the offset of the interrupt routine and then in one byte, 
the number of units supported is stor ed. This information is padded with 
seven zeroes. 
Strategy routine is called whenever the device is needed and it is passed a 
request header. Request header stores the unit requested, the command 
code, space for return value and buffer pointers etc. Important command 
codes include 0 to initialize, 1 to check media, 2 to build a BIOS parameter 
block, 4 and 8 for read and write respectively. For every command the first 
13 bytes of request header are same.  
 
RH+0 BYTE  Length of request header 
RH+1 BYTE  Unit requested 
RH+2 BYTE  Command code 
RH+3 BYTE  Driver’s return code 
RH+5 9 BYTES Reserved 
 
The request header details for different commands is listed below. 
 
0 – Driver Initialization 
Passed to driver 
RH+18 DWORD Pointer to character after equal sign on CONFIG.SYS line 
that loaded driver (read-only) 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
159
RH+22 BYTE Drive number for first unit of this block driver 
(0=A...)  
Return from driver 
RH+13 BYTE Number of units (block devices only) 
RH+14 DWORD  Address of first free memory above driver (break 
address) 
RH+18 DWORD BPB pointer array (block devices only) 
1 – Media Check 
RH+13 BYTE Media descriptor byte 
Return 
RH+14 BYTE Media change code 
   -1 if disk changed 
   0 if dont know whether disk changed 
   1 if disk not changed 
RH+15 DWORD pointer to previous volume label if device attrib bit 
11=1 (open/close/removable media supported) 
2 – Build BPB 
RH+13 BYTE Media descriptor byte 
RH+14 DWORD  buffer address (one sector) 
Return  
RH+18 DWORD pointer to new BPB 
if bit 13 (ibm format) is set buffer is first sector of fat, otherwise 
scrach space 
4 – Read / 8 – Write / 9 – Write with verify 
RH+13 BYTE  Media descriptor byte 
RH+14 DWORD  transfer address 
RH+18 WORD byte or sector count 
RH+20 WORD starting sector number (for block devices) 
Return 
RH+18 WORD actual byte or sectors transferred 
RH+22 DWORD pointer to volume label if error 0Fh is returned 
 
The BIOS parameter block discussed above is a structure that provides 
parameters about the storage medium. It is stored in the first sector or the 
boot sector of the device. Its contents are listed below.  
 
00-01 bytes per sector 
02 sectors per allocation unit 
03-04 Number of reserved sectors ( 0 based) 
05 number of file allocation tables 
06-07 max number of root directory entries 
08-09 total number of sectors in medium 
0A media descriptor byte 
0B-0C number of sectors occupied by a single FAT 
0D-0E sectors per track (3.0 or later) 
0F-10 number of heads (3.0 or later) 
11-12 number of hidden sectors (3.0 or later) 
13-14 high-order word of number of hidden sectors (4.0) 
15-18 IF bytes 8-9 are zero, total number of sectors in medium 
19-1E Reserved should be zero 
 
We will be building an example device driver that takes some RAM and 
expresses it as a secondary storage devi ce to the operating system. Therefore 
a new drive is added and that can be browsed to, filed copied to and from 
just like ordinary drives expect that this drive is very fast as it is located in 
the RAM. This program cannot be directly executed since it is not a user 
program. This must be loaded by adding the line “device=filename.sys” in the 
“config.sys” file in the root directory.  
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
160
 Example 13.5 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
; ram disk dos block device driver 
header:     dd   -1                  ; no next driver 
            dw   0x2000              ; driver attributes: block device 
            dw   strategy            ; offset of strategy routine 
            dw   interrupt           ; offset of interrupt routine 
            db   1                   ; no of units supported 
            times 7 db 0             ; reserved 
 
request:    dd   0                   ; space for request header 
 
ramdisk:    times 11 db 0            ; initial part of boot sector 
bpb:        dw   512                 ; bytes per sector 
            db   1                   ; sectors per cluster 
            dw   1                   ; reserved sectors 
            db   1                   ; fat copies 
            dw   48                  ; root dir entries 
            dw   105                 ; total sectors 
            db   0xf8                ; media desc byte: fixed disk 
            dw   1                   ; sectors per fat 
            times 482 db 0           ; remaining part of boot sector 
            db   0xfe, 0xff, 0xff    ; special bytes at start of FAT 
            times 509 db 0           ; remaining FAT entries unused 
            times 103*512 db 0       ; 103 sectors for data 
bpbptr:     dw   bpb                 ; array of bpb pointers 
 
dispatch:   dw   init                ; command 0: init 
            dw   mediacheck          ; command 1: media check 
            dw   getbpb              ; command 2: get bpb 
            dw   unknown             ; command 3: not handled 
            dw   input               ; command 4: input 
            dw   unknown             ; command 5: not handled 
            dw   unknown             ; command 6: not handled 
            dw   unknown             ; command 7: not handled 
            dw   output              ; command 8: output 
            dw   output              ; command 9: output with verify 
 
; device driver strategy routine 
strategy:   mov  [cs:request], bx    ; save request header offset 
            mov  [cs:request+2], es  ; save request header segment 
            retf 
 
; device driver interrupt routine 
interrupt:  push ax 
            push bx 
            push cx 
            push dx 
            push si 
            push di 
            push ds 
            push es 
 
            push cs 
            pop  ds 
 
            les  di, [request] 
            mov  word [es:di+3], 0x0100 
            mov  bl, [es:di+2] 
            mov  bh, 0 
            cmp  bx, 9 
            ja   skip 
            shl  bx, 1 
 
            call [dispatch+bx] 
 
skip:       pop  es 
            pop  ds 
            pop  di 
            pop  si 
            pop  dx 
            pop  cx 
            pop  bx 
            pop  ax 
            retf 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
161
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
122 
123 
mediacheck: mov  byte [es:di+14], 1 
            ret 
 
getbpb:     mov  word [es:di+18], bpb 
            mov  [es:di+20], ds 
            ret 
 
input:      mov  ax, 512 
            mul  word [es:di+18] 
            mov  cx, ax 
 
            mov  ax, 512 
            mul  word [es:di+20] 
            mov  si, ax 
            add  si, ramdisk 
 
            les  di, [es:di+14] 
            cld 
            rep  movsb 
            ret 
 
output:     mov  ax, 512 
            mul  word [es:di+18] 
            mov  cx, ax 
 
            lds  si, [es:di+14] 
            mov  ax, 512 
            mul  word [es:di+20] 
            mov  di, ax 
            add  di, ramdisk 
 
            push cs 
            pop  es 
            cld 
            rep  movsb 
unknown:    ret 
 
init:       mov  ah, 9 
            mov  dx, message 
            int  0x21 
 
            mov  byte [es:di+13], 1 
            mov  word [es:di+14], init 
            mov  [es:di+16], ds 
            mov  word [es:di+18], bpbptr 
            mov  [es:di+20], ds 
            ret 
 
message:    db   13, 10, 'RAM Disk Driver loaded',13,10,'$' 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
14 
Serial Port Programming 
14.1. INTRODUCTION 
Serial port is a way of communicat ion among two devices just like the 
parallel port. The basic difference is that whole bytes are sent from one place 
to another in case of parallel port while the bits are sent one by one on the 
serial port in a specially formatted fash ion. The serial port connection is a 
9pin DB-9 connector with pins assigned as shown below. 
 
We have made a wire that connects signal ground of the two connectors, 
the TD of one to the RD of the other and the RD of one to the TD of the other. 
This three wire connection is sufficien t for full duplex serial communication. 
T h e  d a t a  o n  t h e  s e r i a l  p o r t  i s  s e n t  i n  a  s t a n d a r d  f o r m a t  c a l l e d  R S 2 3 2  
communication. The data starts with a 1 bit called the start bit, then five to 
eight data bits, an optional parity bit, and one to two 0 bits called stop bits. 
The number of data bits, parity bits, and the number of stop bits have to be 
configured at both ends. Also the duration of a bit must be precisely known 
at both ends called the baud rate of the communication. 
The BIOS INT 14 provides serial port services. We will use a mix of BIOS 
services and direct port access for our example. A major limitation in using 
BIOS is that it does not allows interru pt driven data transfer, i.e. we are 
interrupted whenever a byte is ready to be read or a byte can be transferred 
since the previous transmission has completed. To achieve this we have to 
resort to direct port access. Important BIOS services regarding the serial port 
are discussed below. 
 
INT 14 - SERIAL - INITIALIZE PORT 
AH = 00h 
AL = port parameters 
DX = port number (00h-03h)  
Return:  
AH = line status 
AL = modem status 
 
Every bit of line status conveys different information. From most 
significant to least significant, the me anings are timeout, transmitter shift 
register empty, transmitter holding register empty, break detect, receiver 
ready, overrun, parity error, and framing error. Modem status is not used in 
direct serial communication. The port parameters in AL consist of the baud 
1 – Carrier Detect 
(CD) 
2 – Received Data 
(RD) 
3 – Transmitted 
Data (TD) 
4 – Data Terminal 
Ready 
(DTR) 
5 – Signal Ground 
6 – Data Set 
Ready 
(DSR) 
7 – Request to 
Send (RTS) 
8 – Clear to Send 
(CTS) 
9 – Ring Indicator 
(RI) 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
164
rate, parity scheme, number of stop bits, and number of data bits. The 
description of various bits is as under. 
 
 
 
INT 14 - SERIAL - WRITE CHARACTER TO PORT 
AH = 01h 
AL = character to write 
DX = port number (00h-03h) 
Return:  
AH bit 7 = error flag 
AH bits 6-0 = port status 
INT 14 - SERIAL - READ CHARACTER FROM PORT 
AH = 02h 
DX = port number (00h-03h) 
Return:  
AH = line status  
AL = received character if AH bit 7 clear 
INT 14 - SERIAL - GET PORT STATUS 
AH = 03h 
DX = port number (00h-03h) 
Return:  
AH = line status 
AL = modem status  
 
Serial port is also accessible via I/O ports. COM1 is accessible via ports 
3F8-3FF while COM2 is accessible via 2F8-2FF. The first register at 3F8 (or 
2F8 for the other port) is the transmitter holding register if written to and the 
receiver buffer register if read from. Other registers of our interest include 
3F9 whose bit 0 must be set to enable received data available interrupt and 
bit 1 must be set to enable transmitter holding register empty interrupt. Bit 0 
of 3FA is set if an interrupt is pendin g and its bits 1-3 identify the cause of 
the interrupt. The three bit causes are as follows. 
 
110 (16550, 82510) timeout interrupt pending 
101 (82510) timer interrupt 
100 (82510) transmit machine 
011 receiver line status interrupt. priority=highest 
010 received data available register interrupt. priority=second 
001 transmitter holding register empty interrupt. priority=third 
000 modem status interrupt. priority=fourth 
 
The register at 3FB is line control register while the one at 3FD is line 
status register. The line status register has the same bits as returned in line 
status by the get port status BIOS interrupt however the most significant bit 
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0
baud rate 
000-110 
001-150 
010-300 
011-600 
100-1200 
101-2400 
110-4800 
111-9600 
parity
00-N 
10-N 
01-O 
11-E 
data bits 
00-5 
01-6 
10-7 
11-8 
stop bits 
0-1 
1-2 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
165
is reserved in this case instead of signaling a timeout. The register at 3FC is 
the modem control register. Bit 3 of this register must be set to enable 
interrupt generation by the serial port. 
14.2. SERIAL COMMUNICATION 
We give an example where two computers are connected using a serial 
cable made just as described above. The program is to be run on both 
computers. After that whatever is typed on one computer appears on the 
screen of the other. 
 
 Example 14.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
; a program using serial port to transfer data back and forth 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
screenpos:    dw   0              ; where to display next character 
 
; subroutine to clear the screen 
clrscr:       push es 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push di 
               
              mov  ax, 0xb800 
              mov  es, ax         ; point es to video base 
              xor  di, di         ; point di to top left column 
              mov  ax, 0x0720     ; space char in normal attribute 
              mov  cx, 2000       ; number of screen locations 
               
              cld                 ; auto increment mode 
              rep  stosw          ; clear the whole screen 
               
              pop  di 
              pop  cx 
              pop  ax 
              pop  es 
              ret 
               
serial:       push ax 
              push bx 
              push dx 
              push es 
 
              mov  dx, 0x3FA      ; interrupt identification register 
              in   al, dx         ; read register 
              and  al, 0x0F       ; leave lowerniblle only 
              cmp  al, 4          ; is receiver data available  
              jne  skipall        ; no, leave interrupt handler 
 
              mov  dx, 0x3F8      ; data register 
              in   al, dx         ; read character 
 
              mov  dx, 0xB800 
              mov  es, dx         ; point es to video memory 
              mov  bx, [cs:screenpos] ; get current screen position 
              mov  [es:bx], al    ; write character on screen 
              add  word [cs:screenpos], 2 ; update screen position 
              cmp  word [cs:screenpos], 4000 ; is the screen full 
              jne  skipall        ; no, leave interrupt handler 
 
              call clrscr         ; clear the screen 
              mov  word [cs:screenpos], 0 ; reset screen position 
 
skipall:      mov  al, 0x20        
              out  0x20, al       ; end of interrupt 
 
              pop  es 
              pop  dx 
              pop  bx 
              pop  ax 
              iret 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
166
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
 
start:        call clrscr         ; clear the screen 
 
              mov  ah, 0          ; initialize port service 
              mov  al, 0xE3       ; line settings = 9600, 8, N, 1 
              xor  dx, dx         ; port = COM1 
              int  0x14           ; BIOS serial port services 
 
              xor  ax, ax 
              mov  es, ax         ; point es to IVT base 
              mov  word [es:0x0C*4], serial 
              mov  [es:0x0C*4+2], cs ; hook serial port interrupt 
 
              mov  dx, 0x3FC      ; modem control register 
              in   al, dx         ; read register 
              or   al, 8          ; enable bit 3 (OUT2) 
              out  dx, al         ; write back to register 
 
              mov  dx, 0x3F9      ; interrupt enable register 
              in   al, dx         ; read register 
              or   al, 1          ; receiver data interrupt enable 
              out  dx, al         ; write back to register 
 
              in   al, 0x21       ; read interrupt mask register 
              and  al, 0xEF       ; enable IRQ 4 
              out  0x21, al       ; write back to register 
 
main:         mov  ah, 0          ; read key service 
              int  0x16           ; BIOS keybaord services 
              push ax             ; save key for later use 
 
retest:       mov  ah, 3          ; get line status 
              xor  dx, dx         ; port = COM1 
              int  0x14           ; BIOS keyboard services 
              and  ah, 32         ; trasmitter holding register empty 
              jz   retest         ; no, test again 
 
              pop  ax             ; load saved key 
              mov  dx, 0x3F8      ; data port 
              out  dx, al         ; send on serial port 
 
              jmp  main 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
15 
Protected Mode 
Programming 
15.1. INTRODUCTION 
Till now we have been discussing the 8088 architecture which was a 16bit 
processor. Newer processors of the Intel series provide 32bit architecture. Till 
now we were in real mode of a newer processor which is basically a 
compatibility mode making the newer proc essor just a faster version of the 
original 8088. Switching processor in the newer 32bit mode is a very easy 
task. Just turn on the least significant bit of a new register called CR0 
(Control Register 0) and the processor switches into 32bit mode called 
protected mode. However manipulations in the protected mode are very 
different from those in the read mode. 
All registers in 386 have been extended to 32bits. The new names are EAX, 
EBX, ECX, EDX, ESI, EDI, ESP, EBP, EIP, and EFLAGS. The original names 
refer to the lower 16bits of these registers. A 32bit address register can 
access upto 4GB of memory so memory access has increased a lot. 
As regards segment registers the scheme is not so simple. First of all we 
call them segment selectors instead of segment registers and they are still 
16bits wide. We are also given two other segment selectors FS and GS for no 
specific purpose just like ES.  
The working of segment registers as being multiplied by 10 and added into 
the offset for obtaining the physical address is totally changed. Now the 
selector is just an index into an array of segment descriptors where each 
descriptor describes the base, limit, and attributes of a segment. Role of 
selector is to select on descriptor from the table of descriptors and the role of 
descriptor is to define the actual base address. This decouples the selection 
and actual definition which is needed in certain protection mechanisms 
introduced into this processor. For ex ample an operating system can define 
the possible descriptors for a program and the program is bound to select 
one of them and nothing else. This sentence also hints that the processor 
has some sense of programs that can or cannot do certain things like change 
this table of descriptors. This is called the privilege level of the program and 
varies for 0 (highest privilege) to 3 (lowest privilege). The format of a selector 
is shown below. 
 
 
 
The table index (TI) is set to 0 to access the global table of descriptors 
called the GDT (Global Descriptor Table). It is set to 1 to access another 
table, the local descriptor table (LDT) that we will not be using. RPL is the 
requested privilege level that ranges from 0-3 and informs what privilege level 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
168
the program wants when using this descriptor. The 13bit index is the actual 
index into the GDT to select the approp riate descriptor. 13 bits mean that a 
maximum of 8192 descriptors are possible in the GDT. 
The GDT itself is an array of descripto rs where each descriptor is an 8byte 
entry. The base and limit of GDT is stored in a 48bit register called the 
GDTR. This register is loaded with a special instruction LGDT and is given a 
memory address from where the 48bits are fetched. The first entry of the 
GDT must always be zero. It is called the null descriptor. After that any 
number of entries upto a maximum of 8191 can follow. The format of a code 
and data descriptor is shown below.  
 
 
 
 
 
The 32bit base in both descriptors is scattered into different places 
because of compatibility reasons. The limit  is stored in 20 bits but the G bit 
defines that the limit is in terms of bytes of 4K pages therefore a maximum of 
4GB size is possible. The P bit must be set to signal that this segment is 
present in memory. DPL is the descriptor privilege level again related to the 
protection levels in 386. D bit defines th at this segment is to execute code is 
16bit mode or 32bit mode. C is conforming bit that we will not be using. R 
signals that the segment is readable. A bit is automatically set whenever the 
segment is accessed. The combination of  S (system) and X (executable) tell 
that the descriptors is a code or a data descriptor. B (big) bit tells that if this 
data segment is used as stack SP is used or ESP is used. 
Our first example is a very rudimentar y one that just goes into protected 
mode and prints an A on the screen by directly accessing 000B8000.  
 
 Example 15.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
gdt:          dd   0x00000000, 0x00000000   ; null descriptor 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00   ; 32bit code 
              ;      \--/\--/    \/||||\/ 
              ;       |   |      | ||||+--- Base (16..23)=0 fill later 
              ;       |   |      | |||+--- X=1 C=0 R=1 A=0 
              ;       |   |      | ||+--- P=1 DPL=00 S=1 
              ;       |   |      | |+--- Limit (16..19) = F 
              ;       |   |      | +--- G=1 D=1 r=0 AVL=0 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
169
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
              ;       |   |      +--- Base (24..31) = 0 
              ;       |   +--- Limit (0..15) = FFFF 
              ;       +--- Base (0..15)=0 fill later 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200   ; data 
              ;      \--/\--/    \/||||\/ 
              ;       |   |      | ||||+--- Base (16..23) = 0 
              ;       |   |      | |||+--- X=0 E=0 W=1 A=0 
              ;       |   |      | ||+--- P=1 DPL=00 S=1 
              ;       |   |      | |+--- Limit (16..19) = F 
              ;       |   |      | +--- G=1 B=1 r=0 AVL=0 
              ;       |   |      +--- Base (24..31) = 0 
              ;       |   +--- Limit (0..15) = FFFF 
              ;       +--- Base (0..15) = 0 
 
gdtreg:       dw   0x17      ; 16bit limit 
              dd   0         ; 32bit base (filled later) 
 
stack:        times 256 dd 0 ; for use in p-mode 
stacktop: 
 
start:        mov  ax, 0x2401 
              int  0x15           ; enable A20 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+2], ax 
              shr  eax, 16 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+4], al         ; fill base of code desc 
 
              xor  edx, edx 
              mov  dx, cs 
              shl  edx, 4 
              add  edx, stacktop            ; edx = stack top for p-
mode 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              add  eax, gdt 
              mov  [gdtreg+2], eax          ; fill phy base of gdt  
              lgdt [gdtreg]                 ; load gdtr 
 
              mov  eax, cr0 
              or   eax, 1 
 
              cli                           ; MUST disable interrupts 
              mov  cr0, eax                 ; P-MODE ON 
              jmp  0x08:pstart              ; load cs 
 
;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;; 
 
[bits 32] ; ask assembler to generate 32bit code 
pstart:       mov  eax, 0x10 
              mov  ds, ax 
              mov  es, ax                   ; load other seg regs 
              mov  fs, ax                   ; flat memory model 
              mov  gs, ax 
              mov  ss, ax 
              mov  esp, edx 
 
              mov  byte [0x000b8000], 'A'   ; direct poke at video  
              jmp  $                        ; hang around 
 
Gate A20 is a workaround for a bug that is not detailed here. The BIOS call 
will simply enable it to open the whole memory for us. Another important 
thing is that the far jump we used load ed 8 into CS but CS is now a selector 
so it means Index=1, TI=0, and RPL=0 and therefore the actual descriptor 
loaded is the one at index 1 in the GDT. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
170
15.2. 32BIT PROGRAMMING 
Our next example is to give a falvour of 32bit programming. We have 
written the printstr function for read and for protected mode. The availability 
of larger registers and flexible addressing rules allows writing a much 
comprehensive version of the code. Also offsets to parameters and default 
widths change. 
 
 Example 15.2 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
gdt:          dd   0x00000000, 0x00000000   ; null descriptor 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00   ; 32bit code 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200   ; data 
 
gdtreg:       dw   0x17                     ; 16bit limit 
              dd   0                        ; 32bit base 
 
rstring:      db   'In Real Mode...', 0 
pstring:      db   'In Protected Mode...', 0 
 
stack:        times 256 dd 0                ; 1K stack 
stacktop: 
 
printstr:     push bp                       ; real mode print string 
              mov  bp, sp 
              push ax 
              push cx 
              push si 
              push di 
              push es 
 
              mov  di,[bp+4]  ;load string address 
              mov  cx,0xffff  ;load maximum possible size in cx 
              xor  al,al      ;clear al reg 
              repne scasb     ;repeat scan 
              mov ax,0xffff   ; 
              sub ax,cx       ;calculate length 
              dec ax          ;off by one, as it includes zero 
              mov cx,ax       ;move length to counter 
 
              mov ax, 0xb800 
              mov es, ax               ; point es to video base 
              mov ax,80                ;its a word move, clears ah 
              mul byte [bp+8]         ;its a byte mul to calc y offset 
              add ax,[bp+10]           ;add x offset 
              shl ax,1                 ;mul by 2 to get word offset 
              mov di,ax                ;load pointer 
 
              mov si, [bp+4]           ; string to be printed 
              mov ah, [bp+6]           ; load attribute 
 
              cld                      ; set auto increment mode 
nextchar:     lodsb                    ;load next char and inc si by 1 
              stosw                    ;store ax and inc di by 2 
              loop nextchar 
 
              pop es 
              pop di 
              pop si 
              pop cx 
              pop ax 
              pop bp 
              ret 8 
 
start:        push byte 0              ; 386 can directly push 
immediates 
              push byte 10 
              push byte 7 
              push word rstring 
              call printstr 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
171
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
115 
116 
117 
118 
119 
120 
121 
123 
124 
125 
126 
127 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
              mov  ax, 0x2401 
              int  0x15                ; enable a20 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+2], ax 
              shr  eax, 16 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+4], al         ; set base of code desc 
 
              xor  edx, edx 
              mov  dx, cs 
              shl  edx, 4 
              add  edx, stacktop       ; stacktop to be used in p-mode 
 
              xor  ebx, ebx 
              mov  bx, cs 
              shl  ebx, 4 
              add  ebx, pstring        ; pstring to be used in p-mode 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              add  eax, gdt 
              mov  [gdtreg+2], eax          ; set base of gdt 
              lgdt [gdtreg]                 ; load gdtr 
 
              mov  eax, cr0 
              or   eax, 1 
 
              cli                           ; disable interrupts 
              mov  cr0, eax                 ; enable protected mode 
              jmp  0x08:pstart              ; load cs 
 
;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;; 
 
[bits 32] 
pprintstr:    push ebp                 ; p-mode print string routine 
              mov  ebp, esp 
              push eax 
              push ecx 
              push esi 
              push edi 
 
              mov  edi, [ebp+8]  ;load string address 
              mov  ecx, 0xffffffff  ;load maximum possible size in cx 
              xor  al, al      ;clear al reg 
              repne scasb     ;repeat scan 
              mov  eax, 0xffffffff   ; 
              sub  eax, ecx       ;calculate length 
              dec  eax          ;off by one, as it includes zero 
              mov  ecx, eax       ;move length to counter 
 
              mov  eax, 80                ;its a word move, clears ah 
              mul  byte [ebp+16]         ;its a byte mul to calc y 
offset 
              add  eax, [ebp+20]           ;add x offset 
              shl  eax, 1                 ;mul by 2 to get word offset 
              add  eax, 0xb8000 
              mov  edi, eax                ;load pointer 
 
              mov esi, [ebp+8]           ; string to be printed 
              mov ah, [ebp+12]           ; load attribute 
 
              cld                      ; set auto increment mode 
pnextchar:    lodsb                    ;load next char and inc si by 1 
              stosw                    ;store ax and inc di by 2 
              loop pnextchar 
 
              pop  edi 
              pop  esi 
              pop  ecx 
              pop  eax 
              pop  ebp 
              ret  16                  ; 4 args now mean 16 bytes 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
172
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
147 
148 
149 
150 
133 
134 
135 
136 
137 
138 
139 
140 
141 
142 
143 
144 
145 
146 
pstart:       mov  ax, 0x10            ; load all seg regs to 0x10 
              mov  ds, ax              ; flat memory model 
              mov  es, ax 
              mov  fs, ax 
              mov  gs, ax 
              mov  ss, ax 
              mov  esp, edx            ; load saved esp on stack 
 
              push byte 0 
              push byte 11 
              push byte 7 
              push ebx 
              call pprintstr           ; call p-mode print string 
routine 
 
              mov  eax, 0x000b8000 
              mov  ebx, '/-\|' 
 
nextsymbol:   mov  [eax], bl 
              mov  ecx, 0x00FFFFFF 
              loop $ 
              ror  ebx, 8 
              jmp  nextsymbol 
 
15.3. VESA LINEAR FRAME BUFFER 
As an example of accessing a really large area of memory for which 
protected mode is a necessity, we will be accessing the video memory in high 
resolution and high color graphics mode where the necessary video memory 
is alone above a megabyte. We will be using the VESA VBE 2.0 for a standard 
for these high resolution modes. 
VESA is the Video Electronics Standards Association and VBE is the set of 
Video BIOS Extensions proposed by them. The VESA VBE 2.0 standard 
includes a linear frame buffer mode that  we will be using. This mode allows 
direct access to the whole video memory. Some important VESA services are 
listed below. 
 
INT 10 – VESA – Get  SuperVGA Infromation 
AX = 4F00h 
ES:DI -> buffer for SuperVGA information 
Return:  
AL = 4Fh if function supported 
AH = status 
INT 10 – VESA – Get SuperVGA Mode Information 
AX = 4F01h 
CX = SuperVGA video mode 
ES:DI -> 256-byte buffer for mode information 
Return:  
AL = 4Fh if function supported 
AH = status 
ES:DI filled if no error 
INT 10 – VESA – Set VESA Video Mode 
AX = 4F02h 
BX = new video mode 
Return:  
AL = 4Fh if function supported 
AH = status 
 
One of the VESA defined modes is 4117 which is a 1024x768 mode with 
16bit color and a linear frame buffer. The 16 color bits for every pixel are 
organized in 5:6:5 format with 5 bits for red, 6 for green, and 5 for blue. This 
makes 32 shades of red and blue and 64 shades of green and 64K total 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
173
possible colors. The 32bit linear frame buffer base address is available at 
offset 28 in the mode information bu ffer. Our example will produces shades 
of green on the screen and clear them and again print them in an infinite 
loop with delays in between. 
 
 Example 15.3 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
modeblock:    times 256 db 0 
 
gdt:          dd   0x00000000, 0x00000000   ; null descriptor 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00   ; 32bit code 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200   ; data 
 
gdtreg:       dw   0x17                     ; 16bit limit 
              dd   0                        ; 32bit base 
 
stack:        times 256 dd 0                ; 1K stack 
stacktop: 
 
start:        mov  ax, 0x4f01          ; get vesa mode information 
              mov  cx, 0x4117         ; 1024*768*64K linear frame 
buffer 
              mov  di, modeblock 
              int  0x10 
              mov  esi, [modeblock+0x28]    ; save frame buffer base 
 
              mov  ax, 0x4f02          ; set vesa mode 
              mov  bx, 0x4117 
              int  0x10 
 
              mov  ax, 0x2401 
              int  0x15                ; enable a20 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+2], ax 
              shr  eax, 16 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+4], al         ; set base of code desc 
 
              xor  edx, edx 
              mov  dx, cs 
              shl  edx, 4 
              add  edx, stacktop       ; stacktop to be used in p-mode 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              add  eax, gdt 
              mov  [gdtreg+2], eax          ; set base of gdt 
              lgdt [gdtreg]                 ; load gdtr 
 
              mov  eax, cr0 
              or   eax, 1 
 
              cli                           ; disable interrupts 
              mov  cr0, eax                 ; enable protected mode 
              jmp  0x08:pstart              ; load cs 
 
;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;; 
 
[bits 32] 
pstart:       mov  ax, 0x10            ; load all seg regs to 0x10 
              mov  ds, ax              ; flat memory model 
              mov  es, ax 
              mov  fs, ax 
              mov  gs, ax 
              mov  ss, ax 
              mov  esp, edx            ; load saved esp on stack 
 
l1:           xor  eax, eax 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
174
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
              mov  edi, esi 
              mov  ecx, 1024*768*2/4        ; divide by 4 as dwords 
              cld 
              rep  stosd 
 
              mov  eax, 0x07FF07FF 
              mov  ecx, 32   ; no of bands 
              mov  edi, esi 
 
l2:           push ecx 
              mov  ecx, 768*16   ; band width = 32 
lines 
              cld 
              rep stosd 
 
              mov  ecx, 0x000FFFFF  ; small wait 
              loop $ 
              pop  ecx 
 
              sub  eax, 0x00410041 
              loop l2 
 
              mov  ecx, 0x0FFFFFFF  ; long wait 
              loop $ 
              jmp  l1 
 
15.4. INTERRUPT HANDLING 
Handling interrupts in protected mode is also different. Instead of the IVT 
at physical address 0 there is the IDT (interrupt descriptor table) located at 
physical address stored in IDTR, a special purpose register. The IDTR is also 
a 48bit register similar in structure to the GDTR and loaded with another 
special instruction LGDT. The format of the interrupt descriptor is as shown 
below. 
 
 
 
The P and DPL have the same meaning as in data and code descriptors. 
The S bit tells that this is a system descriptor while the 1110 following it tells 
that it is a 386 interrupt gate. Our example hooks the keyboard and timer 
interrupts and displays certain things on the screen to show that they are 
working. 
 
 Example 15.4 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
[org 0x0100] 
              jmp  start 
 
gdt:          dd   0x00000000, 0x00000000   ; null descriptor 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9A00   ; 32bit code 
              dd   0x0000FFFF, 0x00CF9200   ; data 
 
gdtreg:       dw   0x17                     ; 16bit limit 
              dd   0                        ; 32bit base 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
175
010 
011 
012 
013 
014 
015 
016 
017 
018 
019 
020 
021 
022 
023 
024 
025 
026 
027 
028 
029 
030 
031 
032 
033 
034 
035 
036 
037 
038 
039 
040 
041 
042 
043 
044 
045 
046 
047 
048 
049 
050 
051 
052 
053 
054 
055 
056 
057 
058 
059 
060 
061 
062 
063 
064 
065 
066 
067 
068 
069 
070 
071 
072 
073 
074 
075 
076 
077 
078 
079 
080 
081 
082 
083 
084 
085 
 
idt:          times 8 dw unhandled, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000 
              dw   timer, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000 
                   \---/  \----/    ||\/  \----/ 
                     |      |       || |    +----- offset bits 16..32 
                     |      |       || +----- reserved 
                     |      |       |+------ Type=E 386 Interrupt Gate 
                     |      |       +--- P=1 DPL=00 S=0 
                     |      +------- selector 
                     +-------- offset bits 0..15 
              dw   keyboard, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000 
              times 246 dw unhandled, 0x0008, 0x8e00, 0x0000 
 
idtreg:       dw   0x07FF 
              dd   0 
 
stack:        times 256 dd 0                ; 1K stack 
stacktop: 
 
start:        mov  ax, 0x2401 
              int  0x15                ; enable a20 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+2], ax 
              shr  eax, 16 
              mov  [gdt+0x08+4], al         ; set base of code desc 
 
              xor  edx, edx 
              mov  dx, cs 
              shl  edx, 4 
              add  edx, stacktop       ; stacktop to be used in p-mode 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              add  eax, gdt 
              mov  [gdtreg+2], eax          ; set base of gdt 
              lgdt [gdtreg]                 ; load gdtr 
 
              xor  eax, eax 
              mov  ax, cs 
              shl  eax, 4 
              add  eax, idt 
              mov  [idtreg+2], eax          ; set base of idt 
 
              cli                           ; disable interrupts 
              lidt [idtreg]                 ; load idtr 
 
              mov  eax, cr0 
              or   eax, 1 
              mov  cr0, eax                 ; enable protected mode 
 
              jmp  0x08:pstart              ; load cs 
 
;;;;; 32bit protected mode ;;;;; 
 
[bits 32] 
unhandled:    iret 
 
timer:        push eax 
 
              inc  byte [0x000b8000] 
 
       mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al 
              pop  eax 
              iret 
 
keyboard:     push eax 
 
              in   al, 0x60 
              mov  ah, al 
              and  al, 0x0F 
              shr  ah, 4 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
176
086 
087 
088 
089 
090 
091 
092 
093 
094 
095 
096 
097 
098 
099 
100 
101 
102 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
111 
112 
113 
114 
              add  ax, 0x3030 
              cmp  al, 0x39 
              jbe  skip1 
              add  al, 7 
skip1:        cmp  ah, 0x39 
              jbe  skip2 
              add  ah, 7 
skip2:        mov  [0x000b809C], ah 
              mov  [0x000b809E], al 
 
skipkb:       mov  al, 0x20 
              out  0x20, al 
              pop  eax 
              iret 
 
pstart:       mov  ax, 0x10            ; load all seg regs to 0x10 
              mov  ds, ax              ; flat memory model 
              mov  es, ax 
              mov  fs, ax 
              mov  gs, ax 
              mov  ss, ax 
              mov  esp, edx            ; load saved esp on stack 
 
              mov  al, 0xFC 
              out  0x21, al            ; no unexpected int comes 
 
              sti                      ; interrupts are okay now 
 
              jmp  $ 
 
 
EXERCISES 
1. Write very brief and to-the-point answers. 
a. Why loading idtr with a value appropriate for real mode is 
necessary while gdtr is not? 
b. What should we do in protected mode so that when we turn 
protection off, we are in unreal mode? 
c. If the line jmp code:next is replaced with call code:somefun, 
the prefetch queue is still empt ied. What problem will occur 
when somefun will return? 
d. How much is ESP decremented when an interrupt arrives. 
This depends on weather we are in 16-bit mode or 32-bit. 
Does it depend on any other thing as well? If yes, what? 
e. Give two instructions that change the TR register. 
2. Name the following descriptors like code descriptor, data descriptor, 
interrupt gate etc. 
gdt:  dd 0x00000000, 0x00000000 
dd 0x00000000, 0x00000000 
dd 0x80000fA0, 0x0000820b 
dd 0x0000ffff, 0x00409a00 
dd 0x80000000, 0x0001d20b 
3. Using the above GDT, which of the following values, when moved into 
DS will cause an exception and why. 
0x00 
0x08 
0x10 
0x18 
0x28 
0x23 
4. Using the above GDT, if DS contai ns 0x20, which of the following 
offsets will cause an exception on read access? 
0x0ffff 
0x10000 
0x10001 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
177
5. The following function is written in  32-bit code for a 16-bit stack. 
Against every instruction, write the prefixes generated before that 
instruction. Prefixes can be addr ess size, operand size, repeat, or 
segment override. Then rewrite the code such that no prefixes are 
generated considering that this is assembled and executed in 32-bit 
mode. Don’t care for retaining register values. The function copies 
specified number of DWORDs between two segments. 
 
[bits 32] 
memcpy:       mov  bp, sp              
              lds  esi, [bp+4]        ; source address 
              les  edi, [bp+10]       ; destination address 
              mov  cx, [bp+16]        ; count of DWORDs to move 
              shl  cx, 1              ; make into count of WORDs 
L1:           mov  dx, [si] 
              mov  [es:di], dx 
              dec  cx 
              jnz  L1 
              ret 
6. Rewrite the following scheduler so th at it schedules processes stored 
in readyQ, where enque and deque functions are redefined and 
readyQ contains TSS selectors of processes to be multitasked. 
Remember you can’t use a register as a segment in a jump (eg jmp 
ax:0) but you can jump to an indirect address (eg jmp far [eax]) where 
eax points to a six-byte address. Declare any variables you need. 
 
              mov al, 0x20 
scheduler:    jmp USERONESEL:0 
              out  0x20, al 
              mov  byte [USERONEDESC+5], 0x89 
              jmp  USERTWOSEL:0 
              out  0x20, al 
              mov  byte [USERTWODESC+5], 0x89 
              jmp  scheduler 
7. Protected mode has specialized mechanism for multitasking using task state 
segments but the method used in real mode i.e. saving all registers in a PCB, 
selecting the next PCB and loading all registers from there is still applicable. 
Multitask two tasks in protected mode multitasking without TSS. Assume that 
all processes are at level zero so no protection issues arise. Be careful to 
save the complete state of the process. 
8. Write the following descriptors.  
a. 32 bit, conforming, execute-only c ode segment at level 2, with base 
at 6MB and a size of 4MB. 
b. 16 bit, non-conforming, readable code  segment at level 0, with base 
at 1MB and a size of 10 bytes. 
c. Read only data segment at level 3, with base at 0 and size of 1MB. 
d. Interrupt Gate with selector 180h and offset 11223344h. 
9. Write physical addresses for the following accesses where CS points to the 
first descriptor above, DS to the second, ES to the third, EBX contains 
00010000h, and ESI contains 00020000h 
a. [bx+si] 
b. [ebx+esi-2ffffh] 
c. [es:ebx-10h] 
10. Which of the following will cause exceptions and why. The registers have the 
same values as the last question. 
a. mov eax, [cs:10000h] 
b. mov [es:esi:100h], ebx 
c. mov ax, [es:ebx]  
11. Give short answers. 
a. How can a GPF (General protection fault) occur while running 
the following code 
push es 
pop  es 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
178
b. How can a GPF occur during the following instruction? Give 
any two reasons. 
jmp  10h:100h 
c. What will happen if we call interrupt 80h after loading out IDT 
and before switching to protected mode? 
d. What will happen if we call interrupt 80h after switching into 
protected mode but before making a far jump? 
12. Write the following descriptors. Assume values for attributes not 
specifically mentioned. 
a. Write able 32-bit data segment with 1 GB base and 1 GB limit 
and a privilege level of 2. 
b. Readable 16-bit code descriptor with 1 MB base and 1 MB 
limit and a privilege level of 1. 
c. Interrupt gate given that the handler is at 48h:12345678h and 
a privilege level of 0. 
13. Describe the following descriptors. Give their type and the value of all 
their fields. 
dd 01234567h, 789abcdeh 
dd 30405060h, 70809010h 
dd 00aabb00h, 00ffee00h 
14. Make an EXE file, switch into protected mode, rotate an asterisk on 
the border of the screen, and return to real mode when the border is 
traversed. 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
16 
Interfacing with High 
Level Languages 
16.1. CALLING CONVENTIONS 
To interface an assembly routine with a high level language program 
means to be able to call functions back and forth. And to be able to do so 
requires knowledge of certain behavior of the HLL when calling functions. 
This behavior of calling functions is called the calling conventions of the 
language. Two prevalent calling conventions are the C calling convention and 
the Pascal calling convention. 
What is the naming convention 
C prepends an underscore to every function or variable name while Pascal 
translates the name to all uppercase. C++ has a weird name mangling 
scheme that is compiler dependent. To avoid it C++ can be forced to use C 
style naming with extern “C” directive.  
How are parameters passed to the routine 
In C parameters are pushed in reverse order with the rightmost being 
pushed first. While in Pascal they are pushed in proper order with the 
leftmost being pushed first. 
Which registers must be preserved 
Both standards preserve EBX, ESI, EDI, EBP, ESP, DS, ES, and SS. 
Which registers are used as scratch 
Both standards do not preserve or guarantee the value of EAX, ECX, EDX, 
FS, GS, EFLAGS, and any other registers. 
Which register holds the return value 
Both C and Pascal return upto 32bit large values in EAX and upto 64bit 
large values in EDX:EAX. 
Who is responsible for removing the parameters 
In C the caller removes the parameter while in Pascal the callee removes 
them. The C scheme has reasons pertaining to its provision for variable 
number of arguments. 
16.2. CALLING C FROM ASSEMBLY 
For example we take a function divide declared in C as follows. 
 
int divide( int dividend, int divisor ); 
 
To call this function from assembly we have to write. 
 
push dword [mydivisor] 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
180
push dword [mydividend] 
call _divide 
add esp, 8 
; EAX holds the answer 
 
Observe the order of parameters according to the C calling conventions 
and observe that the caller cleared the stack. Now take another example of a 
function written in C as follows. 
 
void swap( int* p1, int* p2 ) 
{ 
 int temp = *p1; 
 *p1 = *p2; 
 *p2 = temp; 
} 
 
To call it from assembly we have to write this. 
 
[section .text] 
extern _swap 
x:  dd 4 
y:  dd 7 
 
push dword y 
push dword x 
call _swap ; will only retain the specified registers 
add esp, 8 
 
Observe how pointers were initialize d appropriately. The above function 
swap was converted into assembly by the gcc compiler as follows. 
 
; swap generated by gcc with no optimizations (converted to Intel 
syntax) 
; 15 instructions AND 13 memory accesses 
_swap: 
 push ebp 
 mov  ebp, esp 
 sub  esp, 4    ; space created for temp 
 
 mov eax, [ebp+8]   
 mov eax, [eax] 
 mov [ebp-4], eax   ; temp = *p1 
 
 mov edx, [ebp+8] 
 mov eax, [ebp+12] 
 mov eax, [eax] 
 mov [edx], eax   ; *p1 = *p2 
 
 mov edx, [ebp+12] 
 mov eax, [ebp-4] 
 mov [edx], eax   ; *p2 = temp 
 
 leave ;;;;; EQUIVALENT TO mov esp, ebp AND pop ebp ;;;;; 
 ret 
 
If we turn on optimizations the same fu nction is compiled into the following 
code. 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
181
 
; generated with full optimization by gcc compiler  
; 12 instructions AND 11 memory accesses 
_swap: 
 push  ebp 
 mov  ebp, esp 
 push  ebx 
 
 mov  edx, [ebp+8] 
 mov  ecx, [ebp+12] 
 mov ebx, [edx] 
 mov eax, [ecx] 
 mov  [edx], eax 
 mov [ecx], ebx 
 
 pop ebx 
 pop ebp 
 ret 
16.3. CALLING ASSEMBLY FROM C 
We now write a hand optimized version in assembly. Our version is only 6 
instructions and 6 memory accesses. 
 
 Example 16.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
[section .text] 
global        _swap 
_swap:        mov  ecx,[esp+4]  ; copy parameter p1 to ecx 
              mov  edx,[esp+8]  ; copy parameter p2 to edx 
              mov  eax,[ecx]  ; copy *p1 into eax 
              xchg eax,[edx]  ; exchange eax with *p2 
              mov  [ecx],eax  ; copy eax into *p1 
              ret    ; return from this function 
 
We assemble the above program with the following command. 
•nasm –f win32 swap.asm 
 
This produces a swap.obj file. The format directive told the assembler that 
it is to be linked with a 32bit Windows executable. The linking process 
involves resolving imported symbols of one object files with export symbols of 
another. In NASM an imported symbol is declared with the extern directive 
while and exported symbol is declared with the global directive.  
We write the following program in C to call this assembly routine. We 
should have provided the swap.obj file to the C linker otherwise an 
unresolved external symbol error will come. 
 
 Example 16.1 
001 
002 
003 
004 
005 
006 
007 
008 
009 
010 
011 
012 
013 
#include <stdio.h> 
 
void swap( int* p1, int* p2 ); 
 
int main()  
{  
  int a = 10, b = 20; 
  printf( "a=%d b=%d\n", a, b ); 
  swap(&a, &b ); 
  printf( "a=%d b=%d\n", a, b ); 
  system( "PAUSE" ); 
  return 0; 
} 
 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
182
EXERCISES 
1. Write a traverse function in assembly, which takes an array, the 
number of elements in the array and the address of another function 
to be called for each member of th e array. Call the function from a C 
program. 
2. Make the linked list functions make in Exercise 5.XX available to C 
programs using the following declarations. 
struct node { 
 int data; 
 struct node* next; 
}; 
void init( void ); 
struct node* createlist( void ); 
void insertafter( struct node*, int ); 
void deleteafter( struct node* ); 
void deletelist( struct node* ); 
3. Add two functions to the above program implemented in C. The 
function “printnode” should print the data in the passed node using 
printf, while “countfree” should count the number of free nodes by 
traversing the free list starting from the node address stored in 
firstfree. 
void printnode( struct node* ); 
void countfree( void ); 
4. Add the function “printlist” to the above program and implement in 
assembly. This function should tr averse the list whose head is 
passed as parameter and for each node containing data (head is 
dummy and doesn’t contain data) calls the C function printnode to 
actually print the contained data. 
void printlist( struct node* ); 
5. Modify the createlist and deletelist functions in the above program to 
increment and decrement an integer variable “listcount” declared in 
C to maintain a count of linked lists present. 
 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
17 
Comparison with Other 
Processors 
We emphasized that assembly language has to be learned once and every 
processor can be programmed by that person. To give a flavour of two 
different widely popular processors we  introduce the Motorolla 68K series 
and the Sun SPARC processors. The Motorolla 68K processors are very 
popular in high performance embedde d applications while the Sun SPARC 
processors are popular in very high en d enterprise servers. We will compare 
them with the Intel x86 series which is known for its success in the desktop 
market. 
17.1. MOTOROLLA 68K PROCESSORS 
Motorolla 68K processors are very similar to Intel x86 series in their 
architecture and instruction set. The both are of the same era and added 
various features at the same time. The instructions are very similar however 
the difference in architecture evident from a programmer’s point of view must 
be understood. 
68K processors have 16 23bit general purpose registers named from A0-A7 
and D0-D7. A0-A7 can hold addresses in indirect memory accesses. These 
can also be used as software stack po inters. Stack in 68K is not as rigit a 
structure as it is in x86. There is a 32bit program counter (PC) that holds the 
address of currently executing instruction. The 8bit condition code register 
(CCR) holds the X (Extend) N (Negative) Z (Zero) V (Overflow) C (Carry) flags. 
X is set to C for extended operations (addition, subtraction, or shifting). 
Motrolla processors allow bit addressing, that is a specific bit in a byte or a 
bit field, i.e. a number of bits can be directly accessed. This is a very useful 
feature especially in control applicat ions. Other data types include byte, 
word, long word, and quad word. A special MOVE16 instruction also accepts 
a 16byte block. 
68K allows indirect memory access using any A register. A special memory 
access allows post increment or predecrement as part of memory access. 
These forms are written as (An), (A n)+, and –(An). Other forms allow 
addressing with another regiser as index and with constant displacement. 
Using one of the A registers as the stack pointer and using the post 
increment and pre decrement forms of addressing, stack is implemented. 
Immediates can also be given as arguments and are preceded with a hash 
sign (#). Addressing is indicated with parenthesis instead of brackets.  
68K has no segmentation; it however has a paged memory model. It used 
the big endian format in contrast to  the little endian used by the Intel 
processors. It has varying instruction lengths from 1-11 words. It has a 
decrementing stack just like the Intel one. The format of instructions is 
“operation source, destination” which is different from the Intel order of 
operands. Some instructions from va rious instruction groups are given 
below. 
 
Data Movement 
EXG D0, D2 
MOVE.B (A1), (A2) 
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
184
MOVEA (2222).L, A4 
MOVEQ #12, D7 
Arithmetic 
ADD D7, (A4) 
CLR (A3)  (set to zero) 
CMP (A2), D1 
ASL, ASR, LSL, LSR, ROR, ROL, ROXL, ROXR (shift operations) 
Program Control 
BRA label 
JMP (A3) 
BSR label  (CALL) 
JSR (A2)  (indirect call) 
RTD #4   (RET N) 
Conditional Branch 
BCC    (branch if carry clear) 
BLS    (branch if Lower or Same) 
BLT    (branch if Less Than) 
BEQ    (branch if Equal) 
BVC    (branch if Overflow clear) 
17.2. SUN SPARC PROCESSOR 
The Sun SPARC is a very popular processing belonging to the RISC 
(reduced instruction set computer) fa mily of processors. RISC processors 
originally named because of the very  few rudimentary instructions they 
provided, are now providing almost as many instruction as CISC (complex 
instruction set computer). However some  properties like a fixed instruction 
size and single clock execution for most instructions are there.  
SPARC stands for Scalable Processor ARChitecture. SPARC is a 64bit 
processor. It byte order is user settable and even on a per program basis. So 
one program may be using little endian byte order and another may be using 
big endian at the same time. Data types include byte, Halfword, Word (32bit), 
and Double Word (64bits) and Quadwo rd. It has a fixed 32bit instruction 
size. It has a concept of ASI (Address Sp ace Identifier); an 8bit number that 
works similar to a segment. 
There are 8 global registers and 8 alternate global registers. One of them is 
active at a time and accessible as g0-g7.  Apart from that it has 8 in registers 
(i0-i7), 8 local registers (l0-l7), and 8 out registers (o0-o7). All registers are 
64bit in size. The global registers can also be called r0-r7, in registers as r8-
r15, local registers as r16-r23, and out registers as r24-r31.  
SPARC introduces a concept of register window. One window is 24 
registers and the active window is pointed to by a special register called 
Current Window Pointer (CWP). The actual number of registers in the 
processor is in hundreds not restricted  by the architecture definition. Two 
instruction SAVE and RESTORE move this register window forward and 
backward by 16 registers. Therefore one SAVE instruction makes the out 
register the in registers and brings in new local and out registers. A 
RESTORE instruction makes the in registers out registers and restores the 
old local and in registers. This way parameters passing and returning can be 
totally done in registers and there is no need to save and restore registers 
inside subroutines. 
The register o6 is conventionally used as the stack pointer. Return address 
is stored in o7 by the CALL instruction.  The register g0 (r0) is always 0 so 
loading 0 in a register is made easy. SPARC is a totally register based 
architecture, or it is call ed a load-store architecture where memory access is 
only allowed in data movement instruct ion. Rest of the operations must be 
done on registers.  
--- Page Break ---
Computer Architecture & Assembly Language Programming Course Code: CS401 
CS401@vu.edu.pk  
 
Virtual University of Pakistan 
  
 
185
SPARC instructions have two sources and a distinct destination. This 
allows more flexibility in writing progra ms. Some examples of instructions of 
this processor follow. 
 
Data Movement 
LDSB [rn], rn   (load signed byte) 
LDUW [rn], rn   (load unsigned word) 
STH [rn], rn   (store half word) 
Arithmetic 
source1 = rn  
source2 = rn or simm13 
dest = rn 
ADD r2, r3, r4 
SUB r2, 4000, r5 
SLL, SRA, SRL   (shifting) 
AND, OR, XOR   (logical) 
Program Control 
CALL     (direct call) 
JMPL    (register indirect) 
RET  
SAVE  
RESTORE 
BA label   (Branch Always) 
BE label   (branch if equal) 
BCC label   (branch if carry clear) 
BLE label   (branch if less or equal) 
BVS label   (branch if overflow set) 
 
 
--- Page Break ---
