Lab Manual
Computer Organization and
Assembly Language Lab
(CMP-224)
Faculty of Computing & Information Technology (FCIT)
University of the Punjab, Lahore.
www.pucit.edu.pk

--- Page Break ---

Computer  Organization  and  Assembly
Language  Lab
(CMP‐224)
LAB  MANUAL
Punjab University College of Information Technology
University of the Punjab

--- Page Break ---

Table of contents
Week Topics
Week 1 DOS Debugger I:
Commands Q,R,D,E,F,C,M,S,H, to view RAM memory and Processor’s Registers
Week 2 DOS Debugger II:
Commands A,U,L,W,N,T,P,G,I,O, to write and execute a program in debugger.
Assembly Language Program:
Week 3 Syntax, Variables (declaration, initialization and storage in memory).Use of
MASM6.11
Week 4 Data Transfer instructions like mov and exchg also Arithmetic instructions like
add, sub, inc, dec, neg. Flag Register
Week 5 Control transfer instructions like LOOP, JMP and conditional Jumps.
Week 6 High Level structures like decision, looping, and , or conditions using control
transfer instructions.
Week 7 Logical, Shift and rotate Instructions and its use in input and output of BINARY
and HEXADECIMAL Numbers.
Week 8 MID LAB EXAM
Week 9 Procedures and use of stack
Week 10 Mul and Div Instructions and its use in input and output of DECIMAL Numbers.
Week 11 String Instructions
Week 12 Disk and File Operations
Week 13 Graphics
Week 14 BIOS and DOS Interrupts
Week 15 Linking to High Level Languages
Week 16 FINAL LAB EXAM

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 02
Lab 02
Task-1
Copy the contents of memory location 100 to 107 at location 108 to 10F and find out the difference between the
contents of memory blocks of 102 to 105 and 112 to 115 using compare command.
Task-2
Write an assembly program which should:
• Place 1234 in AX
• Copy the value of AX into DX
• Copy the contents of DX at memory location 102
• Copy the contents of memory location 102 in BX
• Change the value of CL to 23
Task-3
Write an assembly program which should:
• Change the contents of AX to 1234
• Add 1 to the contents of AX
• Copy the value of AX to DX
• Subtract 1233 from the value of DX
• Do BH = DL
• Place 9 in AL
• Divide AL with 2
• Copy the quotient of above division at memory location 100
• Move the remainder of above division in DL
• Save the program at your Z drive with name Lab2_T2.bin
• Quit the debugger
• Reopen the debugger and load your program
• Unassemble your program
• Execute the instructions by using Trace command.

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 05
Lab 05
Task-1
Write a program which should accomplish the following tasks:
 AX = 2004
 BX = 0002
 Add contents of AX and BX and place result in AX
None of the following statements should be present in your code:
 MOV AX, 2004
 ADD AX, BX
Task-2
Write a program in which:
 Declare two variables ALPHA and BETA.
 Initialize these variables with 2F and 9D respectively.
 Now swap the contents of ALPHA and BETA without using another variable.
Task-3
Suppose variable VarA is located at memory address DS:xxxx (where x can be any value) then VarB would must be
located at DS:xxxx+1. Like this find out the address of all variables in the following code and verify your results by
debugging the following program.
.MODEL SMALL
.STACK 100H
.DATA
VARA BYTE 10 ;address is DS:xxxx
VARB BYTE 0BH ;address is DS:xxxx + 1
VARC WORD ?
VARD SBYTE ?
VARE DWORD ?
ARR BYTE 20 DUP(?)
VARF SWORD 010B
ARRB WORD 10 DUP(?)
VARZ BYTE 0
.CODE
MAIN PROC
MOV AX, @DATA
MOV DS, AX
MAIN ENDP
END MAIN
Prepared by: Mian Zeshan Farooqi

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 06
No Evaluation
Lab 06
after Lab
Task-1
You’ve following data area in your code:
.DATA
STR BYTE “Assembly Language Programmers can play with machines.”,“$”
ARR BYTE 256 DUP(?)
TEMP BYTE ?
Complete this program which should:
Display STR string using INT 21H
Display contents (garbage) of ARR in next line using INT 21H
Copy the contents of STR in ARR
Display the contents of ARR in new line using INT 21H
You’re allowed to declare as many variables as you want.
Task-2
Write a program which should:
Take two integers (0-9) from user.
Add them without using ADD instruction or LOOP.
Store their sum in AX
Store the 2’s complement of first integer in BX (without using NEG operator)

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Programming
Lab5 Total Marks:100
Task-1 [5+5+10]
Write an assembly program to
a) Prompt user by displaying appropriate message for taking a character
b) Take an input character from user
c) Print 5×5 solid grid of that character using conditional and looping structures
Task-2 [5+5+20]
Write a program to
a) Prompt a user by displaying appropriate message for taking four alphabets
b) Take alphabets and store them in four variables already declared in data area
c) Show them on next line in alphabetical order
Task-3 [5+15+10]
Write a program which prompts the user to press any key. When user presses some key it
should check and tell the user whether they key is alphabet, a digit an asterisk sign, dollar
sign, percentage sign or some other symbol. You’ve to map the switch and if-else structure
in this program.
Pseudo Code of this program is given below for your convenience:
CHECK_KEY ()
Begin
Print “Press any key: “
Take Input
If input (ASCII) is between 65 and 90 OR input is between 90 and 122 then
Print “You‟ve entered an alphabet”.
Else if input (ASCII) is between 48 and 57 then
Print “You‟ve entered a digit”.
Else
switch( input )
case „#‟:
Print “You‟ve entered hash sign.”
break;
case „$‟
Print “You‟ve entered a dollar sign.”
Punjab University College of Information Technology Lahore

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Programming
break;
case „%‟:
Print “You‟ve entered a percentage sign.”
break;
case „*‟:
Print “You‟ve entered an asterisk sign.”
break;
default:
Print “You‟ve entered a symbol.”
End if
End
Note: “You have to use unconditional jump in this task also”
Task-4 [ 20 ]
Write a program which prompts the user to enter some alphabet; change its
case and display it on screen i.e. if user enters uppercase alphabet then it
should convert it into lowercase and vice versa. You’re not allowed to use
SUB instruction.
Sample Execution
Enter an alphabet: S
Output: s
If you want to proceed[Y/N]: Y
Enter an alphabet: k
Output: K
If you want to proceed[Y/N]: N
Punjab University College of Information Technology Lahore

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 08
Lab 08
Task-1
Write a program which should prompt the user to press some key and print its ASCII in binary format.
Press any keyPress any key::  ZZ
ASCII: 1011010ASCII: 1011010
Task-2
Write a program which should prompt the user to enter a hex integer (up to 4 digits and press ENTER to terminate
string input); add all the digits of user given integer and display their sum in hexadecimal format.
Enter a hex integerEnter a hex integer::  3CB3CB
Sum of digits:Sum of digits:  1A1A
Task-3
Write a program which should take two binary numbers from user (up to 7 digits); add them; display their sum in
binary format. Now consider the sum as ASCII of some character. Display the equivalent character having ASCII equal
to the sum.
Enter a binary number: 101010
Enter a binary number: 0100100
Sum = 1001110
Character = N
Prepared by: Mian Zeshan Farooqi, M Luqman Zafar

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 09
Lab 09
Task-1
Write a procedure PRINT_HEX:
Functionality: Prints a hexadecimal number (up to two digits).
Parameters: Hex number in stack.
Returns: Nothing
Pre-condition: Value to be printed (hex number) is pushed in stack.
Task-2
Write a procedure TAKE_HEX:
Functionality: Takes a hexadecimal number as input (up to 2 digits) and stores it in DL.
Parameters: No Parameter
Returns: A hexadecimal number in DL register.
Pre-condition: Nothing is required as pre condition
Task-3
Write a procedure PRINT_DIAMOND:
Functionality: Prints a diamond on console using asterisk sign ‘*’
Parameters: Maximum number of asterisk signs in AL register.
Returns: Status in DL (1 on success and 0 on error)
Pre-condition: AL should contain an odd value between 1 and 9 (inclusive).
Write a program; take input in main procedure and pass it to PRINT_DIAMOND to print a diamond on console:
Data Segment should not exceed than one byte.
Write some helping procedures like TAKE_INPUT, ENDL, PRINT_SPACES, PRINT_ASTERIKS, etc~
Hold the output on console until user presses some key.
Enter an odd number between 0 and 10: 9

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 10
Lab 10
Task-1
Write a procedure TAKE_DECIMAL:
Functionality: Takes a decimal number input up to 2 digits and stores it in DL.
Parameters: No Parameter
Returns: A decimal number in DL register.
Pre-condition: Nothing
Task-2
Write a program which should take a string from user in the following format:
operand1<space>operator<space>operand2 <enter>
e.g.:
2+4
After taking input your program should evaluate the user given expression and display the result on screen.
Each operand is a decimal number of maximum two digits. The answer should be displayed as a decimal number.
Valid operators for your program are:
Operator Purpose
+ Addition
- Subtraction
* Multiplication
% Mod
After displaying the result your program should prompt for another expression until user enters ‘x’.
See the following sample execution:
Enter an expression
to evaluate:
Answer: 6
Enter an expression to evaluate:
Answer: 1
Enter an expression to evaluate:

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 10
Lab 11
Task-1
Write a program that should take string input; store it in reverse order into another string and then display both
strings.
To get full credit, write all procedures required in this task e.g. STR_INPUT, STR_OUTPUT, STR_REV, etc…
Enter a string: We are going on vacations.
Original String: We are going on vacations.
Reversed String: .snoitacav no gniog era eW
Task-2
Write a program that should take two inputs i.e. a character and a string and display the number of occurrences o
given character in given string in decimal format.
Enter a string: Hello COAL is very easy.
Enter a character: y
Number of occurrences: 2

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 12
Lab 12
Task-1
Write a program which should store the size of “Data.txt” (in bytes) in CX. You should not traverse the whole file to
find out its size or in other words you should not use a counter to accomplish this task.
Size of this file is
more than three
bytes.
0 0 2 B
CX (Hex)
Data.txt
Task-2
Write a program which should display the contents of “Data.txt”. In the next last line the program should display the
vowels found in the same file. Each vowel (which is found) should be displayed only once. Assume that all the text in
this file is in lowercase.
you don't have to be great to
you don't have
start, but you have to start to
to be great to
be great.
start, but you
have to start to
Vowels used:
be great.
a e o u
Data.txt
Task-3
Write a program which should ask the user to enter a string and press enter to terminate. The program should store
the user given string in a file “User.txt”.
Note: You are not allowed to restrict the user to enter a string of some specific length i.e. user is free to enter the
string as much long as he wants.
Prepared by: Mian Zeshan Farooqi , M Luqman Zafar

--- Page Break ---

Computer Organization and Assembly Language Lab 13
Lab 13
Task-1
Write a procedure DRAW_LINE. The given parameters are:
AL = Line Color
CX = Row Number or Y
DX = Column Number or X
The procedure should draw line according to the given parameters when called.
Task-2
Write a procedure DRAW_RECT. The given parameters are:
AX = Row Number or Y
BX = Column Number or X
CX = Height
DX = Width
Line Color is pushed in stack.
The procedure should draw a rectangle shape according to given attributes.
Task-3
Write a procedure FILL_RECT. The given parameters are:
AX = Row Number or Y
BX = Column Number or X
CL = Boundary Color
CH = Fill Color
The procedure should fill all the pixels with given fill color starting from given AX and BX until the boundary color is
not encountered.
Prepared by: Mian Zeshan Farooqi, M Luqman Zafar