file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Yorgos/Desktop/Shuttle/d/TOC.txt
1.Introduction
2.Number Systems and Codes
3.Digital Circuits
4.Combinational Logic Design Principles
5.Combinational Logic Design Practices
6.Combinational Design Examples
7.Sequential Logic Design principles
8.Sequential Logic Design practices
9.Sequential Design Examples
file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Yorgos/Desktop/Shuttle/d/TOC.txt9/11/2006 12:43:52 PM

--- Page Break ---

Hi, I'm John . . . .
c h a p t e r
DO NOT
1
COPY
DO NOT
Introduction
COPY
elcome to the world of digital design. Perhaps you’re a com-
puter science student who knows all about computer software
DO NOT
and programming, but you’re still trying to figure out how all
W
that fancy hardware could possibly work. Or perhaps you’re
an electrical engineering student who already knows some-
thing about analog electronics and circuit design, but you wouldn’t know a
bit if it bit you. No matter. Starting from a fairly basic level, this book willCOPY
show you how to design digital circuits and subsystems.
We’ll give you the basic principles that you need to figure things out,
and we’ll give you lots of examples. Along with principles, we’ll try to
convey the flavor of real-world digital design by discussing current,
practical considerations whenever possible. And I, the author, will oftenDO NOT
refer to myself as “we” in the hope that you’ll be drawn in and feel that we’re
walking through the learning process together.
1.1 About Digital Design
COPY
Some people call it “logic design.” That’s OK, but ultimately the goal of
design is to build systems. To that end, we’ll cover a whole lot more in this
text than just logic equations and theorems.
This book claims to be about principles and practices. Most of the prin-
DO NOT
ciples that we present will continue to be important years from now; some
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 1
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

2  Chapter 1  Introduction
may be applied in ways that have not even been discovered yet. As for practices,
they may be a little different from what’s presented here by the time you start
working in the field, and they will certainly continue to change throughout your
DO NOT COPY
career. So you should treat the “practices” material in this book as a way to rein-
force principles, and as a way to learn design methods by example.
One of the book's goals is to present enough about basic principles for you
to know what's happening when you use software tools to turn the crank for you.
The same basic principles can help you get to the root of problems when the
DO NOT COPY
tools happen to get in your way.
Listed in the box on this page, there are several key points that you should
learn through your studies with this text. Most of these items probably make no
sense to you right now, but you should come back and review them later.
DO NOT COPYDigital design is engineering, and engineering means “problem solving.”
My experience is that only 5%–10% of digital design is “the fun stuff”—the
creative part of design, the flash of insight, the invention of a new approach.
Much of the rest is just “turning the crank.” To be sure, turning the crank is much
easier now than it was 20 or even 10 years ago, but you still can’t spend 100% or
DO NOT COPYeven 50% of your time on the fun stuff.
DO NOT COPYIMPORTANT •  Good tools do not guarantee good design, but they help a lot by taking the pain out
THEMES IN of doing things right.
DIGITAL DESIGN •  Digital circuits have analog characteristics.
•  Know when to worry and when not to worry about the analog aspects of digital
design.
DO NOT COPY
•  Always document your designs to make them understandable by yourself and others.
•  Associate active levels with signal names and practice bubble-to-bubble logic
design.
•  Understand and use standard functional building blocks.
DO NOT COPY•  Design for minimum cost at the system level, including your own engineering effort
as part of the cost.
•  State-machine design is like programming; approach it that way.
•  Use programmable logic to simplify designs, reduce cost, and accommodate last-
minute modifications.
DO NOT COPY
•  Avoid asynchronous design. Practice synchronous design until a better methodology
comes along.
•  Pinpoint the unavoidable asynchronous interfaces between different subsystems and
the outside world, and provide reliable synchronizers.
DO NOT COPY•  Catching a glitch in time saves nine.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.2  Analog versus Digital  3
Besides the fun stuff and turning the crank, there are many other areas in
which a successful digital designer must be competent, including the following:
•DO NOT COPY  Debugging.  It’s next to impossible to be a good designer without being a
good troubleshooter. Successful debugging takes planning, a systematic
approach, patience, and logic: if you can’t discover where a problem  is,
find out where it  is not!
•  Business requirements and practices.  A digital designer’s work is affected
DO NOT COPY
by a lot of non-engineering factors, including documentation standards,
component availability, feature definitions, target specifications, task
scheduling, office politics, and going to lunch with vendors.
•  Risk-taking. When you begin a design project you must carefully balance
risks against potential rewards and consequences, in areas ranging from
DO NOT COPY
new-component selection (will it be available when I’m ready to build the
first prototype?) to schedule commitments (will I still have a job if I’m
late?).
•  Communication.  Eventually, you’ll hand off your successful designs to
DO NOT COPYother engineers, other departments, and customers. Without good commu-
nication skills, you’ll never complete this step successfully. Keep in mind
that communication includes not just transmitting but also receiving; learn
to be a good listener!
DO NOT COPYIn the rest of this chapter, and throughout the text, I’ll continue to state
some opinions about what’s important and what is not. I think I’m entitled to do
so as a moderately successful practitioner of digital design. Of course, you are
always welcome to share your own opinions and experience (send email to
john@wakerly.com).
DO NOT COPY
1.2 Analog versus Digital
Analog  devices and systems process time-varying signals that can take on any analog
value across a continuous range of voltage, current, or other metric. So do digital digital
circuits and systems; the difference is that we can pretend that they don’t! ADO NOT COPY
digital signal is modeled as taking on, at any time, only one of two discrete
values, which we call  0  and  1  (or  LOW  and  HIGH,  FALSE  and  TRUE, negated 0
and asserted, Sam and Fred, or whatever). 1
Digital computers have been around since the 1940s, and have been in
DO NOT COPY
widespread commercial use since the 1960s. Yet only in the past 10 to 20 years
has the “digital revolution” spread to many other aspects of life. Examples of
once-analog systems that have now “gone digital” include the following:
•  Still pictures. The majority of cameras still use silver-halide film to record
DO NOT COPYimages. However, the increasing density of digital memory chips has
allowed the development of digital cameras which record a picture as a
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

4  Chapter 1  Introduction
640×480 or larger array of pixels, where each pixel stores the intensities of
its red, green and blue color components as 8 bits each. This large amount
of data, over seven million bits in this example, may be processed and
DO NOT COPY
compressed into a format called JPEG with as little as 5% of the original
storage size, depending on the amount of picture detail. So, digital cameras
rely on both digital storage and digital processing.
•  Video recordings. A digital versatile disc (DVD) stores video in a highly
DO NOT COPYcompressed digital format called MPEG-2. This standard encodes a small
fraction of the individual video frames in a compressed format similar to
JPEG, and encodes each other frame as the difference between it and the
previous one. The capacity of a single-layer, single-sided DVD is about 35
billion bits, sufficient for about 2 hours of high-quality video, and a two-
DO NOT COPYlayer, double-sided disc has four times that capacity.
•  Audio recordings. Once made exclusively by impressing analog wave-
forms onto vinyl or magnetic tape, audio recordings now commonly use
digital compact discs (CDs). A CD stores music as a sequence of 16-bit
numbers corresponding to samples of the original analog waveform, one
DO NOT COPY
sample per stereo channel every 22.7 microseconds. A full-length CD
recording (73 minutes) contains over six billion bits of information.
•  Automobile carburetors. Once controlled strictly by mechanical linkages
(including clever “analog” mechanical devices that sensed temperature,
DO NOT COPY
pressure, etc.), automobile engines are now controlled by embedded
microprocessors. Various electronic and electromechanical sensors con-
vert engine conditions into numbers that the microprocessor can examine
to determine how to control the flow of fuel and oxygen to the engine. The
microprocessor’s output is a time-varying sequence of numbers that
DO NOT COPY
operate electromechanical actuators which, in turn, control the engine.
•  The telephone system. It started out a hundred years ago with analog
microphones and receivers connected to the ends of a pair of copper wires
(or was it string?). Even today, most homes still use analog telephones,
DO NOT COPYwhich transmit analog signals to the phone company’s central office (CO).
However, in the majority of COs, these analog signals are converted into a
digital format before they are routed to their destinations, be they in the
same CO or across the world. For many years the private branch exchanges
(PBXs) used by businesses have carried the digital format all the way to the
DO NOT COPY
desktop. Now many businesses, COs, and traditional telephony service
providers are converting to integrated systems that combine digital voice
with data traffic over a single IP (Internet Protocol) network.
•  Traffic lights. Stop lights used to be controlled by electromechanical timers
DO NOT COPYthat would give the green light to each direction for a predetermined
amount of time. Later, relays were used in controllers that could activate
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.2  Analog versus Digital  5
the lights according to the pattern of traffic detected by sensors embedded
in the pavement. Today’s controllers use microprocessors, and can control
the lights in ways that maximize vehicle throughput or, in some California
DO NOT COPY
cities, frustrate drivers in all kinds of creative ways.
•  Movie effects.  Special effects used to be made exclusively with miniature
clay models, stop action, trick photography, and numerous overlays of film
on a frame-by-frame basis. Today, spaceships, bugs, other-worldly scenes,
DO NOT COPYand even babies from hell (in Pixar’s animated feature  Tin Toy) are synthe-
sized entirely using digital computers. Might the stunt man or woman
someday no longer be needed, either?
The electronics revolution has been going on for quite some time now, and
the “solid-state” revolution began with analog devices and applications like
DO NOT COPY
transistors and transistor radios. So why has there now been a digital  revolution?
There are in fact many reasons to favor digital circuits over analog ones:
•  Reproducibility of results. Given the same set of inputs (in both value and
time sequence), a properly designed digital circuit always produces exactly
DO NOT COPY
the same results. The outputs of an analog circuit vary with temperature,
power-supply voltage, component aging, and other factors.
•  Ease of design. Digital design, often called “logic design,” is logical. No
special math skills are needed, and the behavior of small logic circuits can
DO NOT COPYbe visualized mentally without any special insights about the operation of
capacitors, transistors, or other devices that require calculus to model.
•  Flexibility and functionality.  Once a problem has been reduced to digital
form, it can be solved using a set of logical steps in space and time. For
example, you can design a digital circuit that scrambles your recorded
DO NOT COPY
voice so that it is absolutely indecipherable by anyone who does not have
your “key” (password), but can be heard virtually undistorted by anyone
who does. Try doing that with an analog circuit.
•  Programmability.  You’re probably already quite familiar with digital com-
DO NOT COPYputers and the ease with which you can design, write, and debug programs
for them. Well, guess what? Much of digital design is carried out today by
writing programs, too, in  hardware description languages (HDLs). These hardware description
languages allow both structure and function of a digital circuit to be language (HDL)
specified or  modeled. Besides a compiler, a typical HDL also comes with hardware model
DO NOT COPY
simulation and synthesis programs. These software tools are used to test
the hardware model’s behavior before any real hardware is built, and then
synthesize the model into a circuit in a particular component technology.
•  Speed.  Today’s digital devices are very fast. Individual transistors in the
DO NOT COPYfastest integrated circuits can switch in less than 10 picoseconds, and a
complete, complex device built from these transistors can examine its
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

6  Chapter 1  Introduction
−6  −9 
SHORT TIMES  A  microsecond (μsec)  is 10 second. A  nanosecond (ns)  is just 10 second, and a
−12 
picosecond (ps)  is 10 second. In a vacuum, light travels about a foot in a nanosec-
DO NOT COPY
ond, and an inch in 85 picoseconds. With individual transistors in the fastest
integrated circuits now switching in less than 10 picoseconds, the speed-of-light
delay between these transistors across a half-inch-square silicon chip has become a
limiting factor in circuit design.
DO NOT COPY
inputs and produce an output in less than 2 nanoseconds. This means that
such a device can produce 500 million or more results per second.
•  Economy. Digital circuits can provide a lot of functionality in a small
DO NOT COPYspace. Circuits that are used repetitively can be “integrated” into a single
“chip” and mass-produced at very low cost, making possible throw-away
items like calculators, digital watches, and singing birthday cards. (You
may ask, “Is this such a good thing?” Never mind!)
•  Steadily advancing technology.  When you design a digital system, you
DO NOT COPY
almost always know that there will be a faster, cheaper, or otherwise better
technology for it in a few years. Clever designers can accommodate these
expected advances during the initial design of a system, to forestall system
obsolescence and to add value for customers. For example, desktop com-
DO NOT COPYputers often have “expansion sockets” to accommodate faster processors
or larger memories than are available at the time of the computer’s
introduction.
So, that’s enough of a sales pitch on digital design. The rest of this chapter will
give you a bit more technical background to prepare you for the rest of the book.
DO NOT COPY
1.3 Digital Devices
gate The most basic digital devices are called gates and no, they were not named after
the founder of a large software company. Gates originally got their name from
DO NOT COPY
their function of allowing or retarding (“gating”) the flow of digital information.
In general, a gate has one or more inputs and produces an output that is a func-
tion of the current input value(s). While the inputs and outputs may be analog
conditions such as voltage, current, even hydraulic pressure, they are modeled
DO NOT COPYas taking on just two discrete values, 0 and 1.
Figure 1-1 shows symbols for the three most important kinds of gates. A
AND  gate 2-input AND  gate, shown in (a), produces a 1 output if both of its inputs are 1;
otherwise it produces a 0 output. The figure shows the same gate four times, with
the four possible combinations of inputs that may be applied to it and the result-
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.4  Electronic Aspects of Digital Design  7
0 0 1 1
0 0 0 1
(a)  0 1 0 1
DO NOT COPY
0 0 1 1
0 1 1 1
(b)  0 1 0 1
0  1 1 0
(c) 
DO NOT COPY
Fig ure 1-1  Digital devices: (a)  AND  gate; (b)  OR  gate; (c)  NOT  gate or inverter.
ing outputs. A gate is called a  combinational  circuit because its output depends combinational
only on the current input combination.DO NOT COPY
A 2-input OR  gate, shown in (b), produces a 1 output if one or both of its OR  gate
inputs are 1; it produces a 0 output only if both inputs are 0. Once again, there are
four possible input combinations, resulting in the outputs shown in the figure.
A NOT  gate, more commonly called an  inverter, produces an output value NOT  gate
that is the opposite of the input value, as shown in (c).DO NOT COPYinverter
We called these three gates the most important for good reason. Any digital
function can be realized using just these three kinds of gates. In Chapter 3 we’ll
show how gates are realized using transistor circuits. You should know, however,
that gates have been built or proposed using other technologies, such as relays,
DO NOT COPY
vacuum tubes, hydraulics, and molecular structures.
A  flip-flop  is a device that stores either a 0 or 1. The  state  of a flip-flop is flip-flop
the value that it currently stores. The stored value can be changed only at certain state
times determined by a “clock” input, and the new value may further depend on
the flip-flop’s current state and its “control” inputs. A flip-flop can be built from
DO NOT COPY
a collection of gates hooked up in a clever way, as we’ll show in Section 7.2.
A digital circuit that contains flip-flops is called a  sequential circuit sequential circuit
because its output at any time depends not only on its current input, but also on
the past sequence of inputs that have been applied to it. In other words, a sequen-
tial circuit hasDO NOT COPY  memory  of past events. memory
1.4 Electronic Aspects of Digital Design
Digital circuits are not exactly a binary version of alphabet soup—with all due
respect to Figure 1-1, they don’t have little 0s and 1s floating around in them. AsDO NOT COPY
we’ll see in Chapter 3, digital circuits deal with analog voltages and currents,
and are built with analog components. The “digital abstraction” allows analog
behavior to be ignored in most cases, so circuits can be modeled as if they really
did process 0s and 1s.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

8  Chapter 1  Introduction
Noise
Fig ure 1-2
Outputs  Margin Inputs
Logic values and noise Voltage
DO NOT COPYmargins. logic 1
logic 1
invalid
DO NOT COPY
logic 0
logic 0
One important aspect of the digital abstraction is to associate a  range  of
DO NOT COPY
analog values with each logic value (0 or 1). As shown in Figure 1-2, a typical
gate is not guaranteed to have a precise voltage level for a logic 0 output. Rather,
it may produce a voltage somewhere in a range that is a  subset  of the range
guaranteed to be recognized as a 0 by other gate inputs. The difference between
noise margin the range boundaries is called noise margin—in a real circuit, a gate’s output can
DO NOT COPY
be corrupted by this much noise and still be correctly interpreted at the inputs of
other gates.
Behavior for logic 1 outputs is similar. Note in the figure that there is an
“invalid” region between the input ranges for logic 0 and logic 1. Although any
given digital device operating at a particular voltage and temperature will have a
DO NOT COPY
fairly well defined boundary (or threshold) between the two ranges, different
devices may have different boundaries. Still, all properly operating devices have
their boundary  somewhere  in the “invalid” range. Therefore, any signal that is
within the defined ranges for 0 and 1 will be interpreted identically by different
DO NOT COPYdevices. This characteristic is essential for reproducibility of results.
It is the job of an  electronic  circuit designer to ensure that logic gates
produce and recognize logic signals that are within the appropriate ranges. This
is an analog circuit-design problem; we touch upon some aspects of this in
Chapter 3. It is not possible to design a circuit that has the desired behavior
DO NOT COPYunder every possible condition of power-supply voltage, temperature, loading,
and other factors. Instead, the electronic circuit designer or device manufacturer
specifications provides  specifications  that define the conditions under which correct behavior
is guaranteed.
As a  digital  designer, then, you need not delve into the detailed analog
DO NOT COPY
behavior of a digital device to ensure its correct operation. Rather, you need only
examine enough about the device’s operating environment to determine that it is
operating within its published specifications. Granted, some analog knowledge
is needed to perform this examination, but not nearly what you’d need to design
a digital device starting from scratch. In Chapter 3, we’ll give you just what you
DO NOT COPY
need.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.5  Software Aspects of Digital Design  9
DO NOT COPY
Fi gure 1- 3
DO NOT COPYA logic-design
template.
Quarter-size logic symbols, copyright 1976 by Micro Systems Engineering
1.5 Software Aspects of Digital Design
DO NOT COPY
Digital design need not involve any software tools. For example, Figure 1-3
shows the primary tool of the “old school” of digital design—a plastic template
for drawing logic symbols in schematic diagrams by hand (the designer’s name
was engraved into the plastic with a soldering iron).
DO NOT COPYToday, however, software tools are an essential part of digital design.
Indeed, the availability and practicality of hardware description languages
(HDLs) and accompanying circuit simulation and synthesis tools have changed
the entire landscape of digital design over the past several years. We’ll make
extensive use of HDLs throughout this book.
DO NOT COPY
In  computer-aided design (CAD)  various software tools improve the computer-aided design
designer’s productivity and help to improve the correctness and quality of (CAD)
designs. In a competitive world, the use of software tools is mandatory to obtain
high-quality results on aggressive schedules. Important examples of software
tools for digital design are listed below:
DO NOT COPY
•  Schematic entry.  This is the digital designer’s equivalent of a word proces-
sor. It allows schematic diagrams to be drawn “on-line,” instead of with
paper and pencil. The more advanced schematic-entry programs also
check for common, easy-to-spot errors, such as shorted outputs, signals
DO NOT COPY
that don’t go anywhere, and so on. Such programs are discussed in greater
detail in Section 12.1.
•  HDLs.  Hardware description languages, originally developed for circuit
modeling, are now being used more and more for hardware  design. They
DO NOT COPYcan be used to design anything from individual function modules to large,
multi-chip digital systems. We’ll introduce two HDLs, ABEL and VHDL,
at the end of Chapter 4, and we’ll provide examples in both languages in
the chapters that follow.
•  HDL compilers, simulators, and synthesis tools. A typical HDL software
DO NOT COPY
package contains several components. In a typical environment, the
designer writes a text-based “program,” and the HDL compiler analyzes
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

10  Chapter 1  Introduction
the program for syntax errors. If it compiles correctly, the designer has the
option of handing it over to a synthesis tool that creates a corresponding
circuit design targeted to a particular hardware technology. Most often,
DO NOT COPY
before synthesis the designer will use the compiler’s results as input to a
“simulator” to verify the behavior of the design.
•  Simulators.  The design cycle for a customized, single-chip digital integrat-
ed circuit is long and expensive. Once the first chip is built, it’s very
DO NOT COPYdifficult, often impossible, to debug it by probing internal connections
(they are really  tiny ), or to change the gates and interconnections. Usually,
changes must be made in the original design database and a new chip must
be manufactured to incorporate the required changes. Since this process
can take months to complete, chip designers are highly motivated to “get
DO NOT COPYit right” (or almost right) on the first try. Simulators help designers predict
the electrical and functional behavior of a chip without actually building it,
allowing most if not all bugs to be found before the chip is fabricated.
•  Simulators are also used in the design of “programmable logic devices,”
introduced later, and in the overall design of systems that incorporate many
DO NOT COPY
individual components. They are somewhat less critical in this case
because it’s easier for the designer to make changes in components and
interconnections on a printed-circuit board. However, even a little bit of
simulation can save time by catching simple but stupid mistakes.
DO NOT COPY•  Test benches. Digital designers have learned how to formalize circuit sim-
ulation and testing into software environments called “test benches.” The
idea is to build a set of programs around a design to automatically exercise
its functions and check both its functional and its timing behavior. This is
especially useful when small design changes are made—the test bench can
DO NOT COPYbe run to ensure that bug fixes or “improvements” in one area do not break
something else. Test-bench programs may be written in the same HDL as
the design itself, in C or C++, or in combination of languages including
scripting languages like PERL.
•  Timing analyzers and verifiers.  The time dimension is very important in
DO NOT COPY
digital design. All digital circuits take time to produce a new output value
in response to an input change, and much of a designer’s effort is spent
ensuring that such output changes occur quickly enough (or, in some cases,
not too quickly). Specialized programs can automate the tedious task of
DO NOT COPYdrawing timing diagrams and specifying and verifying the timing relation-
ships between different signals in a complex system.
•  Word processors. Let’s not forget the lowly text editor and word processor.
These tools are obviously useful for creating the source code for HDL-
based designs, but they have an important use in every design—to create
DO NOT COPY
documentation!
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.5  Software Aspects of Digital Design  11
PROGRAMMABLE Later in this book you’ll learn how programmable logic devices (PLDs) and field-
LOGIC DEVICES programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) allow you to design a circuit or subsystem by
DO NOT COPY
VERSUS writing a sort of program. PLDs and FPGAs are now available with up to millions of
SIMULATION gates, and the capabilities of these technologies are ever increasing. If a PLD- or
FPGA-based design doesn’t work the first time, you can often fix it by changing the
program and physically reprogramming the device, without changing any compo-
nents or interconnections at the system level. The ease of prototyping and modifying
DO NOT COPY
PLD- and FPGA-based systems can eliminate the need for simulation in board-level
design; simulation is required only for chip-level designs.
The most widely held view in industry trends says that as chip technology
advances, more and more design will be done at the chip level, rather than the board
level. Therefore, the ability to perform complete and accurate simulation will
DO NOT COPY
become increasingly important to the typical digital designer.
However, another view is possible. If we extrapolate trends in PLD and FPGA
capabilities, in the next decade we will witness the emergence of devices that include
not only gates and flip-flops as building blocks, but also higher-level functions such
as processors, memories, and input/output controllers. At this point, most digital
DO NOT COPY
designers will use complex on-chip components and interconnections whose basic
functions have already been tested by the device manufacturer.
In this future view, it is still possible to misapply high-level programmable
functions, but it is also possible to fix mistakes simply by changing a program;
detailed simulation of a design before simply “trying it out” could be a waste of time.
DO NOT COPYAnother, compatible view is that the PLD or FPGA is merely a full-speed simulator
for the program, and this full-speed simulator is what gets shipped in the product!
Does this extreme view have any validity? To guess the answer, ask yourself
the following question. How many software programmers do you know who debug
a new program by “simulating” its operation rather than just trying it out?
DO NOT COPYIn any case, modern digital systems are much too complex for a designer to
have any chance of testing every possible input condition, with or without simula-
tion. As in software, correct operation of digital systems is best accomplished
through practices that ensure that the systems are “correct by design.” It is a goal of
this text to encourage such practices.
DO NOT COPY
In addition to using the tools above, designers may sometimes write spe-
cialized programs in high-level languages like C or C++, or scripts in languages
like PERL, to solve particular design problems. For example, Section 11.1 gives
DO NOT COPY
a few examples of C programs that generate the “truth tables” for complex
combinational logic functions.
Although CAD tools are important, they don’t make or break a digital
designer. To take an analogy from another field, you couldn’t consider yourself
to be a great writer just because you’re a fast typist or very handy with a word
DO NOT COPY
processor. During your study of digital design, be sure to learn and use all the
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

12  Chapter 1  Introduction
tools that are available to you, such as schematic-entry programs, simulators,
and HDL compilers. But remember that learning to use tools is no guarantee that
you’ll be able to produce good results. Please pay attention to what you’re
DO NOT COPY
producing with them!
1.6 Integrated Circuits
A collection of one or more gates fabricated on a single silicon chip is called an
DO NOT COPY
integrated circuit (IC) integrated circuit (IC). Large ICs with tens of millions of transistors may be half
an inch or more on a side, while small ICs may be less than one-tenth of an inch
on a side.
wafer Regardless of its size, an IC is initially part of a much larger, circular wafer,
DO NOT COPYup to ten inches in diameter, containing dozens to hundreds of replicas of the
same IC. All of the IC chips on the wafer are fabricated at the same time, like
pizzas that are eventually sold by the slice, except in this case, each piece (IC
die chip) is called a  die. After the wafer is fabricated, the dice are tested in place on
the wafer and defective ones are marked. Then the wafer is sliced up to produce
DO NOT COPYthe individual dice, and the marked ones are discarded. (Compare with the pizza-
maker who sells all the pieces, even the ones without enough pepperoni!) Each
unmarked die is mounted in a package, its pads are connected to the package
pins, and the packaged IC is subjected to a final test and is shipped to a customer.
Some people use the term “IC” to refer to a silicon die. Some use “chip” to
DO NOT COPY
refer to the same thing. Still others use “IC” or “chip” to refer to the combination
of a silicon die and its package. Digital designers tend to use the two terms inter-
changeably, and they really don’t care what they’re talking about. They don’t
require a precise definition, since they’re only looking at the functional and elec-
IC trical behavior of these things. In the balance of this text, we’ll use the term IC  to
DO NOT COPY
refer to a packaged die.
A DICEY A reader of the second edition wrote to me to collect a $5 reward for pointing out my
DO NOT COPYDECISION “glaring” misuse of “dice” as the plural of “die.” According to the dictionary, she
said, the plural form of “die” is “dice”  only  when describing those little cubes with
dots on each side; otherwise it’s “dies,” and she produced the references to prove it.
Being stubborn, I asked my friends at the  Microprocessor Report  about this
issue. According to the editor,
DO NOT COPYThere is, indeed, much dispute over this term. We actually stopped using
the term “dice” in  Microprocessor Report  more than four years ago. I
actually prefer the plural “die,” … but perhaps it is best to avoid using
the plural whenever possible.
So there you have it, even the experts don’t agree with the dictionary! Rather
DO NOT COPYthan cop out, I boldly chose to use “dice” anyway, by rolling the dice.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.6  Integrated Circuits  13
pin 1  pin 28
Fi gure 1 -4
Dual in-line pin (DIP)
pin 1 
pin 20
packages: (a) 14-pin;
DO NOT COPY
pin 1  pin 14 (b) 20-pin; (c) 28-pin.
0.1"
0.1"
pin 8 pin 11  pin 15
0.1"
DO NOT COPY
(a) 0.3" (b)  0.3" (c) 0.6"
In the early days of integrated circuits, ICs were classified by size—small,
medium, or large—according to how many gates they contained. The simplestDO NOT COPY
type of commercially available ICs are still called  small-scale integration (SSI), small-scale integration
and contain the equivalent of 1 to 20 gates. SSI ICs typically contain a handful of (SSI)
gates or flip-flops, the basic building blocks of digital design.
The SSI ICs that you’re likely to encounter in an educational lab come in a
14-pinDO NOT COPY  dual in-line-pin (DIP)  package. As shown in Figure 1-4(a), the spacing dual in-line-pin (DIP)
between pins in a column is 0.1 inch and the spacing between columns is 0.3 package
inch. Larger DIP packages accommodate functions with more pins, as shown in
(b) and (c). A  pin diagram  shows the assignment of device signals to package pin diagram
pins, or  pinout. Figure 1-5 shows the pin diagrams for a few common SSI ICs. pinout
DO NOT COPY
Such diagrams are used only for mechanical reference, when a designer needs to
determine the pin numbers for a particular IC. In the schematic diagram for a
Fig ure 1-5  Pin diagrams for a few 7400-series SSI ICs.
DO NOT COPY7400 7402 7404 7408 7410
1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14
2 13 2 13 2 13 2 13 2 13
3 12 3 12 3 12 3 12 3 12
4 11 4 11 4 11 4 11 4 11
5 DO NOT COPY10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10
6 9 6 9 6 9 6 9 6 9
7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8
7411 7420 7421 7430 7432
1 VCC 14
1 DO NOT COPYVCC 14 1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14 1 VCC 14
2 13 2 13 2 13 2 13 2 13
3 12 3 12 3 12 3 12 3 12
4 11 4 11 4 11 4 11 4 11
5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10 5 10
6 9 6 9 6 9 6 9 6 9
DO NOT COPY
7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8 7 GND 8
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

14  Chapter 1  Introduction
TINY-SCALE In the coming years, perhaps the most popular remaining use of SSI and MSI,
INTEGRATION especially in DIP packages, will be in educational labs. These devices will afford
DO NOT COPY
students the opportunity to “get their hands” dirty by “breadboarding” and wiring up
simple circuits in the same way that their professors did years ago.
However, much to my surprise and delight, a segment of the IC industry has
actually gone  downscale from SSI in the past few years. The idea has been to sell
individual logic gates in very small packages. These devices handle simple functions
DO NOT COPY
that are sometimes needed to match larger-scale components to a particular design,
or in some cases they are used to work around bugs in the larger-scale components
or their interfaces.
An example of such an IC is Motorola’s 74VHC1G00. This chip is a single
2-input  NAND  gate housed in a 5-pin package (power, ground, two inputs, and one
DO NOT COPY
output). The entire package, including pins, measures only 0.08 inches on a side, and
is only 0.04 inches high! Now that’s what I would call “tiny-scale integration”!
digital circuit, pin diagrams are not used. Instead, the various gates are grouped
DO NOT COPY
functionally, as we’ll show in Section 5.1.
Although SSI ICs are still sometimes used as “glue” to tie together larger-
scale elements in complex systems, they have been largely supplanted by pro-
grammable logic devices, which we’ll study in Sections 5.3 and 8.3.
medium-scaleDO NOT COPYThe next larger commercially available ICs are called  medium-scale
integration (MSI) integration (MSI), and contain the equivalent of about 20 to 200 gates. An MSI
IC typically contains a functional building block, such as a decoder, register, or
counter. In Chapters 5 and 8, we’ll place a strong emphasis on these building
blocks. Even though the use of discrete MSI ICs is declining, the equivalent
DO NOT COPYbuilding blocks are used extensively in the design of larger ICs.
large-scale integration Large-scale integration (LSI)  ICs are bigger still, containing the equivalent
(LSI) of 200 to 200,000 gates or more. LSI parts include small memories, micro-
processors, programmable logic devices, and customized devices.
DO NOT COPY
STANDARD Many standard “high-level” functions appear over and over as building blocks
LOGIC in digital design. Historically, these functions were first integrated in MSI cir-
FUNCTIONS cuits. Subsequently, they have appeared as components in the “macro” libraries
DO NOT COPYfor ASIC design, as “standard cells” in VLSI design, as “canned” functions in
PLD programming languages, and as library functions in hardware-description
languages such as VHDL.
Standard logic functions are introduced in Chapters 5 and 8 as 74-series
MSI parts, as well as in HDL form. The discussion and examples in these chap-
DO NOT COPY
ters provide a basis for understanding and using these functions in any form.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.7  Programmable Logic Devices  15
The dividing line between LSI and  very large-scale integration (VLSI)  is very large-scale
fuzzy, and tends to be stated in terms of transistor count rather than gate count. integration (VLSI)
Any IC with over 1,000,000 transistors is definitely VLSI, and that includes
DO NOT COPY
most microprocessors and memories nowadays, as well as larger programmable
logic devices and customized devices. In 1999, the VLSI ICs as large as 50
million transistors were being designed.
1.7 Programmable Logic DevicesDO NOT COPY
There are a wide variety of ICs that can have their logic function “programmed”
into them after they are manufactured. Most of these devices use technology that
also allows the function to be reprogrammed, which means that if you find a bug
in your design, you may be able to fix it without physically replacing or rewiring
DO NOT COPY
the device. In this book, we’ll frequently refer to the design opportunities and
methods for such devices.
Historically,  programmable logic arrays (PLAs)  were the first program- programmable logic
mable logic devices. PLAs contained a two-level structure of AND  and  OR  gates array (PLA)
with user-programmable connections. Using this structure, a designer couldDO NOT COPY
accommodate any logic function up to a certain level of complexity using the
well-known theory of logic synthesis and minimization that we’ll present in
Chapter 4.
PLA structure was enhanced and PLA costs were reduced with the intro- programmable array
duction ofDO NOT COPY  programmable array logic (PAL) devices. Today, such devices are logic (PAL) device
generically called programmable logic devices (PLDs), and are the “MSI” of the programmable logic
programmable logic industry. We’ll have a lot to say about PLD architecture and device (PLD)
technology in Sections 5.3 and 8.3.
The ever-increasing capacity of integrated circuits created an opportunity
DO NOT COPY
for IC manufacturers to design larger PLDs for larger digital-design applica-
tions. However, for technical reasons that we’ll discuss in \secref{CPLDs}, the
basic two-level  AND-OR  structure of PLDs could not be scaled to larger sizes.
Instead, IC manufacturers devised  complex PLD (CPLD)  architectures to complex PLD (CPLD)
achieve the required scale. A typical CPLD is merely a collection of multiple
DO NOT COPY
PLDs and an interconnection structure, all on the same chip. In addition to the
individual PLDs, the on-chip interconnection structure is also programmable,
providing a rich variety of design possibilities. CPLDs can be scaled to larger
sizes by increasing the number of individual PLDs and the richness of the inter-
connection structure on the CPLD chip.DO NOT COPY
At about the same time that CPLDs were being invented, other IC manu-
facturers took a different approach to scaling the size of programmable logic
chips. Compared to a CPLD, a field-programmable gate arrays (FPGA) contains field-programmable
a much larger number of smaller individual logic blocks, and provides a large, gate array (FPGA)
distributed interconnection structure that dominates the entire chip. Figure 1-6DO NOT COPY
illustrates the difference between the two chip-design approaches.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

16  Chapter 1  Introduction
PLD  PLD  PLD  PLD
DO NOT COPY
Programmable Interconnect
DO NOT COPY
PLD  PLD  PLD  PLD
(a)  (b)  = logic block
DO NOT COPY
F igur e 1 -6  Large programmable-logic-device scaling approaches: (a) CPLD; (b) FPGA.
Proponents of one approach or the other used to get into “religious” argu-
ments over which way was better, but the largest manufacturer of large
DO NOT COPY
programmable logic devices, Xilinx Corporation, acknowledges that there is a
place for both approaches and manufactures both types of devices. What’s more
important than chip architecture is that both approaches support a style of design
in which products can be moved from design concept to prototype and produc-
DO NOT COPYtion in a very period of time short time.
Also important in achieving short “time-to-market” for all kinds of PLD-
based products is the use of HDLs in their design. Languages like ABEL and
VHDL, and their accompanying software tools, allow a design to be compiled,
synthesized, and downloaded into a PLD, CPLD, or FPGA literally in minutes.
DO NOT COPYThe power of highly structured, hierarchical languages like VHDL is especially
important in helping designers utilize the hundreds of thousands or millions of
gates that are provided in the largest CPLDs and FPGAs.
1.8 Application-Specific ICs
DO NOT COPY
Perhaps the most interesting developments in IC technology for the average
digital designer are not the ever-increasing chip sizes, but the ever-increasing
opportunities to “design your own chip.” Chips designed for a particular, limited
semicustom IC product or application are called  semicustom ICs  or  application-specific ICs
DO NOT COPY
application-specific IC (ASICs). ASICs generally reduce the total component and manufacturing cost of
(ASIC) a product by reducing chip count, physical size, and power consumption, and
they often provide higher performance.
nonrecurring The  nonrecurring engineering (NRE) cost  for designing an ASIC can
engineering (NRE) exceed the cost of a discrete design by $5,000 to $250,000 or more. NRE charges
DO NOT COPY
cost
are paid to the IC manufacturer and others who are responsible for designing the
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.8  Application-Specific ICs  17
internal structure of the chip, creating tooling such as the metal masks for manu-
facturing the chips, developing tests for the manufactured chips, and actually
making the first few sample chips.
DO NOT COPY
The NRE cost for a typical, medium-complexity ASIC with about 100,000
gates is $30–$50,000. An ASIC design normally makes sense only when the
NRE cost can be offset by the per-unit savings over the expected sales volume of
the product.
The NRE cost to design a  custom LSI  chip—a chip whose functions, inter- custom LSI
DO NOT COPY
nal architecture, and detailed transistor-level design is tailored for a specific
customer—is very high, $250,000 or more. Thus, full custom LSI design is done
only for chips that have general commercial application or that will enjoy very
high sales volume in a specific application (e.g., a digital watch chip, a network
interface, or a bus-interface circuit for a PC).DO NOT COPY
To reduce NRE charges, IC manufacturers have developed libraries of
standard cells  including commonly used MSI functions such as decoders, standard cells
registers, and counters, and commonly used LSI functions such as memories,
programmable logic arrays, and microprocessors. In a  standard-cell design, the standard-cell design
logic designer interconnects functions in much the same way as in a multichipDO NOT COPY
MSI/LSI design. Custom cells are created (at added cost, of course) only if abso-
lutely necessary. All of the cells are then laid out on the chip, optimizing the
layout to reduce propagation delays and minimize the size of the chip. Minimiz-
ing the chip size reduces the per-unit cost of the chip, since it increases the
DO NOT COPY
number of chips that can be fabricated on a single wafer. The NRE cost for a
standard-cell design is typically on the order of $150,000.
Well, $150,000 is still a lot of money for most folks, so IC manufacturers
have gone one step further to bring ASIC design capability to the masses. A gate
array  is an IC whose internal structure is an array of gates whose interconnec- gate array
DO NOT COPY
tions are initially unspecified. The logic designer specifies the gate types and
interconnections. Even though the chip design is ultimately specified at this very
low level, the designer typically works with “macrocells,” the same high-level
functions used in multichip MSI/LSI and standard-cell designs; software
expands the high-level design into a low-level one.
DO NOT COPY
The main difference between standard-cell and gate-array design is that the
macrocells and the chip layout of a gate array are not as highly optimized as
those in a standard-cell design, so the chip may be 25% or more larger, and
therefore may cost more. Also, there is no opportunity to create custom cells in
the gate-array approach. On the other hand, a gate-array design can be complet-DO NOT COPY
ed faster and at lower NRE cost, ranging from about $5000 (what you’re told
initially) to $75,000 (what you find you’ve spent when you’re all done).
The basic digital design methods that you’ll study throughout this book
apply very well to the functional design of ASICs. However, there are additional
opportunities, constraints, and steps in ASIC design, which usually depend onDO NOT COPY
the particular ASIC vendor and design environment.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

18  Chapter 1  Introduction
1.9 Printed-Circuit Boards
printed-circuit board An IC is normally mounted on a  printed-circuit board (PCB)  [or  printed-wiring
(PCB)DO NOT COPYboard (PWB)] that connects it to other ICs in a system. The multilayer PCBs
printed-wiring board used in typical digital systems have copper wiring etched on multiple, thin layers
(PWB) of fiberglass that are laminated into a single board about 1/16 inch thick.
PCB traces Individual wire connections, or  PCB traces  are usually quite narrow, 10 to
mil 25 mils in typical PCBs. (A  mil  is one-thousandth of an inch.) In  fine-line  PCB
DO NOT COPY
fine-line technology, the traces are extremely narrow, as little as 4 mils wide with 4-mil
spacing between adjacent traces. Thus, up to 125 connections may be routed in a
one-inch-wide band on a single layer of the PCB. If higher connection density is
needed, then more layers are used.
surface-mount Most of the components in modern PCBs use  surface-mount technology
DO NOT COPY
technology (SMT) (SMT). Instead of having the long pins of DIP packages that poke through the
board and are soldered to the underside, the leads of SMT IC packages are bent
to make flat contact with the top surface of the PCB. Before such components
are mounted on the PCB, a special “solder paste” is applied to contact pads on
the PCB using a stencil whose hole pattern matches the contact pads to be
DO NOT COPY
soldered. Then the SMT components are placed (by hand or by machine) on the
pads, where they are held in place by the solder paste (or in some cases, by glue).
Finally, the entire assembly is passed through an oven to melt the solder paste,
which then solidifies when cooled.
DO NOT COPYSurface-mount component technology, coupled with fine-line PCB tech-
nology,  allows  extremely  dense  packing  of  integrated  circuits  and  other
components on a PCB. This dense packing does more than save space. For very
high-speed circuits, dense packing goes a long way toward minimizing adverse
analog  phenomena,  including  transmission-line  effects  and  speed-of-light
DO NOT COPYlimitations.
multichip module To satisfy the most stringent requirements for speed and density, multichip
(MCM) modules (MCMs)  have been developed. In this technology, IC dice are not
mounted in individual plastic or ceramic packages. Instead, the IC dice for a
high-speed subsystem (say, a processor and its cache memory) are bonded
DO NOT COPY
directly to a substrate that contains the required interconnections on multiple
layers. The MCM is hermetically sealed and has its own external pins for power,
ground, and just those signals that are required by the system that contains it.
DO NOT COPY1.10 Digital-Design Levels
Digital design can be carried out at several different levels of representation and
abstraction. Although you may learn and practice design at a particular level,
from time to time you’ll need to go up or down a level or two to get the job done.
DO NOT COPYAlso, the industry itself and most designers have been steadily moving to higher
levels of abstraction as circuit density and functionality have increased.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.10  Digital-Design Levels  19
The lowest level of digital design is device physics and IC manufacturing
processes. This is the level that is primarily responsible for the breathtaking
advances in IC speed and density that have occurred over the past decades. The
DO NOT COPY
effects of these advances are summarized in  Moore’s Law, first stated by Intel Moore’s Law
founder Gordon Moore in 1965: that the number of transistors per square inch in
an IC doubles every year. In recent years, the rate of advance has slowed down to
doubling about every 18 months, but it is important to note that with each dou-
bling of density has also come a doubling of speed.
DO NOT COPY
This book does not reach down to the level of device physics and IC
processes, but you need to recognize the importance of that level. Being aware of
likely technology advances and other changes is important in system and
product planning. For example, decreases in chip geometries have recently
forced a move to lower logic-power-supply voltages, causing major changes inDO NOT COPY
the way designers plan and specify modular systems and upgrades.
In this book, we jump into digital design at the transistor level and go all
the way up to the level of logic design using HDLs. We stop short of the next
level, which includes computer design and overall system design. The “center”
of our discussion is at the level of functional building blocks.DO NOT COPY
To get a preview of the levels of design that we’ll cover, consider a simple A
design example. Suppose you are to build a “multiplexer” with two data input
Z
bits,  A  and  B, a control input bit  S, and an output bit  Z. Depending on the value
B
of S, 0 or 1, the circuit is to transfer the value of either A or B to the output Z. This
S
DO NOT COPY
idea is illustrated in the “switch model” of Figure 1-7. Let us consider the design
F igu re 1 -7
of this function at several different levels.
Switch model for
Although logic design is usually carried out at higher level, for some func-
multiplexer function.
tions it is advantageous to optimize them by designing at the transistor level. The
multiplexer is such a function. Figure 1-8 shows how the multiplexer can be
DO NOT COPY
designed in “CMOS” technology using specialized transistor circuit structures
VCC
Fig ure 1-8
Multiplexer design using
DO NOT COPY
CMOS transmission gates.
A
DO NOT COPYZ
B
DO NOT COPYS
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

20  Chapter 1  Introduction
T abl e 1 -1
S  A  B  Z
Truth table for the
multiplexer function. 0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1  0
0  1  0  1
0  1  1  1
1  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
1  0  1  1
1  1  0  0
1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
called “transmission gates,” discussed in Section 3.7.1. Using this approach, the
multiplexer can be built with just six transistors. Any of the other approaches
that we describe require at least 14 transistors.
In the traditional study of logic design, we would use a “truth table” to
describe the multiplexer’s logic function. A truth table list all possible combina-
DO NOT COPY
tions of input values and the corresponding output values for the function. Since
3 
the multiplexer has three inputs, it has 2 or 8 possible input combinations, as
shown in the truth table in Table 1-1.
Once we have a truth table, traditional logic design methods, described in
DO NOT COPYSection 4.3, use Boolean algebra and well understood minimization algorithms
to derive an “optimal” two-level  AND-OR  equation from the truth table. For the
multiplexer truth table, we would derive the following equation:
Z  =  S′ ⋅  A  +  S  ⋅  B
DO NOT COPYThis equation is read “Z  equals not  S  and  A  or  S  and  B.” Going one step further,
we can convert the equation into a corresponding set of logic gates that perform
the specified logic function, as shown in Figure 1-9. This circuit requires 14
transistors if we use standard CMOS technology for the four gates shown.
A multiplexer is a very commonly used function, and most digital logic
DO NOT COPY
technologies provide predefined multiplexer building blocks. For example, the
74x157 is an MSI chip that performs multiplexing on two 4-bit inputs simulta-
neously. Figure 1-10 is a logic diagram that shows how we can hook up just one
bit of this 4-bit building block to solve the problem at hand. The numbers in
color are pin numbers of a 16-pin DIP package containing the device.
DO NOT COPY
A ASN
Fi gure 1 -9 SN 
Gate-level logic diagram S
Z
for multiplexer function.
DO NOT COPYSB
B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.10  Digital-Design Levels  21
74x157
15
G
1
S S
DO NOT COPY
2 
A  1A 4
3 1Y Z
B 1B
5
2A 7
6 2Y
2B
11
3A 9
DO NOT COPY10 3Y Fi gure 1 -10
3B
14 Logic diagram for a
4A 12
13 4Y multiplexer using an
4B
MSI building block.
DO NOT COPY
We can also realize the multiplexer function as part of a programmable
logic device. Languages like ABEL allow us to specify outputs using Boolean
equations similar to the one on the previous page, but it’s usually more conve-
nient to use “higher-level” language elements. For example, Table 1-2 is an
ABEL program for the multiplexer function. The first three lines define theDO NOT COPY
name of the program module and specify the type of PLD in which the function
will be realized. The next two lines specify the device pin numbers for inputs and
output. The “WHEN” statement specifies the actual logic function in a way that’s
very easy to understand, even though we haven’t covered ABEL yet.
DO NOT COPYAn even higher level language, VHDL, can be used to specify the multi-
plexer function in a way that is very flexible and hierarchical. Table 1-3 is an
example VHDL program for the multiplexer. The first two lines specify a
standard library and set of definitions to use in the design. The next four lines
specify only the inputs and outputs of the function, and purposely hide any
DO NOT COPY
details about the way the function is realized internally. The “architecture”
section of the program specifies the function’s behavior. VHDL syntax takes a
little getting used to, but the single “when” statement says basically the same
thing that the ABEL version did. A VHDL “synthesis tool” can start with this
DO NOT COPY
module chap1mux Ta ble 1-2
title 'Two-input multiplexer example' ABEL program for
CHAP1MUX device 'P16V8' the multiplexer.
A, B, S  pin 1, 2, 3;
DO NOT COPY
Z  pin 13 istype 'com';
equations
WHEN S == 0 THEN Z = A;  ELSE Z = B;
DO NOT COPY
end chap1mux
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

22  Chapter 1  Introduction
Ta ble 1-3 library IEEE;
VHDL program for use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
the multiplexer.
DO NOT COPYentity Vchap1mux is
port ( A, B, S: in  STD_LOGIC;
Z:  out STD_LOGIC );
end Vchap1mux;
architecture Vchap1mux_arch of Vchap1mux is
DO NOT COPYbegin
Z <= A when S = '0' else B;
end Vchap1mux_arch;
behavioral description and produce a circuit that has this behavior in a specified
DO NOT COPY
target digital-logic technology.
By explicitly enforcing a separation of input/output definitions (“entity”)
and internal realization (“architecture”), VHDL makes it easy for designers to
define alternate realizations of functions without having to make changes else-
DO NOT COPYwhere in the design hierarchy. For example, a designer could specify an
alternate, structural architecture for the multiplexer as shown in Table 1-4. This
architecture is basically a text equivalent of the logic diagram in Figure 1-9.
Going one step further, VHDL is powerful enough that we could actually
define operations that model functional behavioral at the transistor level (though
DO NOT COPYwe won’t explore such capabilities in this book). Thus, we could come full circle
by writing a VHDL program that specifies a transistor-level realization of the
multiplexer equivalent to Figure 1-8.
Ta ble 1-4
DO NOT COPYarchitecture Vchap1mux_gate_arch of Vchap1mux is
“Structural” VHDL signal SN, ASN, SB: STD_LOGIC;
program for the begin
multiplexer. U1: INV (S, SN);
U2: AND2 (A, SN, ASN);
U3: AND2 (S, B, SB);
DO NOT COPYU4: OR2 (ASN, SB, Z);
end Vchap1mux_gate_arch;
1.11 The Name of the Game
DO NOT COPY
Given the functional and performance requirements for a digital system, the
board-level design name of the game in practical digital design is to minimize cost. For board-level
designs—systems that are packaged on a single PCB—this usually means min-
imizing the number of IC packages. If too many ICs are required, they won’t all
DO NOT COPYfit on the PCB. “Well, just use a bigger PCB,” you say. Unfortunately, PCB sizes
are usually constrained by factors such as pre-existing standards (e.g., add-in
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 1.12  Going Forward  23
boards for PCs), packaging constraints (e.g., it has to fit in a toaster), or edicts
from above (e.g., in order to get the project approved three months ago, you fool-
ishly told your manager that it would all fit on a 3 ×  5 inch PCB, and now you’ve
DO NOT COPY
got to deliver!). In each of these cases, the cost of using a larger PCB or multiple
PCBs may be unacceptable.
Minimizing the number of ICs is usually the rule even though individual IC
costs vary. For example, a typical SSI or MSI IC may cost 25 cents, while an
small PLD may cost a dollar. It may be possible to perform a particular function
DO NOT COPY
with three SSI and MSI ICs (75 cents) or one PLD (a dollar). In most situations,
the more expensive PLD solution is used, not because the designer owns stock in
the IC company, but because the PLD solution uses less PCB area and is also a
lot easier to change if it’s not right the first time.
DO NOT COPYIn  ASIC design, the name of the game is a little different, but the impor- ASIC design
tance of structured, functional design techniques is the same. Although it’s easy
to burn hours and weeks creating custom macrocells and minimizing the total
gate count of an ASIC, only rarely is this advisable. The per-unit cost reduction
achieved by having a 10% smaller chip is negligible except in high-volume
applications. In applications with low to medium volume (the majority), twoDO NOT COPY
other factors are more important: design time and NRE cost.
A shorter design time allows a product to reach the market sooner, increas-
ing revenues over the lifetime of the product. A lower NRE cost also flows right
to the “bottom line,” and in small companies may be the only way the project can
DO NOT COPY
be completed before the company runs out of money (believe me, I’ve been
there!). If the product is successful, it’s always possible and profitable to
“tweak” the design later to reduce per-unit costs. The need to minimize design
time and NRE cost argues in favor of a structured, as opposed to highly opti-
mized, approach to ASIC design, using standard building blocks provided in the
DO NOT COPY
ASIC manufacturer’s library.
The considerations in PLD, CPLD, and FPGA design are a combination of
the above. The choice of a particular PLD technology and device size is usually
made fairly early in the design cycle. Later, as long as the design “fits” in the
selected device, there’s no point in trying to optimize gate count or board area—
DO NOT COPY
the device has already been committed. However, if new functions or bug fixes
push the design beyond the capacity of the selected device, that’s when you must
work very hard to modify the design to make it fit.
DO NOT COPY
1.12 Going Forward
This concludes the introductory chapter. As you continue reading this book,
keep in mind two things. First, the ultimate goal of digital design is to build
systems that solve problems for people. While this book will give you the basic
tools for design, it’s still your job to keep “the big picture” in the back of yourDO NOT COPY
mind. Second, cost is an important factor in every design decision; and you must
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

24  Chapter 1  Introduction
consider not only the cost of digital components, but also the cost of the design
activity itself.
Finally, as you get deeper into the text, if you encounter something that you
DO NOT COPY
think you’ve seen before but don’t remember where, please consult the index.
I’ve tried to make it as helpful and complete as possible.
Drill Problems
DO NOT COPY
1.1  Suggest some better-looking chapter-opening artwork to put on page 1 of the next
edition of this book.
1.2  Give three different definitions for the word “bit” as used in this chapter.
1.3  Define the following acronyms: ASIC, CAD, CD, CO, CPLD, DIP, DVD, FPGA,
HDL, IC, IP, LSI, MCM, MSI, NRE, OK, PBX, PCB, PLD, PWB, SMT, SSI,
DO NOT COPY
VHDL, VLSI.
1.4  Research the definitions of the following acronyms: ABEL, CMOS, JPEG,
MPEG, OK, PERL, VHDL. (Is OK really an acronym?)
1.5  Excluding the topics in Section 1.2, list three once-analog systems that have
DO NOT COPY“gone digital” since you were born.
1.6  Draw a digital circuit consisting of a 2-input  AND  gate and three inverters, where
an inverter is connected to each of the  AND  gate’s inputs and its output. For each
of the four possible combinations of inputs applied to the two primary inputs of
this circuit, determine the value produced at the primary output. Is there a simpler
DO NOT COPYcircuit that gives the same input/output behavior?
1.7  When should you use the pin diagrams of Figure 1-5 in the schematic diagram of
a circuit?
1.8  What is the relationship between “die” and “dice”?
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

c h a p t e r
DO NOT
2
COPY
DO NOT
Number Systems and Codes
COPY
igital systems are built from circuits that process binary digits—
0s and 1s—yet very few real-life problems are based on binary
DO NOT
numbers or any numbers at all. Therefore, a digital system
D
designer must establish some correspondence between the bina-
ry digits processed by digital circuits and real-life numbers,
events, and conditions. The purpose of this chapter is to show you how
familiar numeric quantities can be represented and manipulated in a digitalCOPY
system, and how nonnumeric data, events, and conditions also can be
represented.
The first nine sections describe binary number systems and show how
addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division are performed in these
systems. Sections 2.10–2.13 show how other things, such as decimal num-DO NOT
bers, text characters, mechanical positions, and arbitrary conditions, can be
encoded using strings of binary digits.
Section 2.14 introduces “n-cubes,” which provide a way to visualize
the relationship between different bit strings. The  n-cubes are especially
COPY
useful in the study of error-detecting codes in Section 2.15. We conclude the
chapter with an introduction to codes for transmitting and storing data one
bit at a time.
DO NOT
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 21
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

22  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
2.1 Positional Number Systems
The traditional number system that we learned in school and use every day in
positional numberDO NOT COPYbusiness is called a  positional number system. In such a system, a number is rep-
system resented by a string of digits where each digit position has an associated  weight.
weight The value of a number is a weighted sum of the digits, for example:
1734 = 1·1000 + 7· 100 + 3·10 + 4·1
DO NOT COPY
Each weight is a power of 10 corresponding to the digit’s position. A decimal
point allows negative as well as positive powers of 10 to be used:
5185.68 = 5· 1000 + 1·100 + 8·10 + 5· 1 + 6·0.1 + 8·0.01
In general, a number  D  of the form  d1d0 .d−1d−2  has the value
DO NOT COPY
1  0  –1  –2
D  =  d1 ·10  +  d0 ·10  +  d–1 ·10  +  d–2 ·10 
base Here, 10 is called the  base  or  radix  of the number system. In a general positional
radix number system, the radix may be any integer  r  ≥  2, and a digit in position  i  has
i
weight  r  . The general form of a number in such a system is
DO NOT COPY
d p–1d p–2 · · · d1d0 . d–1d–2 · · ·d–n
where there are  p  digits to the left of the point and  n  digits to the right of the
radix point point, called the  radix point. If the radix point is missing, it is assumed to be to
the right of the rightmost digit. The value of the number is the sum of each digit
DO NOT COPY
multiplied by the corresponding power of the radix:
p – 1 i
D = d  ⋅ r 
∑ i 
i = –n
DO NOT COPY
high-order digit Except for possible leading and trailing zeroes, the representation of a
most significant digit number in a positional number system is unique. (Obviously, 0185.6300 equals
low-order digit 185.63, and so on.) The leftmost digit in such a number is called the  high-order
least significant digit or  most significant digit; the rightmost is the  low-order  or  least significant digit.
DO NOT COPYAs we’ll learn in Chapter 3, digital circuits have signals that are normally
binary digit in one of only two conditions—low or high, charged or discharged, off or on.
bit The signals in these circuits are interpreted to represent  binary digits  (or  bits)
binary radix that have one of two values, 0 and 1. Thus, the  binary radix  is normally used to
represent numbers in a digital system. The general form of a binary number is
DO NOT COPY
b p–1b p–2 · · · b1b0 . b–1b–2 · · ·b–n
and its value is
p – 1 i
B = b  ⋅ 2
i 
DO NOT COPY∑–
i = n
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.2  Octal and Hexadecimal Numbers  23
In a binary number, the radix point is called the  binary point. When dealing with binary point
binary and other nondecimal numbers, we use a subscript to indicate the radix
of each number, unless the radix is clear from the context. Examples of binary
DO NOT COPY
numbers and their decimal equivalents are given below.
10011 2  = 1· 16 + 0·8 + 0· 4 + 1·2 + 1· 1 = 19 10
1000102  = 1· 32 + 0·16 + 0·8 + 0·4 + 1· 2 + 0·1 = 34 10
101. 001  = 1· 4 + 0·2 + 1· 1 + 0·0.5 + 0·0.25 + 1·0.125 = 5.125 
DO NOT COPY2  10
The leftmost bit of a binary number is called the  high-order  or  most significant MSB
bit (MSB); the rightmost is the  low-order  or  least significant bit (LSB). LSB
2.2 Octal and Hexadecimal NumbersDO NOT COPY
Radix 10 is important because we use it in everyday business, and radix 2 is
important because binary numbers can be processed directly by digital circuits.
Numbers in other radices are not often processed directly, but may be important
for documentation or other purposes. In particular, the radices 8 and 16 provide
DO NOT COPY
convenient shorthand representations for multibit numbers in a digital system.
The  octal number system  uses radix 8, while the  hexadecimal number sys- octal number system
tem  uses radix 16. Table 2-1 shows the binary integers from 0 to 1111 and their hexadecimal number
octal, decimal, and hexadecimal equivalents. The octal system needs 8 digits, so system
it uses digits 0–7 of the decimal system. The hexadecimal system needs 16 dig-DO NOT COPY
its, so it supplements decimal digits 0–9 with the letters  A–F. hexadecimal digits
The octal and hexadecimal number systems are useful for representing A–F
multibit numbers because their radices are powers of 2. Since a string of three
bits can take on eight different combinations, it follows that each 3-bit string can
be uniquely represented by one octal digit, according to the third and fourth col-DO NOT COPY
umns  of  Table 2-1.  Likewise,  a  4-bit  string  can  be  represented  by  one
hexadecimal digit according to the fifth and sixth columns of the table.
Thus, it is very easy to convert a binary number to octal. Starting at the binary to octal
binary point and working left, we simply separate the bits into groups of three conversion
DO NOT COPY
and replace each group with the corresponding octal digit:
100011001110 2  = 100 011 001 110 2  = 43168
11101101110101001 2  = 011 101 101 110 101 001 2  = 355651 8
The procedure for binary to hexadecimal conversion is similar, except we useDO NOT COPYbinary to hexadecimal
groups of four bits: conversion
100011001110 2  = 1000 1100 1110 2  = 8CE 16
11101101110101001 2  = 00011101 1011 1010 1001 2  = 1DBA916
DO NOT COPY
In these examples we have freely added zeroes on the left to make the total num-
ber of bits a multiple of 3 or 4 as required.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

24  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 1
3-Bit 4-Bit
Binary, decimal, Binary  Decimal  Octal String  Hexadecimal String
octal, and
hexadecimalDO NOT COPY0  0  0  000  0  0000
numbers. 1  1  1  001  1  0001
10  2  2  010  2  0010
11  3  3  011  3  0011
100  4  4  100  4  0100
DO NOT COPY
101  5  5  101  5  0101
110  6  6  110  6  0110
111  7  7  111  7  0111
1000  8  10  —  8  1000
DO NOT COPY
1001  9  11  —  9  1001
1010  10  12  —  A  1010
1011  11  13  —  B  1011
1100  12  14  —  C  1100
DO NOT COPY1101  13  15  —  D  1101
1110  14  16  —  E  1110
1111  15  17  —  F  1111
DO NOT COPYIf a binary number contains digits to the right of the binary point, we can
convert them to octal or hexadecimal by starting at the binary point and working
right. Both the left-hand and right-hand sides can be padded with zeroes to get
multiples of three or four bits, as shown in the example below:
DO NOT COPY10.1011001011 2  = 010 . 101 100 101 1002  = 2.5454 8
= 0010 . 1011 0010 1100 2  = 2.B2C 16
octal or hexadecimal to Converting in the reverse direction, from octal or hexadecimal to binary, is
binary conversion very easy. We simply replace each octal or hexadecimal digit with the corre-
DO NOT COPYsponding 3- or 4-bit string, as shown below:
1357 8  = 001 011 101 111 2
2046.178  = 010 000 100 110 . 001 111 2
BEAD 16  = 1011 1110 1010 1101 2
DO NOT COPY
9F. 46C 16  = 1001 111 . 0100 0110 1100 2
The octal number system was quite popular 25 years ago because of certain
minicomputers that had their front-panel lights and switches arranged in groups
of three. However, the octal number system is not used much today, because of
DO NOT COPY
byte the preponderance of machines that process 8-bit  bytes. It is difficult to extract
individual byte values in multibyte quantities in the octal representation; for
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.3  General Positional Number System Conversions  25
WHEN I’M 64  As you grow older, you’ll find that the hexadecimal number system is useful for
DO NOT COPYmore than just computers. When I turned 40, I told friends that I had just turned 28 16.
The “16 ” was whispered under my breath, of course. At age 50, I’ll be only 32 16 .
People get all excited about decennial birthdays like 20, 30, 40, 50, …, but you
should be able to convince your friends that the decimal system is of no fundamental
significance. More significant life changes occur around birthdays 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, and
64, when you add a most significant bit to your age. Why do you think the Beatles
DO NOT COPY
sang “When I’m sixty-four”?
example, what are the octal values of the four 8-bit bytes in the 32-bit number
with octal representation 12345670123DO NOT COPY  ?
8
In the hexadecimal system, two digits represent an 8-bit byte, and 2n  digits
represent an  n-byte word; each pair of digits constitutes exactly one byte. For
example, the 32-bit hexadecimal number 5678ABCD 16  consists of four bytes
with values 56 16, 78 16 , AB16 , and CD16 . In this context, a 4-bit hexadecimal digit
DO NOT COPY
is sometimes called a  nibble; a 32-bit (4-byte) number has eight nibbles. Hexa- nibble
decimal numbers are often used to describe a computer’s memory address space.
For example, a computer with 16-bit addresses might be described as having
read/write memory installed at addresses 0–EFFF 16 , and read-only memory at
addresses F000–FFFF  . Many computer programming languages use the prefix
DO NOT COPY16
“0x” to denote a hexadecimal number, for example,  0xBFC0000. 0x  prefix
2.3 General Positional Number System Conversions
In general, conversion between two radices cannot be done by simple substitu-
DO NOT COPY
tions; arithmetic operations are required. In this section, we show how to convert
a number in any radix to radix 10 and vice versa, using radix-10 arithmetic.
In Section 2.1, we indicated that the value of a number in any radix is given radix-r to decimal
by the formula conversion
p – 1
DO NOT COPYi
D = d  ⋅ r 
∑ i 
i = –n
where  r  is the radix of the number and there are  p  digits to the left of the radix
point and  n  to the right. Thus, the value of the number can be found by convert-
ing each digit of the number to its radix-10 equivalent and expanding theDO NOT COPY
formula using radix-10 arithmetic. Some examples are given below:
1CE8 16  = 1·16 3  + 12· 16 2  + 14·161  + 8· 16 0  = 7400
10
F1A3 16  = 15·16 3  + 1· 16 2  + 10·161  + 3· 16 0  = 61859
10
2  1  0  –1 
DO NOT COPY436.5 8  = 4·8  + 3· 8  + 6·8  + 5·8 = 286.625 10
132.3 4  = 1·4 2  + 3· 4 1  + 2·4 0  + 3·4–1  = 30.75 
10
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

26  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
A shortcut for converting whole numbers to radix 10 is obtained by rewrit-
ing the expansion formula as follows:
DO NOT COPYD  = ((· · ·((d p–1 )·r  +  d p–2 )· r  + · · ·) · · ·  r  +  d1 )·r  +  d0
That is, we start with a sum of 0; beginning with the leftmost digit, we multiply
the sum by  r and add the next digit to the sum, repeating until all digits have been
processed. For example, we can write
DO NOT COPYF1AC 16  = (((15)· 16 + 1·16 + 10)· 16 + 12
decimal to radix-r Although this formula is not too exciting in itself, it forms the basis for a
conversion very convenient method of converting a decimal number D  to a radix r. Consider
what happens if we divide the formula by  r. Since the parenthesized part of the
formula is evenly divisible by  r, the quotient will be
DO NOT COPY
Q  = (· · ·((d p–1 )· r  +  d p–2 )·r  + · · ·)· r  +  d1
and the remainder will be  d0. Thus,  d0  can be computed as the remainder of the
long division of  D  by  r. Furthermore, the quotient  Q  has the same form as the
DO NOT COPYoriginal formula. Therefore, successive divisions by  r  will yield successive dig-
its of  D  from right to left, until all the digits of  D  have been derived. Examples
are given below:
179  ÷  2  =  89 remainder 1  (LSB)
÷2  =  44 remainder 1
DO NOT COPY
÷2  =  22 remainder 0
÷2  =  11 remainder 0
÷2  =  5 remainder 1
÷2  =  2 remainder 1
DO NOT COPY
÷2  =  1 remainder 0
÷2  =  0 remainder 1  (MSB)
179 10  =  10110011 2
467  ÷  8  =  58 remainder 3  (least significant digit)
DO NOT COPY
÷8  =  7 remainder 2
÷  8  =  0 remainder 7  (most significant digit)
467 10  =  723 8
3417  ÷  16  =  213 remainder 9  (least significant digit)
DO NOT COPY
÷  16  =  13 remainder 5
÷  16  =  0 remainder 13  (most significant digit)
3417 10  =  D59 16
Table 2-2 summarizes methods for converting among the most common radices.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.3  General Positional Number System Conversions  27
Ta b l e 2 - 2  Conversion methods for common radices.
DO NOT COPY
Conversion  Method Example
Binary to
Octal  Substitution  10111011001 2  = 10 111 011 001 2  = 2731 8
DO NOT COPYHexadecimal  Substitution  10111011001 2  = 101 1101 1001 2  = 5D9 16
Decimal  Summation  10111011001 2  = 1  ⋅  1024  +  0  ⋅  512  +  1  ⋅  256  +  1  ⋅  128  +  1  ⋅  64
+  0  ⋅  32  +  1  ⋅  16  +  1  ⋅  8  +  0  ⋅  4  +  0  ⋅  2  +  1  ⋅  1  =  1497 10
Octal to
DO NOT COPYBinary  Substitution  1234  = 001 010 011 100 
8  2
Hexadecimal  Substitution  1234 8  = 001 010 011 100 2  =  0010 1001 1100 2  = 29C 16
Decimal  Summation  1234 8  = 1  ⋅  512  +  2  ⋅  64  +  3  ⋅  8  +  4  ⋅  1  =  668 10
Hexadecimal to
DO NOT COPY
Binary  Substitution  C0DE 16  = 1100 0000 1101 1110 2
Octal  Substitution  C0DE16  = 1100 0000 1101 1110 2  = 1 100 000 011 011 110 2  = 140336 8
Decimal  Summation  C0DE16  = 12  ⋅  4096  +  0  ⋅  256  +  13  ⋅  16  +  14  ⋅  1 = 4937410
DO NOT COPY
Decimal to
Binary  Division  108 10  ÷  2 = 54 remainder 0  (LSB)
÷2 = 27 remainder 0
÷2 = 13 remainder 1
÷2 = 6 remainder 1
DO NOT COPY
÷2 = 3 remainder 0
÷2 = 1 remainder 1
÷2 = 0 remainder 1  (MSB)
108 10  = 1101100 2
DO NOT COPYOctal  Division  108  ÷  8 = 13 remainder 4  (least significant digit)
10 
÷8 = 1 remainder 5
÷8 = 0 remainder 1  (most significant digit)
108 10  = 154 8
Hexadecimal  Division  108 10  ÷  16 = 6 remainder 12  (least significant digit)
DO NOT COPY
÷16 = 0 remainder 6  (most significant digit)
108 10  = 6C 16
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

28  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 3
cin or  bin  x  y  cout  s  bout  d
Binary addition and
subtraction table. 0  0  0  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1  0  1  1  1
0  1  0  0  1  0  1
0  1  1  1  0  0  0
1  0  0  0  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
1  0  1  1  0  1  0
1  1  0  1  0  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
2.4 Addition and Subtraction of Nondecimal Numbers
Addition and subtraction of nondecimal numbers by hand uses the same tech-
nique that we learned in grammar school for decimal numbers; the only catch is
that the addition and subtraction tables are different.
binary additionDO NOT COPYTable 2-3 is the addition and subtraction table for binary digits. To add two
binary numbers  X  and  Y, we add together the least significant bits with an initial
carry (cin) of 0, producing carry (cout ) and sum (s) bits according to the table. We
continue processing bits from right to left, adding the carry out of each column
into the next column’s sum.
DO NOT COPY
Two examples of decimal additions and the corresponding binary additions
are shown in Figure 2-1, using a colored arrow to indicate a carry of 1. The same
examples are repeated below along with two more, with the carries shown as a
bit string  C:
DO NOT COPYC 101111000 C 001011000
X 190 10111110 X 173 10101101
Y +141 +  10001101 Y +  44 +  00101100
X  +  Y  331  101001011  X  +  Y  217  11011001
DO NOT COPY
C 011111110 C 000000000
X 127 01111111 X 170 10101010
Y +  63 +  00111111 Y +  85 +  01010101
X  +  Y  190  10111110  X  +  Y  255  11111111
DO NOT COPY
binary subtraction Binary subtraction is performed similarly, using borrows (bin  and  bout)
instead of carries between steps, and producing a difference bit  d. Two examples
minuend of decimal subtractions and the corresponding binary subtractions are shown in
subtrahend Figure 2-2. As in decimal subtraction, the binary minuend values in the columns
DO NOT COPYare modified when borrows occur, as shown by the colored arrows and bits. The
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.4  Addition and Subtraction of Nondecimal Numbers  29
1  1  1  1  1  1  1
X 190 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 0 X 173 1 0 1 0 1 1 0 1
Y + 141 + 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 Y + 44 + 0 0 1 0 1 1 0 0
DO NOT COPY
X + Y 331 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 X + Y 217 1 1 0 1 1 0 0 1
Figure 2-1  Examples of decimal and corresponding binary additions.
examples from the figure are repeated below along with two more, this time
DO NOT COPY
showing the borrows as a bit string  B:
B 001111100 B 011011010
X 229 11100101 X 210 11010010
DO NOT COPYY −  46 −  00101110 Y −109 −  01101101
X  −  Y  183  10110111  X  −  Y  101  01100101
B 010101010 B 000000000
X 170 10101010 X 221 11011101
DO NOT COPY
Y −  85 −  01010101 Y −  76 −  01001100
X  −  Y  85  01010101  X  −  Y  145  10010001
A very common use of subtraction in computers is to compare two numbers. For comparing numbers
example, if the operationDO NOT COPY  X  −  Y  produces a borrow out of the most significant bit
position, then  X  is less than  Y; otherwise,  X  is greater than or equal to  Y. The rela-
tionship between carries and borrow in adders and subtractors will be explored
in Section 5.10.
Addition and subtraction tables can be developed for octal and hexadeci-
DO NOT COPY
mal digits, or any other desired radix. However, few computer engineers bother
to memorize these tables. If you rarely need to manipulate nondecimal numbers,
Must borrow 1, yielding
the new subtraction 10–1 = 1
Figure 2-2
DO NOT COPY
Examples of decimal
After the first borrow, the new
subtraction for this column is and corresponding
0–1, so we must borrow again.
binary subtractions.
The borrow ripples through three columns
to reach a borrowable 1, i.e.,
DO NOT COPY100 = 011 (the modified bits)
+  1 (the borrow)
0 10  1  1 10 10 0 10 10  0  1 10  0 10
minuend X 229 1 1 1  0  0  1 0 1 X 210 1  1  0 1  0  0 1 0
subtrahend Y –  46 – 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 Y – 109 –  0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1
DO NOT COPY
difference X – Y 183 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 X – Y 101 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

30  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
then it’s easy enough on those occasions to convert them to decimal, calculate
results, and convert back. On the other hand, if you must perform calculations in
binary, octal, or hexadecimal frequently, then you should ask Santa for a pro-
DO NOT COPY
grammer’s “hex calculator” from Texas Instruments or Casio.
If the calculator’s battery wears out, some mental shortcuts can be used to
facilitate nondecimal arithmetic. In general, each column addition (or subtrac-
tion) can be done by converting the column digits to decimal, adding in decimal,
and converting the result to corresponding sum and carry digits in the nondeci-
DO NOT COPY
mal radix. (A carry is produced whenever the column sum equals or exceeds the
radix.) Since the addition is done in decimal, we rely on our knowledge of the
decimal addition table; the only new thing that we need to learn is the conversion
from decimal to nondecimal digits and vice versa. The sequence of steps for
hexadecimal additionDO NOT COPYmentally adding two hexadecimal numbers is shown below:
C 1 1 0 0 1 1 0 0
X 1 9 B 9 16 1 9 11 9
16 
Y  + C 7 E 6 +12 7 14 6
16 
DO NOT COPYX  +  Y  E 1  9 F  14 17 25 15
14 16+1 16+9 15
E 1 9 F
2.5 Representation of Negative Numbers
DO NOT COPY
So far, we have dealt only with positive numbers, but there are many ways to rep-
resent negative numbers. In everyday business, we use the signed-magnitude
system, discussed next. However, most computers use one of the complement
number systems that we introduce later.
DO NOT COPY
2.5.1 Signed-Magnitude Representation
signed-magnitude In the  signed-magnitude system, a number consists of a magnitude and a symbol
system indicating whether the magnitude is positive or negative. Thus, we interpret dec-
imal numbers  +98,  −57,  +123.5, and  −13 in the usual way, and we also assume
DO NOT COPY
that the sign is “+” if no sign symbol is written. There are two possible represen-
tations of zero, “+0” and “−0”, but both have the same value.
The signed-magnitude system is applied to binary numbers by using an
sign bit extra bit position to represent the sign (the  sign bit). Traditionally, the most sig-
nificant bit (MSB) of a bit string is used as the sign bit (0  =  plus, 1  =  minus), and
DO NOT COPY
the lower-order bits contain the magnitude. Thus, we can write several 8-bit
signed-magnitude integers and their decimal equivalents:
01010101 2  = +85 10  11010101 2  = –85 10
01111111  = +127  11111111  = –127 
DO NOT COPY2  10  2  10
00000000 2  = +0 10  10000000 2  = –0 10
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.5  Representation of Negative Numbers  31
The signed-magnitude system has an equal number of positive and nega-
n−1
tive integers. An  n-bit signed-magnitude integer lies within the range  −(2 −1)
n−1
through  +(2 −1), and there are two possible representations of zero.
DO NOT COPY
Now suppose that we wanted to build a digital logic circuit that adds
signed-magnitude numbers. The circuit must examine the signs of the addends signed-magnitude
to determine what to do with the magnitudes. If the signs are the same, it must adder
add the magnitudes and give the result the same sign. If the signs are different, it
must compare the magnitudes, subtract the smaller from the larger, and give the
DO NOT COPY
result the sign of the larger. All of these “ifs,” “adds,” “subtracts,” and “com-
pares” translate into a lot of logic-circuit complexity. Adders for complement
number systems are much simpler, as we’ll show next. Perhaps the one redeem-
ing feature of a signed-magnitude system is that, once we know how to build a
signed-magnitude adder, a signed-magnitude subtractor is almost trivial toDO NOT COPYsigned-magnitude
build—it need only change the sign of the subtrahend and pass it along with the subtractor
minuend to an adder.
2.5.2 Complement Number Systems
While the signed-magnitude system negates a number by changing its sign, aDO NOT COPY
complement number system  negates a number by taking its complement as complement number
defined by the system. Taking the complement is more difficult than changing system
the sign, but two numbers in a complement number system can be added or sub-
tracted directly without the sign and magnitude checks required by the signed-
DO NOT COPY
magnitude system. We shall describe two complement number systems, called
the “radix complement” and the “diminished radix-complement.”
In any complement number system, we normally deal with a fixed number
of digits, say  n. (However, we can increase the number of digits by “sign exten-
sion” as shown in Exercise 2.23, and decrease the number by truncating high-
DO NOT COPY
order digits as shown in Exercise 2.24.) We further assume that the radix is  r, and
that numbers have the form
D = d n–1d n–2 · · · d1d0  .
The radix point is on the right and so the number is an integer. If an operation
DO NOT COPY
produces a result that requires more than  n  digits, we throw away the extra high-
order digit(s). If a number  D  is complemented twice, the result is  D.
2.5.3 Radix-Complement Representation
In aDO NOT COPY  radix-complement system, the complement of an  n-digit number is obtained radix-complement
n
by subtracting it from  r  . In the decimal number system, the radix complement system
is called the  10’s complement. Some examples using 4-digit decimal numbers 10’s complement
(and subtraction from 10,000) are shown in Table 2-4.
By definition, the radix complement of an  n-digit number  D  is obtained by
n n 
subtracting it fromDO NOT COPY  r  . If  D  is between 1 and  r  −  1, this subtraction produces
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

32  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 4
10’s 9s’
Examples of 10’s and Number complement complement
9s’ complements.
DO NOT COPY1849  8151  8150
2067  7933  7932
100  9900  9899
7  9993  9992
8151  1849  1848
DO NOT COPY
0  10000 (= 0)  9999
n  n
another number between 1 and  r  −  1. If  D  is 0, the result of the subtraction is  r  ,
which has the form 100  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  00, where there are a total of  n  +  1 digits. We throw
DO NOT COPY
away the extra high-order digit and get the result 0. Thus, there is only one rep-
resentation of zero in a radix-complement system.
It seems from the definition that a subtraction operation is needed to com-
computing the radix pute the radix complement of  D. However, this subtraction can be avoided by
n  n  n  n  n 
complement rewriting  r  as (r  −  1)  +  1 and  r  −  D  as ((r  −  1)  −  D)  +  1. The number  r  −  1
DO NOT COPY
has the form  mm  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  mm, where  m  =  r  −  1 and there are  n  m’s. For example,
10,000 equals 9,999  +  1. If we define the complement of a digit  d  to be r  −  1  −  d,
n 
then (r  −  1)  −  D  is obtained by complementing the digits of  D. Therefore, the
radix complement of a number  D  is obtained by complementing the individual
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 2 - 5
Complement
Digit complements.
Digit  Binary  Octal  Decimal  Hexadecimal
0  1  7  9  F
DO NOT COPY
1  0  6  8  E
2  –  5  7  D
3  –  4  6  C
4  –  3  5  B
DO NOT COPY5  –  2  4  A
6  –  1  3  9
7  –  0  2  8
8  –  –  1  7
9  –  –  0  6
DO NOT COPY
A  –  –  –  5
B  –  –  –  4
C  –  –  –  3
D  –  –  –  2
DO NOT COPYE  –  –  –  1
F  –  –  –  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.5  Representation of Negative Numbers  33
digits of  D  and adding 1. For example, the 10’s complement of 1849 is 8150  +  1,
or 8151. You should confirm that this trick also works for the other 10’s-comple-
ment examples above. Table 2-5 lists the digit complements for binary, octal,
DO NOT COPY
decimal, and hexadecimal numbers.
2.5.4 Two’s-Complement Representation
For binary numbers, the radix complement is called the  two’s complement. The two’s complement
MSB of a number in this system serves as the sign bit; a number is negative if
DO NOT COPY
and only if its MSB is 1. The decimal equivalent for a two’s-complement binary
number is computed the same way as for an unsigned number, except that the
n−1  n−1 
weight of the MSB is  −2 instead of  +2  . The range of representable num- weight of MSB
n−1  n−1 
bers is  −(2  ) through  +(2  −1). Some 8-bit examples are shown below:
17DO NOT COPY=  000100012 −99  =  100111012
10  10 
⇓  . complement bits ⇓  . complement bits
11101110 01100010
+1 +1
DO NOT COPY11101111 2  = −17 10  01100011 2  = 9910
119 10  =  01110111 −127 10  =  10000001
⇓  . complement bits ⇓  . complement bits
10001000 01111110
DO NOT COPY
+1 +1
10001001 2  = −119 10  01111111 2  = 12710
0 10  =  000000002 −128 10  =  100000002
DO NOT COPY⇓  . complement bits ⇓  . complement bits
11111111 01111111
+1 +1
1 00000000 2  =  0 10  10000000 2  = −12810
DO NOT COPY
A carry out of the MSB position occurs in one case, as shown in color above. As
in all two’s-complement operations, this bit is ignored and only the low-order  n
bits of the result are used.
In the two’s-complement number system, zero is considered positive
because its sign bit is 0. Since two’s complement has only one representation ofDO NOT COPY
n−1 
zero, we end up with one extra negative number, −(2 ), that doesn’t have a pos- extra negative number
itive counterpart.
We can convert an  n-bit two’s-complement number X  into an  m-bit one, but
some care is needed. If  m  >  n, we must append  m  −  n  copies of  X’s sign bit to the
left ofDO NOT COPY  X  (see Exercise 2.23). That is, we pad a positive number with 0s and a
negative one with 1s; this is called  sign extension. If  m  <  n, we discard  X’s  n  −  m sign extension
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

34  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
leftmost bits; however, the result is valid only if all of the discarded bits are the
same as the sign bit of the result (see Exercise 2.24).
Most computers and other digital systems use the two’s-complement sys-
DO NOT COPY
tem to represent negative numbers. However, for completeness, we’ll also
describe the diminished radix-complement and ones’-complement systems.
*2.5.5 Diminished Radix-Complement Representation
diminished radix-DO NOT COPYIn a  diminished radix-complement system, the complement of an  n-digit number
n
complement system D  is obtained by subtracting it from  r  −1. This can be accomplished by comple-
menting the individual digits of  D,  without  adding 1 as in the radix-complement
9s’ complement system. In decimal, this is called the  9s’ complement; some examples are given
in the last column of Table 2-4 on page 32.
DO NOT COPY
*2.5.6 Ones’-Complement Representation
ones’ complement The diminished radix-complement system for binary numbers is called the  ones’
complement. As in two’s complement, the most significant bit is the sign, 0 if
DO NOT COPYpositive and 1 if negative. Thus there are two representations of zero, positive
zero (00 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 00) and negative zero (11 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 11). Positive number representations
are the same for both ones’ and two’s complements. However, negative number
n−1  n−1 
representations differ by 1. A weight of  −(2 −  1), rather than  −2 , is given
to the most significant bit when computing the decimal equivalent of a ones’-
DO NOT COPYn−1 
complement number. The range of representable numbers is  −(2 −  1) through
n−1 
+(2 −  1). Some 8-bit numbers and their ones’ complements are shown below:
1710  =  00010001 2 −99 10  =  10011100 2
⇓  . ⇓  .
DO NOT COPY= −17  = 99
11101110 2  10 01100011 2  10
119 10  =  01110111 2 −12710  =  10000000 2
⇓  . ⇓  .
10001000  = −119  01111111  = 127
DO NOT COPY2  10 2  10
0 10  =  00000000 2  (positive zero)0000000
⇓  .
000 011111111 2  = 0 10  (negative zero)
DO NOT COPY
The main advantages of the ones’-complement system are its symmetry
and  the  ease  of complementation. However, the  adder  design for  ones’-
complement numbers is somewhat trickier than a two’s-complement adder (see
Exercise 7.67). Also, zero-detecting circuits in a ones’-complement system
DO NOT COPY
* Throughout this book,  optional sections  are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.6  Two’s-Complement Addition and Subtraction  35
either must check for both representations of zero, or must always convert
11 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 11 to 00 ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ 00.
DO NOT COPY
*2.5.7 Excess Representations
Yes, the number of different systems for representing negative numbers  is exces-
sive, but there’s just one more for us to cover. In  excess-B representation, an excess- B  representation
m
m-bit string whose unsigned integer value is  M  (0  ≤  M  <  2 ) represents the
signed integerDO NOT COPY  M  −  B, where  B  is called the  bias  of the number system. bias
m−1  m−1 
For example, an  excess−2 system  represents any number  X  in the range excess-2 system
m−1  m−1  m−1 
−2 through  +2 −  1 by the  m-bit binary representation of  X  +  2 (which
m
is always nonnegative and less than 2 ). The range of this representation is
exactly the same as that of  m-bit two’s-complement numbers. In fact, the repre-
sentations of any number in the two systems are identical except for the sign bits,DO NOT COPY
m−1 
which are always opposite. (Note that this is true only when the bias is 2 .)
The most common use of excess representations is in floating-point num-
ber systems (see References).
DO NOT COPY
2.6 Two’s-Complement Addition and Subtraction
2.6.1 Addition Rules
A table of decimal numbers and their equivalents in different number systems,
DO NOT COPY
Table 2-6, reveals why the two’s complement is preferred for arithmetic opera-
tions. If we start with 1000 2  (−8 10) and count up, we see that each successive
two’s-complement number all the way to 0111 2  (+7 10) can be obtained by add-
ing 1 to the previous one, ignoring any carries beyond the fourth bit position.
The same cannot be said of signed-magnitude and ones’-complement numbers.DO NOT COPY
Because ordinary addition is just an extension of counting, two’s-complement two’s-complement
numbers can thus be added by ordinary binary addition, ignoring any carries addition
beyond the MSB. The result will always be the correct sum as long as the range
of the number system is not exceeded. Some examples of decimal addition and
the corresponding 4-bit two’s-complement additions confirm this:DO NOT COPY
+3 0011 −2 1110
+ +4 +  0100 + −6 +  1010
+7  0111  −8  11000
DO NOT COPY
+6 0110 +4 0100
+ −3 +  1101 + −7 +  1001
+3  10011  −3  1101
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

36  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 6  Decimal and 4-bit numbers.
Two’s Ones’ Signed Excess
DO NOT COPYDecimal Complement Complement Magnitude 2m−1
−8  1000  —  —  0000
−7  1001  1000  1111  0001
−6  1010  1001  1110  0010
DO NOT COPY
−5  1011  1010  1101  0011
−4  1100  1011  1100  0100
−3  1101  1100  1011  0101
−2  1110  1101  1010  0110
DO NOT COPY
−1  1111  1110  1001  0111
0  0000  1111 or 0000  1000 or 0000  1000
1  0001  0001  0001  1001
2  0010  0010  0010  1010
DO NOT COPY3  0011  0011  0011  1011
4  0100  0100  0100  1100
5  0101  0101  0101  1101
6  0110  0110  0110  1110
DO NOT COPY7  0111  0111  0111  1111
2.6.2 A Graphical View
Another way to view the two’s-complement system uses the 4-bit “counter”
DO NOT COPYshown in Figure 2-3. Here we have shown the numbers in a circular or
“modular” representation. The operation of this counter very closely mimics that
of a real up/down counter circuit, which we’ll study in Section 8.4. Starting
0000
Figure 2-3DO NOT COPY1111 0001
A modular counting 1110 0010
+0
representation of 4-bit –1 +1
–2 +2
two’s-complement 1101 0011
numbers. –3 +3
Subtraction of Addition of
DO NOT COPY1100 –4 +4 0100
positive numbers positive numbers
–5 +5
1011 0101
–6 +6
–7 +7
–8
1010 0110
DO NOT COPY
1001 0111
1000
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.6  Two’s-Complement Addition and Subtraction  37
with the arrow pointing to any number, we can add  +n  to that number by
counting up  n  times, that is, by moving the arrow  n  positions clockwise. It is also
evident that we can subtract  n  from a number by counting down  n  times, that is,
DO NOT COPY
by moving the arrow  n  positions counterclockwise. Of course, these operations
give correct results only if n  is small enough that we don’t cross the discontinuity
between  −8 and  +7.
What is most interesting is that we can also subtract  n  (or add  −n) by mov-
ing the arrow 16  −  n  positions clockwise. Notice that the quantity 16  −  n  is what
DO NOT COPY
we defined to be the 4-bit two’s complement of  n, that is, the two’s-complement
representation of  −n. This graphically supports our earlier claim that a negative
number in two’s-complement representation may be added to another number
simply by adding the 4-bit representations using ordinary binary addition. Add-
ing a number in Figure 2-3 is equivalent to moving the arrow a correspondingDO NOT COPY
number of positions clockwise.
2.6.3 Overflow
If an addition operation produces a result that exceeds the range of the number
system,DO NOT COPY  overflow  is said to occur. In the modular counting representation of overflow
Figure 2-3, overflow occurs during addition of positive numbers when we count
past  +7. Addition of two numbers with different signs can never produce over-
flow, but addition of two numbers of like sign can, as shown by the following
examples:
DO NOT COPY
−3 1101 +5 0101
+ −6 +  1010 + +6 +  0110
−9  10111  = +7  +11  1011  = −5
DO NOT COPY−8 1000 +7 0111
+ −8 +  1000 + +7 +  0111
−16  10000  = +0  +14  1110  = −2
Fortunately, there is a simple rule for detecting overflow in addition: An overflow rules
addition overflows if the signs of the addends are the same and the sign of theDO NOT COPY
sum is different from the addends’ sign. The overflow rule is sometimes stated in
terms of carries generated during the addition operation: An addition overflows
if the carry bits  cin into and  cout out of the sign position are different. Close exam-
ination of Table 2-3 on page 28 shows that the two rules are equivalent—there
are only two cases whereDO NOT COPY  c ≠  c , and these are the only two cases where  x  =  y
in  out 
and the sum bit is different.
2.6.4 Subtraction Rules
Two’s-complement  numbers  may be  subtracted as if  they were  ordinary two’s-complement
DO NOT COPYsubtraction
unsigned binary numbers, and appropriate rules for detecting overflow may be
formulated. However, most subtraction circuits for two’s-complement numbers
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

38  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
do not perform subtraction directly. Rather, they negate the subtrahend by taking
its two’s complement, and then add it to the minuend using the normal rules for
addition.
DO NOT COPY
Negating the subtrahend and adding the minuend can be accomplished
with only one addition operation as follows: Perform a bit-by-bit complement of
the subtrahend and add the complemented subtrahend to the minuend with an
initial carry (cin) of 1 instead of 0. Examples are given below:
DO NOT COPY1 —  c 1 —  c
in in
+4 0100 0100 +3 0011 0011
− +3 −  0011 +  1100 − +4 −  0100 +  1011
+3  10001  −1  1111
DO NOT COPY
1 —  cin 1 —  cin
+3 0011 0011 −3 1101 1101
− −4 −  1100 +  0011 − −4 −  1100 +  0011
+7  0111  +1  10001
DO NOT COPY
Overflow in subtraction can be detected by examining the signs of the min-
uend and the  complemented  subtrahend, using the same rule as in addition. Or,
using the technique in the preceding examples, the carries into and out of the
sign position can be observed and overflow detected irrespective of the signs of
DO NOT COPYinputs and output, again using the same rule as in addition.
An attempt to negate the “extra” negative number results in overflow
according to the rules above, when we add 1 in the complementation process:
−(−8) =  −1000 =  0111
DO NOT COPY+  0001
1000 =  −8
However, this number can still be used in additions and subtractions as long as
the final result does not exceed the number range:
DO NOT COPY
1 —  cin
+4 0100 −3 1101 1101
+ −8 +  1000 − −8 −  1000 +  0111
−4  1100  +5  10101
DO NOT COPY
2.6.5 Two’s-Complement and Unsigned Binary Numbers
Since two’s-complement numbers are added and subtracted by the same basic
binary addition and subtraction algorithms as unsigned numbers of the same
length, a computer or other digital system can use the same adder circuit to han-
DO NOT COPY
dle numbers of both types. However, the results must be interpreted differently
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.6  Two’s-Complement Addition and Subtraction  39
depending on whether the system is dealing with signed numbers (e.g.,  −8 signed vs. unsigned
through  +7) or unsigned numbers (e.g., 0 through 15). numbers
We introduced a graphical representation of the 4-bit two’s-complement
DO NOT COPY
system in Figure 2-3. We can relabel this figure as shown in Figure 2-4 to obtain
a representation of the 4-bit unsigned numbers. The binary combinations occupy
the same positions on the wheel, and a number is still added by moving the arrow
a corresponding number of positions clockwise, and subtracted by moving the
arrow counterclockwise.
DO NOT COPY
An addition operation can be seen to exceed the range of the 4-bit unsigned
number system in Figure 2-4 if the arrow moves clockwise through the disconti-
nuity between 0 and 15. In this case a  carry  out of the most significant bit carry
position is said to occur.
DO NOT COPYLikewise a subtraction operation exceeds the range of the number system if
the arrow moves counterclockwise through the discontinuity. In this case a  bor-
row  out of the most significant bit position is said to occur. borrow
From Figure 2-4 it is also evident that we may subtract an unsigned num-
ber  n  by counting  clockwise  16  −  n  positions. This is equivalent to  adding  the
4-bit two’s-complement ofDO NOT COPY  n. The subtraction produces a borrow if the corre-
sponding addition of the two’s complement  does not  produce a carry.
In summary, in unsigned addition the carry or borrow in the most signifi-
cant bit position indicates an out-of-range result. In signed, two’s-complement
addition the overflow condition defined earlier indicates an out-of-range result.
DO NOT COPY
The carry from the most significant bit position is irrelevant in signed addition in
the sense that overflow may or may not occur independently of whether or not a
carry occurs.
DO NOT COPY
0000
1111 0001
DO NOT COPY1110 0010
0
15 1
14 2 Figure 2-4
1101 0011
13 3 A modular counting
representation of 4-bit
Subtraction 1100 12 4 0100 Addition unsigned numbers.
DO NOT COPY
11 5
1011 0101
10 6
9 7
8
1010 0110
1001 0111
DO NOT COPY1000
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

40  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
*2.7 Ones’-Complement Addition and Subtraction
Another look at Table 2-6 helps to explain the rule for adding ones’-complement
DO NOT COPYnumbers. If we start at 1000  (−7  ) and count up, we obtain each successive
2  10
ones’-complement number by adding 1 to the previous one,  except  at the transi-
tion from 1111 2  (negative 0) to 00012  (+110 ). To maintain the proper count, we
must add 2 instead of 1 whenever we count past 1111 2 . This suggests a technique
for adding ones’-complement numbers: Perform a standard binary addition, but
DO NOT COPY
add an extra 1 whenever we count past 1111 2.
Counting past 1111 2  during an addition can be detected by observing the
ones’-complement carry out of the sign position. Thus, the rule for adding ones’-complement num-
addition bers can be stated quite simply:
DO NOT COPY•  Perform a standard binary addition; if there is a carry out of the sign posi-
tion, add 1 to the result.
end-around carry This rule is often called  end-around carry. Examples of ones’-complement addi-
tion are given below; the last three include an end-around carry:
DO NOT COPY
+3 0011 +4 0100 +5 0101
+ +4 +  0100 + −7 +  1000 + −5 +  1010
+7  0111  −3  1100  −0  1111
DO NOT COPY−2 1101 +6 0110 −0 1111
+ −5 +  1010 + −3 +  1100 + −0 +  1111
−7  10111 +3  10010 −0  11110
+  1 +  1 +  1
DO NOT COPY1000  0011  1111
Following the two-step addition rule above, the addition of a number and
its ones’ complement produces negative 0. In fact, an addition operation using
this rule can never produce positive 0 unless both addends are positive 0.
ones’-complementDO NOT COPYAs with two’s complement, the easiest way to do ones’-complement sub-
subtraction traction is to complement the subtrahend and add. Overflow rules for ones’-
complement addition and subtraction are the same as for two’s complement.
Table 2-7 summarizes the rules that we presented in this and previous sec-
tions for negation, addition, and subtraction in binary number systems.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.8  Binary Multiplication  41
Ta b l e 2 - 7  Summary of addition and subtraction rules for binary numbers.
Number System Addition Rules Negation Rules  Subtraction Rules
DO NOT COPY
Unsigned  Add the numbers. Result is out of Not applicable  Subtract the subtrahend
range if a carry out of the MSB from the minuend. Result is
occurs. out of range if a borrow out
of the MSB occurs.
DO NOT COPY
Signed magnitude  (same sign) Add the magnitudes; Change the number’s Change the sign bit of the
overflow occurs if a carry out of sign bit. subtrahend and proceed as
MSB occurs; result has the same in addition.
sign.
(opposite sign) Subtract the
DO NOT COPY
smaller magnitude from the larg-
er; overflow is impossible; result
has the sign of the larger.
Two’s complement  Add, ignoring any carry out of Complement all bits of Complement all bits of the
the MSB. Overflow occurs if the the number; add 1 to the subtrahend and add to the
DO NOT COPY
carries into and out of MSB are result. minuend with an initial
different. carry of 1.
Ones’ complement  Add; if there is a carry out of the Complement all bits of Complement all bits of the
MSB, add 1 to the result. Over- the number. subtrahend and proceed as
DO NOT COPYflow if carries into and out of in addition.
MSB are different.
*2.8 Binary MultiplicationDO NOT COPY
In grammar school we learned to multiply by adding a list of shifted multipli- shift-and-add
cands computed according to the digits of the multiplier. The same method can multiplication
be used to obtain the product of two unsigned binary numbers. Forming the unsigned binary
shifted multiplicands is trivial in binary multiplication, since the only possible multiplication
DO NOT COPY
values of the multiplier digits are 0 and 1. An example is shown below:
11 1011 multiplicand
× 13 ×  1101 multiplier
33 1011
DO NOT COPY
110 00000
shifted multiplicands
143  101100 }
1011000
10001111  product
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

42  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Instead of listing all the shifted multiplicands and then adding, in a digital
system it is more convenient to add each shifted multiplicand as it is created to a
partial product partial product. Applying this technique to the previous example, four additions
DO NOT COPY
and partial products are used to multiply 4-bit numbers:
11 1011 multiplicand
× 13 ×  1101 multiplier
0000 partial product
DO NOT COPY
1011 shifted multiplicand
01011 partial product
0000↓ shifted multiplicand
001011 partial product
DO NOT COPY1011↓↓ shifted multiplicand
0110111 partial product
1011↓↓↓ shifted multiplicand
10001111  product
In general, when we multiply an  n-bit number by an  m-bit number, the resulting
DO NOT COPY
product requires at most  n  +  m  bits to express. The shift-and-add algorithm
requires  m  partial products and additions to obtain the result, but the first addi-
tion is trivial, since the first partial product is zero. Although the first partial
product has only  n  significant bits, after each addition step the partial product
DO NOT COPYgains one more significant bit, since each addition may produce a carry. At the
same time, each step yields one more partial product bit, starting with the right-
most and working toward the left, that does not change. The shift-and-add
algorithm can be performed by a digital circuit that includes a shift register, an
adder, and control logic, as shown in Section 8.7.2.
signed multiplicationDO NOT COPYMultiplication of signed numbers can be accomplished using unsigned
multiplication and the usual grammar school rules: Perform an unsigned multi-
plication of the magnitudes and make the product positive if the operands had
the same sign, negative if they had different signs. This is very convenient in
signed-magnitude systems, since the sign and magnitude are separate.
DO NOT COPY
In the two’s-complement system, obtaining the magnitude of a negative
number and negating the unsigned product are nontrivial operations. This leads
two’s-complement us to seek a more efficient way of performing two’s-complement multiplication,
multiplication described next.
Conceptually, unsigned multiplication is accomplished by a sequence of
DO NOT COPY
unsigned additions of the shifted multiplicands; at each step, the shift of the mul-
tiplicand corresponds to the weight of the multiplier bit. The bits in a two’s-
complement number have the same weights as in an unsigned number, except
for the MSB, which has a negative weight (see Section 2.5.4). Thus, we can per-
DO NOT COPYform two’s-complement multiplication by a sequence of two’s-complement
additions of shifted multiplicands, except for the last step, in which the shifted
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.9  Binary Division  43
multiplicand corresponding to the MSB of the multiplier must be negated before
it is added to the partial product. Our previous example is repeated below, this
time interpreting the multiplier and multiplicand as two’s-complement numbers:
DO NOT COPY
−5 1011 multiplicand
× −3 ×  1101 multiplier
00000 partial product
11011 shifted multiplicand
DO NOT COPY
111011 partial product
00000↓ shifted multiplicand
1111011 partial product
11011↓↓ shifted multiplicand
DO NOT COPY
11100111 partial product
00101↓↓↓ shifted and negated multiplicand
00001111  product
Handling the MSBs is a little tricky because we gain one significant bit at each
step and we are working with signed numbers. Therefore, before adding eachDO NOT COPY
shifted multiplicand and  k-bit partial product, we change them to  k  +  1 signifi-
cant bits by sign extension, as shown in color above. Each resulting sum has
k  +  1 bits; any carry out of the MSB of the  k  +  1-bit sum is ignored.
DO NOT COPY
*2.9 Binary Division
The simplest binary division algorithm is based on the shift-and-subtract method shift-and-subtract
that we learned in grammar school. Table 2-8 gives examples of this method for division
unsigned decimal and binary numbers. In both cases, we mentally compare the unsigned division
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 2 - 8
19 10011 quotient
Example of
11 )217  1011 )11011001 dividend
long division.
110  10110000  shifted divisor
DO NOT COPY
107 0101000 reduced dividend
99 0000000 shifted divisor
8  101000 reduced dividend
000000 shifted divisor
DO NOT COPY
101000 reduced dividend
10110 shifted divisor
10011 reduced dividend
1011 shifted divisor
DO NOT COPY
1000  remainder
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

44  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
reduced dividend with multiples of the divisor to determine which multiple of
the shifted divisor to subtract. In the decimal case, we first pick 11 as the greatest
multiple of 11 less than 21, and then pick 99 as the greatest multiple less than
DO NOT COPY
107. In the binary case, the choice is somewhat simpler, since the only two
choices are zero and the divisor itself.
Division methods for binary numbers are somewhat complementary to
binary multiplication methods. A typical division algorithm accepts an  n+m-bit
dividend and an  n-bit divisor, and produces an  m-bit quotient and an  n-bit
DO NOT COPY
division overflow remainder. A division  overflows  if the divisor is zero or the quotient would take
more than  m  bits to express. In most computer division circuits,  n  =  m.
signed division Division of signed numbers can be accomplished using unsigned division
and the usual grammar school rules: Perform an unsigned division of the magni-
DO NOT COPYtudes and make the quotient positive if the operands had the same sign, negative
if they had different signs. The remainder should be given the same sign as the
dividend. As in multiplication, there are special techniques for performing divi-
sion  directly  on  two’s-complement  numbers;  these  techniques  are  often
implemented in computer division circuits (see References).
DO NOT COPY
2.10 Binary Codes for Decimal Numbers
Even though binary numbers are the most appropriate for the internal computa-
tions of a digital system, most people still prefer to deal with decimal numbers.
DO NOT COPYAs a result, the external interfaces of a digital system may read or display deci-
mal numbers, and some digital devices actually process decimal numbers
directly.
The human need to represent decimal numbers doesn’t change the basic
nature of digital electronic circuits—they still process signals that take on one of
DO NOT COPY
only two states that we call 0 and 1. Therefore, a decimal number is represented
in a digital system by a string of bits, where different combinations of bit values
in the string represent different decimal numbers. For example, if we use a 4-bit
string to represent a decimal number, we might assign bit combination 0000 to
decimal digit 0, 0001 to 1, 0010 to 2, and so on.
DO NOT COPY
A set of  n-bit strings in which different bit strings represent different num-
code bers or other things is called a  code. A particular combination of  n  bit-values is
code word called a  code word. As we’ll see in the examples of decimal codes in this section,
there may or may not be an arithmetic relationship between the bit values in a
DO NOT COPYcode word and the thing that it represents. Furthermore, a code that uses  n-bit
n 
strings need not contain 2 valid code words.
At least four bits are needed to represent the ten decimal digits. There are
billions and billions of different ways to choose ten 4-bit code words, but some
of the more common decimal codes are listed in Table 2-9.
binary-coded decimalDO NOT COPYPerhaps the most “natural” decimal code is  binary-coded decimal (BCD),
(BCD) which encodes the digits 0 through 9 by their 4-bit unsigned binary representa-
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.10  Binary Codes for Decimal Numbers  45
Ta b l e 2 - 9  Decimal codes.
Decimal digit  BCD (8421)  2421  Excess-3  Biquinary  1-out-of-10
DO NOT COPY
0  0000  0000  0011  0100001  1000000000
1  0001  0001  0100  0100010  0100000000
2  0010  0010  0101  0100100  0010000000
3  0011  0011  0110  0101000  0001000000
DO NOT COPY
4  0100  0100  0111  0110000  0000100000
5  0101  1011  1000  1000001  0000010000
6  0110  1100  1001  1000010  0000001000
7  0111  1101  1010  1000100  0000000100
DO NOT COPY
8  1000  1110  1011  1001000  0000000010
9  1001  1111  1100  1010000  0000000001
Unused code words
DO NOT COPY1010  0101  0000  0000000  0000000000
1011  0110  0001  0000001  0000000011
1100  0111  0010  0000010  0000000101
1101  1000  1101  0000011  0000000110
1110  1001  1110  0000101  0000000111
DO NOT COPY
1111  1010  1111  ⋅ ⋅ ⋅  ⋅ ⋅ ⋅
tions, 0000 through 1001. The code words 1010 through 1111 are not used.
Conversions between BCD and decimal representations are trivial, a direct sub-
DO NOT COPY
stitution of four bits for each decimal digit. Some computer programs place two
BCD digits in one 8-bit byte in  packed-BCD representation; thus, one byte may packed-BCD
represent the values from 0 to 99 as opposed to 0 to 255 for a normal unsigned 8- representation
bit binary number. BCD numbers with any desired number of digits may be
obtained by using one byte for each two digits.DO NOT COPY
As with binary numbers, there are many possible representations of nega-
tive BCD numbers. Signed BCD numbers have one extra digit position for the
DO NOT COPY
BINOMIAL The number of different ways to choose  m  items from a set of  n  items is given by
n!
COEFFICIENTS a  binomial coefficient, denoted   n , whose value is ------------------------------- . For a 4-bit
16  m m! ⋅ ( n – m!)
decimal code, there are    different ways to choose 10 out of 16 4-bit code
 10
words, and 10! ways to assign each different choice to the 10 digits. So there are
16!
DO NOT COPY----------------- ⋅  10! or 29,059,430,400 different 4-bit decimal codes.
10! ⋅ 6!
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

46  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
sign. Both the signed-magnitude and 10’s-complement representations are pop-
ular. In signed-magnitude BCD, the encoding of the sign bit string is arbitrary; in
10’s-complement, 0000 indicates plus and 1001 indicates minus.
DO NOT COPY
BCD addition Addition of BCD digits is similar to adding 4-bit unsigned binary numbers,
except that a correction must be made if a result exceeds 1001. The result is cor-
rected by adding 6; examples are shown below:
5 0101 4 0100
DO NOT COPY+  9 +  1001 +  5 +  0101
14  1110 9  1001
+  0110 — correction
10+4  1 0100
DO NOT COPY
8 1000 9 1001
+  8 +  1000 +  9 +  1001
−16  1 0000 18  1 0010
+  0110 — correction +  0110 — correction
DO NOT COPY
10+6  1 0110  10+8  1 1000
Notice that the addition of two BCD digits produces a carry into the next digit
position if either the initial binary addition or the correction factor addition pro-
duces a carry. Many computers perform packed-BCD arithmetic using special
DO NOT COPYinstructions that handle the carry correction automatically.
weighted code Binary-coded decimal is a  weighted code  because each decimal digit can
be obtained from its code word by assigning a fixed weight to each code-word
bit. The weights for the BCD bits are 8, 4, 2, and 1, and for this reason the code
8421 code is sometimes called the  8421 code. Another set of weights results in the  2421
DO NOT COPY
2421 code code  shown  in  Table 2-9.  This  code  has  the  advantage  that  it  is  self-
self-complementing complementing, that is, the code word for the 9s’ complement of any digit may
code be obtained by complementing the individual bits of the digit’s code word.
excess-3 code Another self-complementing code shown in Table 2-9 is the excess-3 code.
Although this code is not weighted, it has an arithmetic relationship with the
DO NOT COPY
BCD code—the code word for each decimal digit is the corresponding BCD
code word plus 0011 2 . Because the code words follow a standard binary count-
ing sequence, standard binary counters can easily be made to count in excess-3
code, as we’ll show in Figure 8-37 on page 600.
biquinary code Decimal codes can have more than four bits; for example, the  biquinary
DO NOT COPY
code  in Table 2-9 uses seven. The first two bits in a code word indicate whether
the number is in the range 0–4 or 5–9, and the last five bits indicate which of the
five numbers in the selected range is represented.
One potential advantage of using more than the minimum number of bits in
DO NOT COPYa code is an error-detecting property. In the biquinary code, if any one bit in a
code word is accidentally changed to the opposite value, the resulting code word
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.11  Gray Code  47
does not represent a decimal digit and can therefore be flagged as an error. Out
of 128 possible 7-bit code words, only 10 are valid and recognized as decimal
digits; the rest can be flagged as errors if they appear.
DO NOT COPY
A  1-out-of-10 code such as the one shown in the last column of Table 2-9 is 1-out-of-10 code
the sparsest encoding for decimal digits, using 10 out of 1024 possible 10-bit
code words.
2.11 Gray CodeDO NOT COPY
In electromechanical applications of digital systems—such as machine tools,
automotive braking systems, and copiers—it is sometimes necessary for an
input sensor to produce a digital value that indicates a mechanical position. For
example, Figure 2-5 is a conceptual sketch of an encoding disk and a set of con-
DO NOT COPY
tacts that produce one of eight 3-bit binary-coded values depending on the
rotational position of the disk. The dark areas of the disk are connected to a sig-
nal source corresponding to logic 1, and the light areas are unconnected, which
the contacts interpret as logic 0.
DO NOT COPYThe encoder in Figure 2-5 has a problem when the disk is positioned at cer-
tain boundaries between the regions. For example, consider the boundary
between the 001 and 010 regions of the disk; two of the encoded bits change
here. What value will the encoder produce if the disk is positioned right on the
theoretical boundary? Since we’re on the border, both 001 and 010 are accept-
able. However, because the mechanical assembly is not perfect, the two right-DO NOT COPY
hand contacts may both touch a “1” region, giving an incorrect reading of 011.
Likewise, a reading of 000 is possible. In general, this sort of problem can occur
at any boundary where more than one bit changes. The worst problems occur
when all three bits are changing, as at the 000–111 and 011–100 boundaries.
DO NOT COPY
The encoding-disk problem can be solved by devising a digital code in
which only one bit changes between each pair of successive code words. Such a
code is called a  Gray code; a 3-bit Gray code is listed in Table 2-10. We’ve rede- Gray code
DO NOT COPY
111 000
Figure 2-5
A mechanical encoding
disk using a 3-bit binary
110 001 code.
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1
101 010
DO NOT COPY
100 011
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

48  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 1 0
Decimal Binary Gray
A comparison of 3-bit number code code
binary code and
DO NOT COPYGray code. 0  000  000
1  001  001
2  010  011
3  011  010
4  100  110
DO NOT COPY
5  101  111
6  110  101
7  111  100
DO NOT COPY
signed the encoding disk using this code as shown in Figure 2-6. Only one bit of
the new disk changes at each border, so borderline readings give us a value on
one side or the other of the border.
There are two convenient ways to construct a Gray code with any desired
number of bits. The first method is based on the fact that Gray code is a  reflected
DO NOT COPY
reflected code code; it can be defined (and constructed) recursively using the following rules:
1.  A 1-bit Gray code has two code words, 0 and 1.
n 
2.  The first 2 code words of an  n+1-bit Gray code equal the code words of
an  n-bit Gray code, written in order with a leading 0 appended.
DO NOT COPY
n 
3.  The last 2 code words of an  n+1-bit Gray code equal the code words of an
n-bit Gray code, but written in reverse order with a leading 1 appended.
If we draw a line between rows 3 and 4 of Table 2-10, we can see that rules 2
and 3 are true for the 3-bit Gray code. Of course, to construct an  n-bit Gray code
DO NOT COPY
for an arbitrary value of  n  with this method, we must also construct a Gray code
of each length smaller than  n.
DO NOT COPY
100 000
Figure 2-6
A mechanical encoding
disk using a 3-bit Gray
code. 101 001
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1
111 011
DO NOT COPY
110 010
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.12  Character Codes  49
The second method allows us to derive an  n-bit Gray-code code word
directly from the corresponding  n-bit binary code word:
1.DO NOT COPY  The bits of an  n-bit binary or Gray-code code word are numbered from
right to left, from 0 to  n  −  1.
2.  Bit  i  of a Gray-code code word is 0 if bits  i  and  i  +  1 of the corresponding
binary code word are the same, else bit  i  is 1. (When  i  +  1 =  n,  bit  n  of the
binary code word is considered to be 0.)
DO NOT COPY
Again, inspection of Table 2-10 shows that this is true for the 3-bit Gray code.
*2.12 Character Codes
As we showed in the preceding section, a string of bits need not represent a num-DO NOT COPY
ber, and in fact most of the information processed by computers is nonnumeric.
The most common type of nonnumeric data is  text, strings of characters from text
some character set. Each character is represented in the computer by a bit string
according to an established convention.
DO NOT COPYThe most commonly used character code is  ASCII  (pronounced  ASS key), ASCII
the American Standard Code for Information Interchange. ASCII represents
each character with a 7-bit string, yielding a total of 128 different characters
shown in Table 2-11. The code contains the uppercase and lowercase alphabet,
numerals, punctuation, and various nonprinting control characters. Thus, the
DO NOT COPY
text string “Yeccch!” is represented by a rather innocuous-looking list of seven
7-bit numbers:
1011001  1100101  1100011  1100011  1100011  1101000  0100001
DO NOT COPY
2.13 Codes for Actions, Conditions, and States
The codes that we’ve described so far are generally used to represent things that
we would probably consider to be “data”—things like numbers, positions, and
characters. Programmers know that dozens of different data types can be used in
a single computer program.DO NOT COPY
In digital system design, we often encounter nondata applications where a
string of bits must be used to control an action, to flag a condition, or to represent
the current state of the hardware. Probably the most commonly used type of code
for such an application is a simple binary code. If there are  n  different actions,
DO NOT COPY
conditions, or states, we can represent them with a  b-bit binary code with
b  = log 2  n  bits. (The brackets     denote the  ceiling function—the smallest  
integer greater than or equal to the bracketed quantity. Thus,  b  is the smallest ceiling function
b 
integer such that 2 ≥  n.)
For example, consider a simple traffic-light controller. The signals at the
DO NOT COPY
intersection of a north-south (N-S) and an east-west (E-W) street might be in any
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

50  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 1 1  American Standard Code for Information Interchange (ASCII), Standard No.
X3.4-1968 of the American National Standards Institute.
DO NOT COPYb  b  b  (column)
6 5  4 
Row 000 001 010 011 100 101 110 111
b 3 b 2b 1 b 0 (hex) 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
0000  0  NUL  DLE  SP  0  @  P  ‘  p
DO NOT COPY
0001  1  SOH  DC1  !  1  A  Q  a  q
0010  2  STX  DC2  "  2  B  R  b  r
0011  3  ETX  DC3  #  3  C  S  c  s
0100  4  EOT  DC4  $  4  D  T  d  t
0101DO NOT COPY  5  ENQ  NAK  %  5  E  U  e  u
0110  6  ACK  SYN  &  6  F  V  f  v
0111  7  BEL  ETB  ’  7  G  W  g  w
1000  8  BS  CAN  (  8  H  X  h  x
1001  9  HT  EM  )  9  I  Y  i  y
1010DO NOT COPY  A  LF  SUB  *  :  J  Z  j  z
1011  B  VT  ESC  +  ;  K  [  k  {
1100  C  FF  FS  ,  <  L  \  l  |
1101  D  CR  GS  –  =  M  ]  m  }
1110  E  SO  RS  .  >  N  ^  n  ~
DO NOT COPY
1111  F  SI  US  /  ?  O  _  o  DEL
Control codes
NUL  Null  DLE  Data link escape
SOH  Start of heading  DC1  Device control 1
DO NOT COPY
STX  Start of text  DC2  Device control 2
ETX  End of text  DC3  Device control 3
EOT  End of transmission  DC4  Device control 4
ENQ  Enquiry  NAK  Negative acknowledge
ACKDO NOT COPY  Acknowledge  SYN  Synchronize
BEL  Bell  ETB  End transmitted block
BS  Backspace  CAN  Cancel
HT  Horizontal tab  EM  End of medium
LF  Line feed  SUB  Substitute
VTDO NOT COPY  Vertical tab  ESC  Escape
FF  Form feed  FS  File separator
CR  Carriage return  GS  Group separator
SO  Shift out  RS  Record separator
SI  Shift in  US  Unit separator
DO NOT COPY
SP  Space  DEL  Delete or rubout
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.13  Codes for Actions, Conditions, and States  51
Ta b l e 2 - 1 2  States in a traffic-light controller.
Lights
DO NOT COPY
N-S N-S N-S E-W E-W E-W Code
State green yellow red green yellow red word
N-S go  ON  off  off  off  off  ON  000
N-S waitDO NOT COPY  off  ON  off  off  off  ON  001
N-S delay  off  off  ON  off  off  ON  010
E-W go  off  off  ON  ON  off  off  100
E-W wait  off  off  ON  off  ON  off  101
DO NOT COPY
E-W delay  off  off  ON  off  off  ON  110
of the six states listed in Table 2-12. These states can be encoded in three bits, as
shown in the last column of the table. Only six of the eight possible 3-bit code
words are used, and the assignment of the six chosen code words to states is arbi-DO NOT COPY
trary, so many other encodings are possible. An experienced digital designer
chooses a particular encoding to minimize circuit cost or to optimize some other
parameter (like design time—there’s no need to try billions and billions of pos-
sible encodings).
DO NOT COPY
Another application of a binary code is illustrated in Figure 2-7(a). Here,
we have a system with  n  devices, each of which can perform a certain action.
The characteristics of the devices are such that they may be enabled to operate
only one at a time. The control unit produces a binary-coded “device select”
word with  log 2  n  bits to indicate which device is enabled at any time. The
DO NOT COPY
“device select” code word is applied to each device, which compares it with its
own “device ID” to determine whether it is enabled.Although its code words
have the minimum number of bits, a binary code isn’t always the best choice for
encoding actions, conditions, or states. Figure 2-7(b) shows how to control  n
devices with a 1-out-of-n code, an  n-bit code in which valid code words have one
DO NOT COPY1-out-of-n code
bit equal to 1 and the rest of the bits equal to 0. Each bit of the 1-out-of-n  code
word is connected directly to the enable input of a corresponding device. This
simplifies the design of the devices, since they no longer have device IDs; they
need only a single “enable” input bit.
DO NOT COPYThe code words of a 1-out-of-10 code were listed in Table 2-9. Sometimes
an all-0s word may also be included in a 1-out-of-n  code, to indicate that no
device is selected. Another common code is an  inverted 1-out-of-n code, in inverted 1-out-of-n code
which valid code words have one 0~bit and the rest of the bits equal to 1.
In complex systems, a combination of coding techniques may be used. For
DO NOT COPY
example, consider a system similar to Figure 2-7(b), in which each of the  n
devices contains up to  s  subdevices. The control unit could produce a device
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

52  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
binary-coded device select
Control
Unit
DO NOT COPY
device device device
compare compare compare
(a) ID ID ID
DO NOT COPY
device device device
enable enable enable
Device Device Device
DO NOT COPY
1-out-of-n coded device select
Control
Unit
DO NOT COPY
device device device
(b) enable enable enable
DO NOT COPY
Device Device Device
Figure 2-7  Control structure for a digital system with  n  devices: (a) using
a binary code; (b) using a 1-out-of-n  code.
DO NOT COPYselect code word with a 1-out-of-n  coded field to select a device, and a  log 2  s-
bit binary-coded field to select one of the  s  subdevices of the selected device.
m-out-of-n code An  m-out-of-n code  is a generalization of the 1-out-of-n  code in which
valid code words have  m  bits equal to 1 and the rest of the bits equal to 0. A valid
m-out-of-n  code word can be detected with an  m-input  AND  gate, which produc-
DO NOT COPYes a 1 output if all of its inputs are 1. This is fairly simple and inexpensive to do,
yet for most values of  m, an  m-out-of-n  code typically has far more valid code
words than a 1-out-of-n  code. The total number of code words is given by the
n n!
binomial coefficient     , which has the value ------------------------------- . Thus, a 2-out-of-4
 m m! ⋅ ( n – m)!
DO NOT COPY
code has 6 valid code words, and a 3-out-of-10 code has 120.
8B10B code An important variation of an  m-out-of-n  code is the  8B10B code used in the
802.3z Gigabit Ethernet standard. This code uses 10 bits to represent 256 valid
code words, or 8 bits worth of data. Most code words use a 5-out-of-10 coding.
5
DO NOT COPYHowever, since    is only 252, some 4- and 6-out-of-10 words are also used to
 10
complete the code in a very interesting way; more on this in Section 2.16.2.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.14  n-Cubes and Distance  53
10 11
Figure 2-8
n-cubes for  n  =  1, 2,
3, and 4.
DO NOT COPY
0  1 00  01
1-cube  2-cube
DO NOT COPY1110  1111
110  111 0110 1011
0111 1010
010  011 0010 1100
DO NOT COPY0011 1101
1000
0101
100  101 0100  1001
000  001 0000  0001
DO NOT COPY
3-cube  4-cube
*2.14 n-Cubes and Distance
An  n-bit string can be visualized geometrically, as a vertex of an object called an n-cube
DO NOT COPY
n 
n-cube. Figure 2-8 shows  n-cubes for  n  =  1, 2, 3, 4. An  n-cube has 2 vertices,
each of which is labeled with an  n-bit string. Edges are drawn so that each vertex
is adjacent to  n  other vertices whose labels differ from the given vertex in only
one bit. Beyond  n  =  4,  n-cubes are really tough to draw.
DO NOT COPYFor reasonable values of n, n-cubes make it easy to visualize certain coding
and logic minimization problems. For example, the problem of designing an
n-bit Gray code is equivalent to finding a path along the edges of an  n-cube, a
path that visits each vertex exactly once. The paths for 3- and 4-bit Gray codes
are shown in Figure 2-9.
DO NOT COPY
1110  1111
Figure 2-9
110  111 0110 1011 Traversing  n-cubes
0111 1010 in Gray-code order:
010  011 0010 (a) 3-cube;
DO NOT COPY1100
(b) 4-cube.
0011 1101
1000
0101
100  101 0100 1001
000DO NOT COPY  001 0000  0001
(a)  (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

54  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
distance Cubes also provide a geometrical interpretation for the concept of  dis-
Hamming distance tance, also called  Hamming distance. The distance between two  n-bit strings is
the number of bit positions in which they differ. In terms of an  n-cube, the dis-
DO NOT COPY
tance is the minimum length of a path between the two corresponding vertices.
Two adjacent vertices have distance 1; vertices 001 and 100 in the 3-cube have
distance 2. The concept of distance is crucial in the design and understanding of
error-detecting codes, discussed in the next section.
m 
m-subcube An  m-subcube  of an  n-cube is a set of 2 vertices in which  n  −  m  of the bits
DO NOT COPY
m 
have the same value at each vertex, and the remaining  m  bits take on all 2 com-
binations. For example, the vertices (000, 010, 100, 110) form a 2-subcube of the
3-cube. This subcube can also be denoted by a single string, xx0, where “x”
don’t-care denotes that a particular bit is a  don’t-care; any vertex whose bits match in the
DO NOT COPYnon-x positions belongs to this subcube. The concept of subcubes is particularly
useful in visualizing algorithms that minimize the cost of combinational logic
functions, as we’ll show in Section 4.4.
*2.15 Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors
DO NOT COPY
error An  error  in a digital system is the corruption of data from its correct value to
failure some other value. An error is caused by a physical  failure. Failures can be either
temporary failure temporary or permanent. For example, a cosmic ray or alpha particle can cause
permanent failure a temporary failure of a memory circuit, changing the value of a bit stored in it.
DO NOT COPYLetting a circuit get too hot or zapping it with static electricity can cause a per-
manent failure, so that it never works correctly again.
error model The effects of failures on data are predicted by  error models. The simplest
independent error error model, which we consider here, is called the  independent error model. In
model this model, a single physical failure is assumed to affect only a single bit of data;
DO NOT COPY
single error the corrupted data is said to contain a  single error. Multiple failures may cause
multiple error multiple errors—two or more bits in error—but multiple errors are normally
assumed to be less likely than single errors.
2.15.1 Error-Detecting Codes
DO NOT COPY
Recall from our definitions in Section 2.10 that a code that uses  n-bit strings
n 
need not contain 2 valid code words; this is certainly the case for the codes that
error-detecting code we now consider. An  error-detecting code  has the property that corrupting or
garbling a code word will likely produce a bit string that is not a code word (a
noncode wordDO NOT COPYnoncode word).
A system that uses an error-detecting code generates, transmits, and stores
only code words. Thus, errors in a bit string can be detected by a simple rule—if
the bit string is a code word, it is assumed to be correct; if it is a noncode word,
it contains an error.
DO NOT COPYAn  n-bit code and its error-detecting properties under the independent
error model are easily explained in terms of an  n-cube. A code is simply a subset
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.15  Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors  55
110  111 110  111
Figure 2-10
Code words in two
010  011 010  011
DO NOT COPYdifferent 3-bit codes:
= code word (a) minimum distance
= noncode word = 1, does not detect
100  101 100  101 all single errors;
(b) minimum distance
000  001 000  001 = 2, detects all single
DO NOT COPY
errors.
(a) (b)
of the vertices of the  n-cube. In order for the code to detect all single errors, no
code-word vertex can be immediately adjacent to another code-word vertex.
DO NOT COPY
For example, Figure 2-10(a) shows a 3-bit code with five code words.
Code word 111 is immediately adjacent to code words 110, 011 and 101. Since
a single failure could change 111 to 110, 011 or 101 this code does not detect all
single errors. If we make 111 a noncode word, we obtain a code that does have
the single-error-detecting property, as shown in (b). No single error can change
DO NOT COPY
one code word into another.
The ability of a code to detect single errors can be stated in terms of the
concept of distance introduced in the preceding section:
•  A code detects all single errors if the  minimum distance between all possi- minimum distance
DO NOT COPYble pairs of code words is 2.
In general, we need  n  +  1 bits to construct a single-error-detecting code
with 2n  code words. The first n  bits of a code word, called  information bits, may information bit
be any of the 2n  n-bit strings. To obtain a minimum-distance-2 code, we add one
more bit, called a  parity bit, that is set to 0 if there are an even number of 1s parity bit
DO NOT COPY
among the information bits, and to 1 otherwise. This is illustrated in the first two
columns of Table 2-13 for a code with three information bits. A valid  n+1-bit
code word has an even number of 1s, and this code is called an  even-parity code. even-parity code
DO NOT COPYInformation Even-parity Odd-parity Ta b l e 2 - 1 3
Bits Code Code Distance-2 codes with
three information bits.
000  000 0  000 1
001  001 1  001 0
DO NOT COPY010  010 1  010 0
011  011 0  011 1
100  100 1  100 0
101  101 0  101 1
DO NOT COPY110  110 0  110 1
111  111 1  111 0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

56  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
We can also construct a code in which the total number of 1s in a valid  n+1-bit
odd-parity code code word is odd; this is called an  odd-parity code  and is shown in the third col-
1-bit parity code umn of the table. These codes are also sometimes called  1-bit parity codes, since
DO NOT COPY
they each use a single parity bit.
The 1-bit parity codes do not detect 2-bit errors, since changing two bits
does not affect the parity. However, the codes can detect errors in any  odd  num-
ber of bits. For example, if three bits in a code word are changed, then the
resulting word has the wrong parity and is a noncode word. This doesn’t help us
DO NOT COPY
much, though. Under the independent error model, 3-bit errors are much less
likely than 2-bit errors, which are not detectable. Thus, practically speaking, the
1-bit parity codes’ error detection capability stops after 1-bit errors. Other codes,
with minimum distance greater than 2, can be used to detect multiple errors.
DO NOT COPY
2.15.2 Error-Correcting and Multiple-Error-Detecting Codes
check bits By using more than one parity bit, or  check bits, according to some well-chosen
rules, we can create a code whose minimum distance is greater than 2. Before
showing how this can be done, let’s look at how such a code can be used to cor-
DO NOT COPYrect single errors or detect multiple errors.
Suppose that a code has a minimum distance of 3. Figure 2-11 shows a
fragment of the  n-cube for such a code. As shown, there are at least two noncode
words between each pair of code words. Now suppose we transmit code words
DO NOT COPY
0001010 1011000
1001011  0001001 1011011 0011001
Figure 2-11
Some code wordsDO NOT COPY
and noncode words in
a 7-bit, distance-3 0001011 0001111  1011001 1111001
code.
DO NOT COPY0101011  0000011 1011101 1001001
0011011 1010011 1010001
0010010 1010000
DO NOT COPY
1010010 1010110
= code word 1110010 1011010
DO NOT COPY
= noncode word
1000010
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.15  Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors  57
and assume that failures affect at most one bit of each received code word. Then
a received noncode word with a 1-bit error will be closer to the originally trans-
mitted code word than to any other code word. Therefore, when we receive a
DO NOT COPY
noncode word, we can  correct  the error by changing the received noncode word error correction
to the nearest code word, as indicated by the arrows in the figure. Deciding
which code word was originally transmitted to produce a received word is called decoding
decoding, and the hardware that does this is an error-correcting  decoder. decoder
A code that is used to correct errors is called an  error-correcting code. In error-correcting code
DO NOT COPY
general, if a code has minimum distance 2c  +  1, it can be used to correct errors
that affect up to  c  bits (c  =  1 in the preceding example). If a code’s minimum dis-
tance is 2c  +  d  +  1, it can be used to correct errors in up to  c  bits and to detect
errors in up to  d  additional bits.
DO NOT COPYFor example, Figure 2-12(a) shows a fragment of the  n-cube for a code
with minimum distance 4 (c  =  1,  d  =  1). Single-bit errors that produce noncode
words 00101010 and 11010011 can be corrected. However, an error that produc-
es 10100011 cannot be corrected, because no single-bit error can produce this
noncode word, and either of two 2-bit errors could have produced it. So the code
can detect a 2-bit error, but it cannot correct it.DO NOT COPY
When a noncode word is received, we don’t know which code word was
originally transmitted; we only know which code word is closest to what we’ve
received. Thus, as shown in Figure 2-12(b), a 3-bit error may be “corrected” to
the wrong value. The possibility of making this kind of mistake may be accept-
DO NOT COPY
able if 3-bit errors are very unlikely to occur. On the other hand, if we are
concerned about 3-bit errors, we can change the decoding policy for the code.
Instead of trying to correct errors, we just flag all noncode words as uncorrect-
able errors. Thus, as shown in (c), we can use the same distance-4 code to detect
up to 3-bit errors but correct no errors (c  =  0,  d  =  3).
DO NOT COPY
2.15.3 Hamming Codes
In 1950, R. W. Hamming described a general method for constructing codes
with a minimum distance of 3, now called  Hamming codes. For any value of  i, Hamming code
i i 
his method yields a 2 −1-bit code with  i  check bits and 2 −  1  −  i  information
DO NOT COPY
bits. Distance-3 codes with a smaller number of information bits are obtained by
deleting information bits from a Hamming code with a larger number of bits.
The bit positions in a Hamming code word can be numbered from 1
i 
through 2 −1. In this case, any position whose number is a power of 2 is a check
bit, and the remaining positions are information bits. Each check bit is groupedDO NOT COPY
with a subset of the information bits, as specified by a  parity-check matrix. As parity-check matrix
DECISIONS, The names  decoding  and  decoder  make sense, since they are just distance-1 pertur-
DO NOT COPYDECISIONS bations of  deciding  and  decider.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

58  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
detectable 2-bit errors
(a)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 2-12
Some code words and
noncode words in an 8-bit, 00101010 11010011
distance-4 code:
10100011
(a) correcting 1-bit and
DO NOT COPY00101011 11000011
detecting 2-bit errors;
00100011 11100011
(b) incorrectly “correcting”
a 3-bit error;
(c) correcting no errors but
detecting up to 3-bit errors.
DO NOT COPY
detectable 2-bit errors
correctable 1-bit errors
DO NOT COPY(b)
00101010 11010011
10100011
00101011 11000011
DO NOT COPY00100011 11100011
3-bit error
looks like a
1-bit error
DO NOT COPY
(c)
00101011  11000011
DO NOT COPY
all 1- to 3-bit errors
are detectable
DO NOT COPY
shown in Figure 2-13(a), each check bit is grouped with the information posi-
tions whose numbers have a 1 in the same bit when expressed in binary. For
example, check bit 2 (010) is grouped with information bits 3 (011), 6 (110), and
7 (111). For a given combination of information-bit values, each check bit is
DO NOT COPYchosen to produce even parity, that is, so the total number of 1s in its group is
even.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.15  Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors  59
(a)
Bit position
7  6  5  4 3  2  1
DO NOT COPY
C
Group
B Groups Figure 2-13
name
Parity-check matrices
A for 7-bit Hamming
DO NOT COPY
codes: (a) with bit
positions in
Check bits
numerical order;
(b) Bit position (b) with check bits
7  6  5 3 4  2  1 and information bits
DO NOT COPYseparated.
C
Group
B Groups
name
DO NOT COPYA
Information bits  Check bits
Traditionally, the bit positions of a parity-check matrix and the resulting
DO NOT COPY
code words are rearranged so that all of the check bits are on the right, as in
Figure 2-13(b). The first two columns of Table 2-14 list the resulting code words.
We can prove that the minimum distance of a Hamming code is 3 by prov-
ing that at least a 3-bit change must be made to a code word to obtain another
code word. That is, we’ll prove that a 1-bit or 2-bit change in a code word yieldsDO NOT COPY
a noncode word.
If we change one bit of a code word, in position  j, then we change the parity
of every group that contains position  j. Since every information bit is contained
in at least one group, at least one group has incorrect parity, and the result is a
noncode word.DO NOT COPY
What happens if we change two bits, in positions  j and  k? Parity groups that
contain both positions  j  and  k  will still have correct parity, since parity is unaf-
fected when an even number of bits are changed. However, since  j  and  k  are
different, their binary representations differ in at least one bit, corresponding to
DO NOT COPY
one of the parity groups. This group has only one bit changed, resulting in incor-
rect parity and a noncode word.
If you understand this proof, you should also see how the position number-
ing rules for constructing a Hamming code are a simple consequence of the
proof. For the first part of the proof (1-bit errors), we required that the position
DO NOT COPY
numbers be nonzero. And for the second part (2-bit errors), we required that no
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

60  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Ta b l e 2 - 1 4  Code words in distance-3 and distance-4 Hamming
codes with four information bits.
DO NOT COPYMinimum-distance-3 code Minimum-distance-4 code
Information Information
Bits Parity Bits Bits Parity Bits
0000  000  0000  0000
DO NOT COPY
0001  011  0001  0111
0010  101  0010  1011
0011  110  0011  1100
DO NOT COPY
0100  110  0100  1101
0101  101  0101  1010
0110  011  0110  0110
0111  000  0111  0001
DO NOT COPY
1000  111  1000  1110
1001  100  1001  1001
1010  010  1010  0101
DO NOT COPY
1011  001  1011  0010
1100  001  1100  0011
1101  010  1101  0100
DO NOT COPY1110  100  1110  1000
1111  111  1111  1111
two positions have the same number. Thus, with an  i-bit position number, you
DO NOT COPYcan construct a Hamming code with up to 2i  −  1 bit positions.
error-correcting The proof also suggests how we can design an  error-correcting decoder  for
decoder a received Hamming code word. First, we check all of the parity groups; if all
have even parity, then the received word is assumed to be correct. If one or more
groups have odd parity, then a single error is assumed to have occurred. The pat-
DO NOT COPY
syndrome tern of groups that have odd parity (called the  syndrome) must match one of the
columns in the parity-check matrix; the corresponding bit position is assumed to
contain the wrong value and is complemented. For example, using the code
defined by Figure 2-13(b), suppose we receive the word 0101011. Groups B and
C have odd parity, corresponding to position 6 of the parity-check matrix (the
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.15  Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors  61
syndrome is 110, or 6). By complementing the bit in position 6 of the received
word, we determine that the correct word is 0001011.
A distance-3 Hamming code can easily be modified to increase its mini-
DO NOT COPY
mum distance to 4. We simply add one more check bit, chosen so that the parity
of all the bits, including the new one, is even. As in the 1-bit even-parity code,
this bit ensures that all errors affecting an odd number of bits are detectable. In
particular, any 3-bit error is detectable. We already showed that 1- and 2-bit
errors are detected by the other parity bits, so the minimum distance of the mod-
DO NOT COPY
ified code must be 4.
Distance-3 and distance-4 Hamming codes are commonly used to detect
and correct errors in computer memory systems, especially in large mainframe
computers where memory circuits account for the bulk of the system’s failures.
These codes are especially attractive for very wide memory words, since theDO NOT COPY
required number of parity bits grows slowly with the width of the memory word,
as shown in Table 2-15.
Ta b l e 2 - 1 5  Word sizes of distance-3 and distance-4 Hamming codes.
DO NOT COPY
Minimum-distance-3 Codes  Minimum-distance-4 Codes
Information Bits  Parity Bits  Total Bits  Parity Bits  Total Bits
DO NOT COPY1  2  3  3  4
≤  4  3  ≤  7  4  ≤  8
≤  11  4  ≤  15  5  ≤  16
≤  26  5  ≤  31  6  ≤  32
DO NOT COPY
≤  57  6  ≤  63  7  ≤  64
≤  120  7  ≤  127  8  ≤  128
2.15.4 CRC CodesDO NOT COPY
Beyond Hamming codes, many other error-detecting and -correcting codes have
been developed. The most important codes, which happen to include Hamming
codes, are the  cyclic redundancy check (CRC) codes. A rich set of knowledge cyclic redundancy
has been developed for these codes, focused both on their error detecting and check (CRC) code
DO NOT COPY
correcting properties and on the design of inexpensive encoders and decoders
for them (see References).
Two important applications of CRC codes are in disk drives and in data
networks. In a disk drive, each block of data (typically 512 bytes) is protected
by a CRC code, so that errors within a block can be detected and, in some drives,
DO NOT COPY
corrected. In a data network, each packet of data ends with check bits in a CRC
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

62  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
code. The CRC codes for both applications were selected because of their burst-
error detecting properties. In addition to single-bit errors, they can detect multi-
bit errors that are clustered together within the disk block or packet. Such errors
DO NOT COPY
are more likely than errors of randomly distributed bits, because of the likely
physical causes of errors in the two applications—surface defects in disc drives
and noise bursts in communication links.
2.15.5 Two-Dimensional Codes
DO NOT COPY
Another way to obtain a code with large minimum distance is to construct a  two-
two-dimensional code dimensional code, as illustrated in Figure 2-14(a). The information bits are con-
ceptually arranged in a two-dimensional array, and parity bits are provided to
check both the rows and the columns. A code  Crow  with minimum distance  drow  is
DO NOT COPYused for the rows, and a possibly different code  Ccol  with minimum distance  dcol
is used for the columns. That is, the row-parity bits are selected so that each row
is a code word in  Crow  and the column-parity bits are selected so that each column
is a code word in  Ccol . (The “corner” parity bits can be chosen according to either
code.) The minimum distance of the two-dimensional code is the product of  drow
product codeDO NOT COPYand  dcol ; in fact, two-dimensional codes are sometimes called  product codes.
(a)
Figure 2-14DO NOT COPY
Two-dimensional codes:
checks Rows are
(a) general structure; information bits  on rows
code words
(b) using even parity for in Crow
both the row and column
codes to obtain
DO NOT COPY
minimum distance 4;
(c) typical pattern of an
checks
undetectable error.
checks on columns on checks
DO NOT COPYColumns are code words in Ccol
(b) (c)
Rows are
DO NOT COPYinformation bits code words
in 1-bit No effect on
even-parity row parity
code
DO NOT COPY
Columns are code words No effect on column parity
in 1-bit even-parity code
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *2.15  Codes for Detecting and Correcting Errors  63
As shown in Figure 2-14(b), the simplest two-dimensional code uses 1-bit
even-parity codes for the rows and columns, and has a minimum distance of
2  ⋅  2, or 4. You can easily prove that the minimum distance is 4 by convincing
DO NOT COPY
yourself that any pattern of one, two, or three bits in error causes incorrect parity
of a row or a column or both. In order to obtain an undetectable error, at least
four bits must be changed in a rectangular pattern as in (c).
The error detecting and correcting procedures for this code are straightfor-
ward. Assume we are reading information one row at a time. As we read each
DO NOT COPY
row, we check its row code. If an error is detected in a row, we can’t tell which bit
is wrong from the row check alone. However, assuming only one row is bad, we
can reconstruct it by forming the bit-by-bit  Exclusive OR  of the columns, omit-
ting the bad row, but including the column-check row.
DO NOT COPYTo obtain an even larger minimum distance, a distance-3 or -4 Hamming
code can be used for the row or column code or both. It is also possible to con-
struct a code in three or more dimensions, with minimum distance equal to the
product of the minimum distances in each dimension.
An important application of two-dimensional codes is in RAID storage
systems.DO NOT COPY  RAID  stands for “redundant array of inexpensive disks.” In this RAID
scheme,  n+1 identical disk drives are used to store  n  disks worth of data. For
example, eight 8-Gigabyte drives could be use to store 64 Gigabytes of non-
redundant data, and a ninth 8-gigabyte drive would be used to store checking
information.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 2-15 shows the general scheme of a two-dimensional code for a
RAID system; each disk drive is considered to be a row in the code. Each drive
stores  m  blocks of data, where a block typically contains 512 bytes. For example,
an 8-gigabyte drive would store about 16 million blocks. As shown in the figure,
each block includes its own check bits in a CRC code, to detect errors within that
DO NOT COPY
block. The first  n  drives store the nonredundant data. Each block in drive  n+1
Figure 2-15
DO NOT COPY
Block number Structure of error-
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8 9  10 11 12 . . . m correcting code for
Disk 1 a RAID system.
Disk 2
Disk 3
DO NOT COPYData bytes
Disk 4
information blocks . . . 1  2  3  4  5  6  7 . . . 512 CRC
Disk 5 . . .
Disk 6
. . .  . . .
One block
Disk n
DO NOT COPY. . .
Disk n+1
check blocks
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

64  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
stores parity bits for the corresponding blocks in the first  n  drives. That is, each
bit  i in drive n+1 block  b  is chosen so that there are an even number of 1s in block
b  bit position  i  across all the drives.
DO NOT COPY
In operation, errors in the information blocks are detected by the CRC
code. Whenever an error is detected in a block on one of the drives, the correct
contents of that block can be constructed simply by computing the parity of the
corresponding blocks in all the other drives, including drive  n+1. Although this
requires  n  extra disk read operations, it’s better than losing your data! Write
DO NOT COPY
operations require extra disk accesses as well, to update the corresponding check
block when an information block is written (see Exercise 2.46). Since disk
writes are much less frequent than reads in typical applications, this overhead
usually is not a problem.
DO NOT COPY
2.15.6 Checksum Codes
The parity-checking operation that we’ve used in the previous subsections is
essentially modulo-2 addition of bits—the sum modulo 2 of a group of bits is 0
if the number of 1s in the group is even, and 1 if it is odd. The technique of mod-
DO NOT COPYular addition can be extended to other bases besides 2 to form check digits.
For example, a computer stores information as a set of 8-bit bytes. Each
byte may be considered to have a decimal value from 0 to 255. Therefore, we can
use modulo-256 addition to check the bytes. We form a single check byte, called
checksum a  checksum, that is the sum modulo 256 of all the information bytes. The result-
DO NOT COPY
checksum code ing  checksum code can detect any single byte error, since such an error will cause
a recomputed sum of bytes to disagree with the checksum.
Checksum codes can also use a different modulus of addition. In particular,
ones’-complement checksum codes using modulo-255, ones’-complement addition are important
checksum code because of their special computational and error detecting properties, and
DO NOT COPY
because they are used to check packet headers in the ubiquitous Internet Protocol
(IP) (see References).
2.15.7 m-out-of-n Codes
The 1-out-of-n  and  m-out-of-n  codes that we introduced in Section 2.13 have a
DO NOT COPY
minimum distance of 2, since changing only one bit changes the total number of
1s in a code word and therefore produces a noncode word.
These codes have another useful error-detecting property—they detect uni-
unidirectional error directional multiple errors. In a  unidirectional error, all of the erroneous bits
DO NOT COPYchange in the same direction (0s change to 1s, or vice versa). This property is
very useful in systems where the predominant error mechanism tends to change
all bits in the same direction.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.16  Codes for Serial Data Transmission and Storage  65
time
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
bit time
SERDATA bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell  bit cell bit cell
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
bit number  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  1 2
Figure 2-16  Basic concepts for serial data transmission.
DO NOT COPY
2.16 Codes for Serial Data Transmission and Storage
DO NOT COPY
2.16.1 Parallel and Serial Data
Most computers and other digital systems transmit and store data in a  parallel parallel data
format. In parallel data transmission, a separate signal line is provided for each
bit of a data word. In parallel data storage, all of the bits of a data word can beDO NOT COPY
written or read simultaneously.
Parallel formats are not cost-effective for some applications. For example,
parallel transmission of data bytes over the telephone network would require
eight phone lines, and parallel storage of data bytes on a magnetic disk would
require a disk drive with eight separate read/write heads.DO NOT COPY  Serial  formats allow serial data
data to be transmitted or stored one bit at a time, reducing system cost in many
applications.
Figure 2-16 illustrates some of the basic ideas in serial data transmission.
A repetitive clock signal, named  CLOCK  in the figure, defines the rate at which
DO NOT COPY
bits are transmitted, one bit per clock cycle. Thus, the  bit rate  in bits per second bit rate, bps
(bps) numerically equals the clock frequency in cycles per second (hertz, or Hz).
The reciprocal of the bit rate is called the  bit time  and numerically equals bit time
the clock period in seconds (s). This amount of time is reserved on the serial data
line (named  SERDATA  in the figure) for each bit that is transmitted. The time
DO NOT COPY
occupied by each bit is sometimes called a  bit cell. The format of the actual sig- bit cell
nal that appears on the line during each bit cell depends on the  line code. In the line code
simplest line code, called  Non-Return-to-Zero (NRZ), a 1 is transmitted by plac- Non-Return-to-Zero
ing a 1 on the line for the entire bit cell, and a 0 is transmitted as a 0. However, (NRZ)
more complex line codes have other rules, as discussed in the next subsection.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

66  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Regardless of the line code, a serial data transmission or storage system
needs some way of identifying the significance of each bit in the serial stream. For
example, suppose that 8-bit bytes are transmitted serially. How can we tell which
DO NOT COPY
synchronization signal is the first  bit  of  each  byte?  A  synchronization signal,  named  SYNC  in
Figure 2-16, provides the necessary information; it is 1 for the first bit of each byte.
Evidently, we need a minimum of three signals to recover a serial data
stream: a clock to define the bit cells, a synchronization signal to define the word
boundaries, and the serial data itself. In some applications, like the interconnec-
DO NOT COPY
tion of modules in a computer or telecommunications system, a separate wire is
used for each of these signals, since reducing the number of wires per connec-
tion from  n  to three is savings enough. We’ll give an example of a 3-wire serial
data system in Section 8.5.4.
DO NOT COPYIn many applications, the cost of having three separate signals is still too
high (e.g., three phone lines, three read/write heads). Such systems typically
combine all three signals into a single serial data stream and use sophisticated
analog and digital circuits to recover the clock and synchronization information
from the data stream.
DO NOT COPY
*2.16.2 Serial Line Codes
The most commonly used line codes for serial data are illustrated in Figure 2-17.
In the NRZ code, each bit value is sent on the line for the entire bit cell. This is
the simplest and most reliable coding scheme for short distance transmission.
DO NOT COPY
However, it generally requires a clock signal to be sent along with the data to
define the bit cells. Otherwise, it is not possible for the receiver to determine how
many 0s or 1s are represented by a continuous 0 or 1 level. For example, without
a clock to define the bit cells, the NRZ waveform in Figure 2-17 might be erro-
neously interpreted as 01010.
DO NOT COPY
time
Figure 2-17
Commonly used line bit value  0  1  1  1 0  0 1  0
DO NOT COPY
codes for serial data.
NRZ
NRZI
DO NOT COPY
RZ
BPRZ
DO NOT COPY
Manchester
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 2.16  Codes for Serial Data Transmission and Storage  67
A  digital phase-locked loop (DPLL)  is an analog/digital circuit that can be digital phase-locked
used to recover a clock signal from a serial data stream. The DPLL works only if loop (DPLL)
the serial data stream contains enough 0-to-1 and 1-to-0 transitions to give the
DO NOT COPY
DPLL “hints” about when the original clock transitions took place. With NRZ-
coded data, the DPLL works only if the data does not contain any long, continu-
ous streams of 1s or 0s.
Some serial transmission and storage media are  transition sensitive; they transition-sensitive
cannot transmit or store absolute 0 or 1 levels, only transitions between two dis- media
DO NOT COPY
crete levels. For example, a magnetic disk or tape stores information by
changing the polarity of the medium’s magnetization in regions corresponding
to the stored bits. When the information is recovered, it is not feasible to deter-
mine the absolute magnetization polarity of a region, only that the polarity
changes between one region and the next.DO NOT COPY
Data stored in NRZ format on transition-sensitive media cannot be recov-
ered unambiguously; the data in Figure 2-17 might be interpreted as 01110010
or 10001101. The  Non-Return-to-Zero Invert-on-1s (NRZI)  code overcomes this Non-Return-to-Zero
limitation by sending a 1 as the opposite of the level that was sent during the pre- Invert-on-1s (NRZI)
vious bit cell, and a 0 as the same level. A DPLL can recover the clock fromDO NOT COPY
NRZI-coded data as long as the data does not contain any long, continuous
streams of 0s.
The Return-to-Zero (RZ) code is similar to NRZ except that, for a 1 bit, the Return-to-Zero (RZ)
1 level is transmitted only for a fraction of the bit time, usually 1/2. With this code,
DO NOT COPY
data patterns that contain a lot of 1s create lots of transitions for a DPLL to use to
recover the clock. However, as in the other line codes, a string of 0s has no transi-
tions, and a long string of 0s makes clock recovery impossible.
Another requirement of some transmission media, such as high-speed
fiber-optic links, is that the serial data stream be  DC balanced. That is, it must DC balance
DO NOT COPY
have an equal number of 1s and 0s; any long-term DC component in the stream
(created by have a lot more 1s than 0s or vice versa) creates a bias at the receiver
that reduces its ability to distinguish reliably between 1s and 0s.
Ordinarily, NRZ, NRZI or RZ data has no guarantee of DC balance; there’s
nothing to prevent a user data stream from having a long string of words with
DO NOT COPY
more than 1s than 0s or vice versa. However, DC balance can still be achieved
using a few extra bits to code the user data in a  balanced code, in which each balanced code
code word has an equal number of 1s and 0s, and then sending these code words
in NRZ format.
DO NOT COPYFor example, in Section 2.13 we introduced the 8B10B code, which codes
8 bits of user data into 10 bits in a mostly 5-out-of-10 code. Recall that there are
4
only 252 5-out-of-10 code words, but there are another    = 210 4-out-of-10
 10
code words and an equal number of 6-out-of-10 code words. Of course, these
code words aren’t quite DC balanced. The 8B10B code solves this problem by
DO NOT COPY
associating with each 8-bit value to be encoded a  pair of unbalanced code words,
one 4-out-of-10 (“light”) and the other 6-out-of-10 (“heavy”). The coder also
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

68  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
3  6  9
KILO-, MEGA-, The prefixes K (kilo-), M (mega-), G (giga-), and T (tera-) mean 10 , 10 , 10  , and
12 
DO NOT COPYGIGA-, TERA- 10 , respectively, when referring to bps, hertz, ohms, watts, and most other engi-
10
neering quantities. However, when referring to memory sizes, the prefixes mean 2  ,
20  30 40
2 , 2  , and 2  . Historically, the prefixes were co-opted for this purpose because
10 
memory sizes are normally powers of 2, and 2 (1024) is very close to 1000,
Now, when somebody offers you 50 kilobucks a year for your first engineering
job, it’s up to you to negotiate what the prefix means!
DO NOT COPY
running disparity keeps track of the  running disparity, a single bit of information indicating
whether the last unbalanced code word that it transmitted was heavy or light.
DO NOT COPY
When it comes time to transmit another unbalanced code word, the coder selects
the one of the pair with the opposite weight. This simple trick makes available
252 + 210 = 462 code words for the 8B10B to encode 8 bits of user data. Some
of the “extra” code words are used to conveniently encode non-data conditions
on the serial line, such as  IDLE, SYNC, and ERROR. Not all the unbalanced code
DO NOT COPY
words are used. Also, some of the balanced code words, such as 0000011111,
are not used either, in favor of unbalanced pairs that contain more transitions.
All of the preceding codes transmit or store only two signal levels. The
Bipolar Return-to-Zero Bipolar Return-to-Zero (BPRZ) code transmits three signal levels:  +1, 0, and  −1.
(BPRZ)
DO NOT COPYThe code is like RZ except that 1s are alternately transmitted as  +1 and  −1; for
Alternate Mark this reason, the code is also known as  Alternate Mark Inversion (AMI).
Inversion (AMI) The big advantage of BPRZ over RZ is that it’s DC balanced. This makes it
possible to send BPRZ streams over transmission media that cannot tolerate a
DC component, such as transformer-coupled phone lines. In fact, the BPRZ
DO NOT COPYcode has been used in T1 digital telephone links for decades, where analog
speech signals are carried as streams of 8000 8-bit digital samples per second
that are transmitted in BPRZ format on 64 Kbps serial channels.
As with RZ, it is possible to recover a clock signal from a BPRZ stream as
long as there aren’t too many 0s in a row. Although TPC (The Phone Company)
DO NOT COPY
has no control over what you say (at least, not yet), they still have a simple way
of limiting runs of 0s. If one of the 8-bit bytes that results from sampling your
analog speech pattern is all 0s, they simply change second-least significant bit
zero-code suppression to 1! This is called  zero-code suppression  and I’ll bet you never noticed it. And
this is also why, in many data applications of T1 links, you get only 56 Kbps of
DO NOT COPY
usable data per 64 Kbps channel; the LSB of each byte is always set to 1 to pre-
vent zero-code suppression from changing the other bits.
Manchester The last code in Figure 2-17 is called  Manchester  or  diphase  code. The
diphase major strength of this code is that, regardless of the transmitted data pattern, it
DO NOT COPYprovides at least one transition per bit cell, making it very easy to recover the
clock. As shown in the figure, a 0 is encoded as a 0-to-1 transition in the middle
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

References  69
ABOUT TPC  Watch the 1967 James Coburn movie,  The President’s Analyst, for an amusing view
DO NOT COPYof TPC. With the growing pervasiveness of digital technology and cheap wireless
communications, the concept of universal,  personal  connectivity to the phone net-
work presented in the movie’s conclusion has become much less far-fetched.
DO NOT COPY
of the bit cell, and a 1 is encoded as a 1-to-0 transition. The Manchester code’s
major strength is also its major weakness. Since it has more transitions per bit
cell than other codes, it also requires more media bandwidth to transmit a given
bit rate. Bandwidth is not a problem in coaxial cable, however, which was used
in the original Ethernet local area networks to carry Manchester-coded serialDO NOT COPY
data at the rate of 10 Mbps (megabits per second).
References
The presentation in the first nine sections of this chapter is based on Chapter 4DO NOT COPY
of  Microcomputer Architecture and Programming, by John F. Wakerly (Wiley,
1981). Precise, thorough, and entertaining discussions of these topics can also
be found in Donald E. Knuth’s  Seminumerical Algorithms, 3rd edition (Addi-
son-Wesley, 1997). Mathematically inclined readers will find Knuth’s analysis
of the properties of number systems and arithmetic to be excellent, and all read-DO NOT COPY
ers should enjoy the insights and history sprinkled throughout the text.
Descriptions of digital logic circuits for arithmetic operations, as well as an
introduction to properties of various number systems, appear in  Computer Arith-
metic  by Kai Hwang (Wiley, 1979).  Decimal Computation  by Hermann Schmid
DO NOT COPY
(Wiley, 1974) contains a thorough description of techniques for BCD arithmetic.
An introduction to algorithms for binary multiplication and division and to
floating-point arithmetic appears in  Microcomputer Architecture and Program-
ming: The 68000 Family  by John F. Wakerly (Wiley, 1989). A more thorough
discussion of arithmetic techniques and floating-point number systems can be
DO NOT COPY
found in  Introduction to Arithmetic for Digital Systems Designers  by Shlomo
Waser and Michael J. Flynn (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1982).
CRC codes are based on the theory of finite fields,  which was developed by finite fields
French mathematician Évariste Galois (1811–1832) shortly before he was killed
in a duel with a political opponent. The classic book on error-detecting andDO NOT COPY
error-correcting codes is  Error-Correcting Codes  by W. W. Peterson and E. J.
Weldon, Jr. (MIT Press, 1972, 2nd ed.); however, this book is recommended
only for mathematically sophisticated readers. A more accessible introduction
can be found in  Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications  by S.
Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr. (Prentice Hall, 1983). Another recent, communica-DO NOT COPY
tion-oriented introduction to coding theory can be found in  Error-Control
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

70  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Techniques for Digital Communication  by A. M. Michelson and A. H. Levesque
(Wiley-Interscience, 1985). Hardware applications of codes in computer sys-
tems are discussed in  Error-Detecting Codes, Self-Checking Circuits, and
DO NOT COPY
Applications  by John F. Wakerly (Elsevier/North-Holland, 1978).
As shown in the above reference by Wakerly, ones’-complement checksum
codes have the ability to detect long bursts of unidirectional errors; this is useful
in communication channels where errors all tend to be in the same direction. The
special computational properties of these codes also make them quite amenable
DO NOT COPY
to efficient checksum calculation by software programs, important for their use
in the Internet Protocol; see RFC-1071 and RFC-1141.
An introduction to coding techniques for serial data transmission, includ-
ing mathematical analysis of the performance and bandwidth requirements of
DO NOT COPYseveral codes, appears in  Introduction to Communications Engineering  by R. M.
Gagliardi (Wiley-Interscience, 1988, 2nd ed.). A nice introduction to the serial
codes used in magnetic disks and tapes is given in  Computer Storage Systems
and Technology  by Richard Matick (Wiley-Interscience, 1977).
The structure of the 8B10B code and the rationale behind it is explained
DO NOT COPYnicely in the original IBM patent by Peter Franaszek and Albert Widmer, U.S.
patent number 4,486,739 (1984). This and almost all U.S. patents issued after
1971 can be found on the web at  www.patents.ibm.com. When you’re done
reading Franaszek, for a good time do a boolean search for inventor “wakerly”.
DO NOT COPY
Drill Problems
2.1  Perform the following number system conversions:
(a)  1101011 2  =  ?16  (b)  174003 8  =  ? 2
DO NOT COPY(c)  10110111 2  =  ?16  (d)  67.24 8  =  ?2
(e)  10100.1101 2  =  ?16  (f)  F3A5 16  =  ?2
(g)  11011001 2  =  ?8  (h)  AB3D 16  =  ? 2
(i)  101111.0111 2  =  ?8  (j)  15C.38 16  =  ? 2
DO NOT COPY2.2  Convert the following octal numbers into binary and hexadecimal:
(a)  1023 8  =  ? 2  =  ? 16  (b)  7613028  =  ?2 =  ?16
(c)  163417 8  =  ? 2  =  ?16  (d)  5522738  =  ?2  =  ? 16
(e)  5436.15 8  =  ? 2  =  ? 16  (f)  13705.207 8  =  ?2  =  ? 16
DO NOT COPY
2.3  Convert the following hexadecimal numbers into binary and octal:
(a)  1023 16  =  ? 2  =  ?8  (b)  7E6A 16  =  ?2  =  ?8
(c)  ABCD 16  =  ? 2  =  ? 8  (d)  C350 16  =  ? 2  =  ?8
DO NOT COPY(e)  9E36.7A 16  =  ?2  =  ?8  (f)  DEAD.BEEF 16  =  ?2  =  ? 8
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Drill Problems  71
2.4  What are the octal values of the four 8-bit bytes in the 32-bit number with octal
representation 123456701238 ?
2.5  Convert the following numbers into decimal:
DO NOT COPY
(a)  1101011 2  =  ?10  (b)  174003 8  =  ? 10
(c)  10110111 2  =  ?10  (d)  67.24 8  =  ?10
(e)  10100.1101 2  =  ?10  (f)  F3A5 16  =  ?10
(g)  12010  =  ?  (h)  AB3D  =  ? 
DO NOT COPY3  10  16  10
(i)  7156 8  =  ? 10  (j)  15C.38 16  =  ? 10
2.6  Perform the following number system conversions:
(a)  125 10  =  ? 2  (b)  3489 10  =  ? 8
DO NOT COPY(c)  209  =  ?  (d)  9714  =  ? 
10  2  10  8
(e)  132 10  =  ? 2  (f)  23851 10  =  ?16
(g)  727 10  =  ? 5  (h)  57190 10  =  ?16
(i)  1435 10  =  ? 8  (j)  65113 10  =  ?16
DO NOT COPY
2.7  Add the following pairs of binary numbers, showing all carries:
(a)  110101 (b)  101110 (c)  11011101 (d)  1110010
+  11001 +  100101 +  1100011 +  1101101
2.8 DO NOT COPYRepeat Drill 2.7 using subtraction instead of addition, and showing borrows
instead of carries.
2.9  Add the following pairs of octal numbers:
(a)  1372 (b)  47135 (c)  175214 (d)  110321
+  4631 +  5125 +  152405 +  56573
DO NOT COPY
2.10  Add the following pairs of hexadecimal numbers:
(a)  1372 (b)  4F1A5 (c)  F35B (d)  1B90F
+  4631 +  B8D5 +  27E6 +  C44E
DO NOT COPY
2.11  Write the 8-bit signed-magnitude, two’s-complement, and ones’-complement
representations for each of these decimal numbers: +18,  +115,  +79, −49,  −3, −100.
2.12  Indicate whether or not overflow occurs when adding the following 8-bit two’s-
complement numbers:
DO NOT COPY
(a)  11010100 (b)  10111001 (c)  01011101 (d)  00100110
+  10101011 +  11010110 +  00100001 +  01011010
2.13  How many errors can be detected by a code with minimum distance  d?
2.14  What is the minimum number of parity bits required to obtain a distance-4, two-
DO NOT COPY
dimensional code with  n  information bits?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

72  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
Exercises
2.15  Here’s a problem to whet your appetite. What is the hexadecimal equivalent of
DO NOT COPY61453 10?
2.16  Each of the following arithmetic operations is correct in at least one number sys-
tem. Determine possible radices of the numbers in each operation.
(a)  1234  +  5432  =  6666  (b)  41 / 3 = 13
(c)  33/3 = 11  (d)  23+44+14+32 = 223
DO NOT COPY
(e)  302/20 = 12.1  (f)  14 = 5
2.17  The first expedition to Mars found only the ruins of a civilization. From the arti-
facts and pictures, the explorers deduced that the creatures who produced this
civilization were four-legged beings with a tentacle that branched out at the end
DO NOT COPY
with a number of grasping “fingers.” After much study, the explorers were able
to translate Martian mathematics. They found the following equation:
2 
5x −  50x  +  125  =  0
with the indicated solutions  x  = 5 and  x  = 8. The value  x  = 5 seemed legitimate
DO NOT COPYenough, but x = 8 required some explanation. Then the explorers reflected on the way
in which Earth’s number system developed, and found evidence that the Martian sys-
tem had a similar history. How many fingers would you say the Martians had? (From
The Bent of Tau Beta Pi, February, 1956.)
2.18  Suppose a 4n-bit number  B  is represented by an  n-digit hexadecimal number  H.
DO NOT COPYProve that the two’s complement of  B  is represented by the 16’s complement of
H. Make and prove true a similar statement for octal representation.
2.19  Repeat Exercise 2.18 using the ones’ complement of  B  and the 15s’ complement
of  H.
−1  −1 
2.20  Given an integer x in the range −2n ≤ x ≤ 2n − 1, we define [x] to be the two’s-
DO NOT COPY
complement representation of  x, expressed as a positive number: [x] =  x  if  x  ≥  0
and [x]  =  2n  −  |x| if  x  <  0, where  | x|  is the absolute value of  x. Let  y  be another
integer in the same range as  x. Prove that the two’s-complement addition rules
given in Section 2.6 are correct by proving that the following equation is always
true:
DO NOT COPY
n
[ x  +  y]  =  ( [x]  +  [y] ) modulo 2
(Hints:  Consider four cases based on the signs of  x  and  y. Without loss of generality,
you may assume that  | x|  ≥  | y|.)
2.21  Repeat Exercise 2.20 using appropriate expressions and rules for ones’-comple-
DO NOT COPYment addition.
2.22  State an overflow rule for addition of two’s-complement numbers in terms of
counting operations in the modular representation of Figure 2-3.
2.23  Show that a two’s-complement number can be converted to a representation with
more bits by  sign extension. That is, given an  n-bit two’s-complement number  X,
DO NOT COPYshow that the  m-bit two’s-complement representation of  X, where  m  >  n, can be
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  73
obtained by appending  m  −  n  copies of  X’s sign bit to the left of the  n-bit repre-
sentation of  X.
2.24  Show that a two’s-complement number can be converted to a representation with
DO NOT COPY
fewer bits by removing higher-order bits. That is, given an  n-bit two’s-comple-
ment number  X, show that the  m-bit two’s-complement number  Y  obtained by
discarding the  d  leftmost bits of  X  represents the same number as  X  if and only if
the discarded bits all equal the sign bit of  Y.
2.25  Why is the punctuation of “two’s complement” and “ones’ complement” incon-
DO NOT COPY
sistent? (See the first two citations in the References.)
2.26  A  n-bit binary adder can be used to perform an  n-bit unsigned subtraction opera-
tion  X  −  Y, by performing the operation  X  +  Y  +  1, where  X  and  Y  are  n-bit
unsigned numbers and  Y  represents the bit-by-bit complement of  Y. Demonstrate
n
this fact as follows. First, prove that (X −  Y) = (X +  Y +  1)  −  2 . Second, prove that
DO NOT COPY
the carry out of the  n-bit adder is the opposite of the borrow from the  n-bit sub-
traction. That is, show that the operation  X −  Y produces a borrow out of the MSB
position if and only if the operation  X  +  Y  +  1  does not  produce a carry out of the
MSB position.
2.27  In most cases, the product of two  n-bit two’s-complement numbers requires fewer
DO NOT COPY
than 2n  bits to represent it. In fact, there is only one case in which 2n  bits are
needed—find it.
2.28  Prove that a two’s-complement number can be multiplied by 2 by shifting it one
bit position to the left, with a carry of 0 into the least significant bit position and
disregarding any carry out of the most significant bit position, assuming no over-
DO NOT COPY
flow. State the rule for detecting overflow.
2.29  State and prove correct a technique similar to the one described in Exercise 2.28,
for multiplying a ones’-complement number by 2.
2.30  Show how to subtract BCD numbers, by stating the rules for generating borrows
and applying a correction factor. Show how your rules apply to each of the fol-
DO NOT COPY
lowing subtractions: 9  −  3, 5  −  7, 4  −  9, 1  −  8.
2.31  How many different 3-bit binary state encodings are possible for the traffic-light
controller of Table 2-12?
2.32  List all of the “bad” boundaries in the mechanical encoding disc of Figure 2-5,
where an incorrect position may be sensed.
DO NOT COPY
2.33  As a function of  n, how many “bad” boundaries are there in a mechanical encod-
ing disc that uses an  n-bit binary code?
2.34  On-board altitude transponders on commercial and private aircraft use Gray code
to encode the altitude readings that are transmitted to air traffic controllers. Why?
2.35DO NOT COPY  An incandescent light bulb is stressed every time it is turned on, so in some appli-
cations the lifetime of the bulb is limited by the number of on/off cycles rather
than the total time it is illuminated. Use your knowledge of codes to suggest a way
to double the lifetime of 3-way bulbs in such applications.
2.36  As a function of  n, how many different distinct subcubes of an  n-cube are there?
2.37DO NOT COPY  Find a way to draw a 3-cube on a sheet of paper (or other two-dimensional object)
so that none of the lines cross, or prove that it’s impossible.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

74  Chapter 2  Number Systems and Codes
2.38  Repeat Exercise 2.37 for a 4-cube.
2.39  Write a formula that gives the number of  m-subcubes of an  n-cube for a specific
value of  m. (Your answer should be a function of  n  and  m.)
DO NOT COPY
2.40  Define parity groups for a distance-3 Hamming code with 11 information bits.
2.41  Write the code words of a Hamming code with one information bit.
2.42  Exhibit the pattern for a 3-bit error that is not detected if the “corner” parity bits
are not included in the two-dimensional codes of Figure 2-14.
DO NOT COPY2.43  The  rate of a code  is the ratio of the number of information bits to the total num-
ber of bits in a code word. High rates, approaching 1, are desirable for efficient
transmission of information. Construct a graph comparing the rates of distance-2
parity codes and distance-3 and -4 Hamming codes for up to 100 information bits.
2.44  Which type of distance-4 code has a higher rate—a two-dimensional code or a
DO NOT COPYHamming code? Support your answer with a table in the style of Table 2-15,
including the rate as well as the number of parity and information bits of each
code for up to 100 information bits.
2.45  Show how to construct a distance-6 code with four information bits. Write a list
of its code words.
DO NOT COPY2.46  Describe the operations that must be performed in a RAID system to write new
data into information block  b  in drive  d, so the data can be recovered in the event
of an error in block  b  in any drive. Minimize the number of disk accesses
required.
2.47  In the style of Figure 2-17, draw the waveforms for the bit pattern 10101110
DO NOT COPYwhen sent serially using the NRZ, NRZI, RZ, BPRZ, and Manchester codes,
assuming that the bits are transmitted in order from left to right.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

c h a p t e r
DO NOT
3
COPY
DO NOT
Digital Circuits
COPY
arketing hype notwithstanding, we live in an analog world, not
a digital one. Voltages, currents, and other physical quantities
DO NOT
in real circuits take on values that are infinitely variable,
M
depending on properties of the real devices that comprise the
circuits. Because real values are continuously variable, we
could use a physical quantity such as a signal voltage in a circuit to represent
a real number (e.g., 3.14159265358979 volts represents the mathematicalCOPY
constant  pi  to 14 decimal digits of precision).
Unfortunately, stability and accuracy in physical quantities are diffi-
cult to obtain in real circuits. They are affected by manufacturing tolerances,
temperature, power-supply voltage, cosmic rays, and noise created by other
circuits, among other things. If we used an analog voltage to representDO NOT   pi, we
might find that instead of being an absolute mathematical constant,  pi  varied
over a range of 10% or more.
Also, many mathematical and logical operations are difficult or impos-
sible to perform with analog quantities. While it is possible with some
COPY
cleverness to build an analog circuit whose output voltage is the square root
of its input voltage, no one has ever built a 100-input, 100-output analog cir-
cuit whose outputs are a set of voltages identical to the set of input voltages,
but sorted arithmetically.
The purpose of this chapter is to give you a solid working knowledge
DO NOT
of the electrical aspects of digital circuits, enough for you to understand and
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 75
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

76  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
build real circuits and systems. We’ll see in later chapters that with modern soft-
ware tools, it’s possible to “build” circuits in the abstract, using hardware design
languages to specify their design and simulators to test their operation. Still, to
DO NOT COPY
build real, production-quality circuits, either at the board level or the chip level,
you need to understand most of the material in this chapter. However, if you’re
anxious to start designing and simulating abstract circuits, you can just read the
first section of this chapter and come back to the rest of it later.
DO NOT COPY
3.1 Logic Signals and Gates
digital logic Digital logic  hides the pitfalls of the analog world by mapping the infinite set of
real values for a physical quantity into two subsets corresponding to just two
logic values possible numbers or  logic values—0 and 1. As a result, digital logic circuits can
DO NOT COPY
be analyzed and designed functionally, using switching algebra, tables, and
other abstract means to describe the operation of well-behaved 0s and 1s in a
circuit.
binary digit A logic value, 0 or 1, is often called a  binary digit, or  bit. If an application
bitDO NOT COPYrequires more than two discrete values, additional bits may be used, with a set of
n 
n  bits representing 2 different values.
Examples of the physical phenomena used to represent bits in some mod-
ern (and not-so-modern) digital technologies are given in Table 3-1. With
most phenomena, there is an undefined region between the 0 and 1 states (e.g.,
DO NOT COPYvoltage = 1.8 V, dim light, capacitor slightly charged, etc.). This undefined
region is needed so that the 0 and 1 states can be unambiguously defined and
reliably detected. Noise can more easily corrupt results if the boundaries sepa-
rating the 0 and 1 states are too close.
When discussing electronic logic circuits such as CMOS and TTL, digital
DO NOT COPY
LOW designers often use the words “LOW” and “HIGH” in place of “0” and “1” to
HIGH remind them that they are dealing with real circuits, not abstract quantities:
LOW  A signal in the range of algebraically lower voltages, which is interpret-
ed as a logic 0.
DO NOT COPY
HIGH  A signal in the range of algebraically higher voltages, which is interpret-
ed as a logic 1.
Note that the assignments of 0 and 1 to  LOW  and  HIGH  are somewhat arbitrary.
Assigning 0 to  LOW  and 1 to  HIGH  seems most natural, and is called  positive
positive logicDO NOT COPYlogic. The opposite assignment, 1 to  LOW  and 0 to  HIGH, is not often used, and
negative logic is called  negative logic.
Because a wide range of physical values represent the same binary value,
digital logic is highly immune to component and power supply variations and
buffer amplifier noise. Furthermore,  buffer amplifier  circuits can be used to regenerate “weak”
DO NOT COPY
values into “strong” ones, so that digital signals can be transmitted over arbitrary
distances without loss of information. For example, a buffer amplifier for CMOS
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.1  Logic Signals and Gates  77
Ta b l e  3 - 1  Physical states representing bits in different computer logic and
memory technologies.
DO NOT COPYState Representing Bit
Technology 0 1
Pneumatic logic  Fluid at low pressure  Fluid at high pressure
Relay logicDO NOT COPY  Circuit open  Circuit closed
Complementary metal-oxide semi 0–1.5 V  3.5–5.0 V
conductor (CMOS) logic
Transistor-transistor logic (TTL)  0–0.8 V  2.0–5.0 V
Fiber opticsDO NOT COPY  Light off  Light on
Dynamic memory  Capacitor discharged  Capacitor charged
Nonvolatile, erasable memory  Electrons trapped  Electrons released
Bipolar read-only memory  Fuse blown  Fuse intact
DO NOT COPY
Bubble memory  No magnetic bubble  Bubble present
Magnetic tape or disk  Flux direction “north”  Flux direction “south”
Polymer memory  Molecule in state A  Molecule in state B
Read-only compact disc  No pit  Pit
DO NOT COPY
Rewriteable compact disc  Dye in crystalline state  Dye in non-crystalline state
logic converts any  HIGH  input voltage into an output very close to 5.0 V, and any
LOWDO NOT COPY  input voltage into an output very close to 0.0 V.
A logic circuit can be represented with a minimum amount of detail simply
as a “black box” with a certain number of inputs and outputs. For example,
Figure 3-1 shows a logic circuit with three inputs and one output. However, this
representation does not describe how the circuit responds to input signals.
DO NOT COPYFrom the point of view of electronic circuit design, it takes a lot of informa-
tion to describe the precise electrical behavior of a circuit. However, since the
inputs of a digital logic circuit can be viewed as taking on only discrete 0 and 1
values, the circuit’s “logical” operation can be described with a table that ignores
electrical behavior and lists only discrete 0 and 1 values.
DO NOT COPY
Inputs  Output 
Figure 3-1
X “Black box” representation
logic circuit
Y F of a three-input, one-output
Z logic circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

78  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
A logic circuit whose outputs depend only on its current inputs is called a
combinational circuit combinational circuit. Its operation is fully described by a  truth table  that lists
truth table all combinations of input values and the output value(s) produced by each one.
DO NOT COPY
Table 3-2 is the truth table for a logic circuit with three inputs  X,  Y, and  Z  and a
single output  F.
Ta b l e  3 - 2
X  Y  Z  F
Truth table for a
DO NOT COPY
combinational logic 0  0  0  0
circuit. 0  0  1  1
0  1  0  0
0  1  1  0
DO NOT COPY
1  0  0  0
1  0  1  0
1  1  0  1
1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
A circuit with memory, whose outputs depend on the current input  and  the
sequential circuit sequence of past inputs, is called a  sequential circuit. The behavior of such a cir-
state table cuit may be described by a  state table  that specifies its output and next state as
functions of its current state and input. Sequential circuits will be introduced in
DO NOT COPY
\chapref{SeqPrinc}.
As we’ll show in Section 4.1, just three basic logic functions,  AND,  OR,
and  NOT, can be used to build any combinational digital logic circuit. Figure 3-2
shows the truth tables and symbols for logic “gates” that perform these func-
DO NOT COPYtions. The symbols and truth tables for  AND  and  OR  may be extended to gates
with any number of inputs. The gates’ functions are easily defined in words:
AND  gate •  An AND  gate  produces a 1 output if and only if all of its inputs are 1.
OR  gate •  An OR  gate  produces a 1 if and only if one or more of its inputs are 1.
NOTDO NOT COPY  gate •  A NOT  gate,  usually called an  inverter, produces an output value that is the
inverter opposite of its input value.
X X
X AND Y X OR Y X NOT X
(a) Y  (b) Y (c)
DO NOT COPYX • Y  X + Y X′
Figure 3-2
Basic logic elements: X Y X AND Y X Y X OR Y X  NOT X
(a)  AND ; (b)  OR ;
0 0 0 0 0 0 0  1
(c)  NOT(inverter).
0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0
DO NOT COPY1 0 0 1 0 1
1 1 1 1 1 1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.1  Logic Signals and Gates  79
X X
X NAND Y X NOR Y
(a) Y  (b) Y
(X • Y)′  (X + Y)′
DO NOT COPY
X Y X NAND Y X Y X NOR Y
Figure 3-3
0 0 1 0 0 1
Inverting gates:
0 1 1 0 1 0
(a)  NAND ; (b)  NOR.
1 0 1 1 0 0
DO NOT COPY1 1 0 1 1 0
The circle on the inverter symbol’s output is called an  inversion bubble, and is inversion bubble
used in this and other gate symbols to denote “inverting” behavior.
Notice that in the definitions of  AND  and  OR  functions, we only had to
DO NOT COPY
state the input conditions for which the output is 1, because there is only one pos-
sibility when the output is not 1—it must be 0.
Two more logic functions are obtained by combining  NOT with an  AND  or
OR  function in a single gate. Figure 3-3 shows the truth tables and symbols for
these gates; Their functions are also easily described in words:DO NOT COPY
•  A NAND  gate  produces the opposite of an  AND  gate’s output, a 0 if and NAND  gate
only if all of its inputs are 1.
•  A NOR  gate  produces the opposite of an  OR  gate’s output, a 0 if and only NOR  gate
DO NOT COPYif one or more of its inputs are 1.
As with  AND  and  OR  gates, the symbols and truth tables for  NAND  and  NOR
may be extended to gates with any number of inputs.
Figure 3-4 is a logic circuit using  AND,  OR, and  NOT  gates that functions
according to the truth table of Table 3-2. In Chapter 4 you’ll learn how to go
DO NOT COPY
from a truth table to a logic circuit, and vice versa, and you’ll also learn about the
switching-algebra notation used in Figures 3-2 through 3-4.
Real logic circuits also function in another analog dimension—time. For
example, Figure 3-5 is a timing diagram  that shows how the circuit of Figure 3-4 timing diagram
might respond to a time-varying pattern of input signals. The timing diagram
DO NOT COPY
shows that the logic signals do not change between 0 and 1 instantaneously, and
also that there is a lag between an input change and the corresponding output
X
DO NOT COPYX • Y Figure 3-4
Y
Logic circuit with the
truth table of
X′ F
Table 3-2.
X • Y + X′ • Y′ • Z
Y′ X′ • Y • Z
DO NOT COPY
Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

80  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
X
DO NOT COPY
Y
Z
Figure 3-5
Timing diagram for a
logic circuit. F
DO NOT COPY
TIME
change. Later in this chapter, you’ll learn some of the reasons for this timing
DO NOT COPYbehavior, and how it is specified and handled in real circuits. And once again,
you’ll learn in a later chapter how this analog timing behavior can be generally
ignored in most sequential circuits, and instead the circuit can be viewed as mov-
ing between discrete states at precise intervals defined by a clock signal.
Thus, even if you know nothing about analog electronics, you should be
DO NOT COPYable to understand the logical behavior of digital circuits. However, there comes
a time in design and debugging when every digital logic designer must tempo-
rarily throw out “the digital abstraction” and consider the analog phenomena
that limit or disrupt digital performance. The rest of this chapter prepares you for
that day by discussing the electrical characteristics of digital logic circuits.
DO NOT COPY
THERE’S HOPE If all of this electrical “stuff” bothers you, don’t worry, at least for now. The rest of
FOR NON-EE’S this book is written to be as independent of this stuff as possible. But you’ll need it
later, if you ever have to design and build digital systems in the real world.
DO NOT COPY
3.2 Logic Families
DO NOT COPY
There are many, many ways to design an electronic logic circuit. The first elec-
trically controlled logic circuits, developed at Bell Laboratories in 1930s, were
based on relays. In the mid-1940s, the first electronic digital computer, the Eni-
ac, used logic circuits based on vacuum tubes. The Eniac had about 18,000 tubes
and a similar number of logic gates, not a lot by today’s standards of micropro-
DO NOT COPY
cessor chips with tens of millions of transistors. However, the Eniac could hurt
you a lot more than a chip could if it fell on you—it was 100 feet long, 10 feet
high, 3 feet deep, and consumed 140,000 watts of power!
semiconductor diode The inventions of the  semiconductor diode  and the  bipolar junction tran-
bipolar junctionDO NOT COPYsistor  allowed the development of smaller, faster, and more capable computers
transistor in the late 1950s. In the 1960s, the invention of the  integrated circuit (IC)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.2  Logic Families  81
allowed multiple diodes, transistors, and other components to be fabricated on a integrated circuit (IC)
single chip, and computers got still better.
The 1960s also saw the introduction of the first integrated-circuit logic
DO NOT COPY
families. A  logic family  is a collection of different integrated-circuit chips that logic family
have similar input, output, and internal circuit characteristics, but that perform
different logic functions. Chips from the same family can be interconnected to
perform any desired logic function. On the other hand, chips from differing fam-
ilies may not be compatible; they may use different power-supply voltages or
DO NOT COPY
may use different input and output conditions to represent logic values.
The most successful  bipolar logic family  (one based on bipolar junction bipolar logic family
transistors) is  transistor-transistor logic (TTL). First introduced in the 1960s, transistor-transistor
TTL now is actually a family of logic families that are compatible with each logic (TTL)
other but differ in speed, power consumption, and cost. Digital systems can mixDO NOT COPY
components from several different TTL families, according to design goals and
constraints in different parts of the system. Although TTL was largely replaced
by CMOS in the 1990s, you’re still likely to encounter TTL components in aca-
demic labs; therefore, we introduce TTL families in Section 3.10.
DO NOT COPYTen years  before the bipolar junction transistor was invented, the principles
of operation were patented for another type of transistor, called the  metal-oxide metal-oxide
semiconductor field effect transistor (MOSFET), or simply  MOS transistor. semiconductor field
effect transistor
However, MOS transistors were difficult to fabricate in the early days, and it
(MOSFET)
wasn’t until the 1960s that a wave of developments made MOS-based logic and
DO NOT COPY
memory circuits practical. Even then, MOS circuits lagged bipolar circuits con- MOS transistor
siderably in speed, and were attractive only in selected applications because of
their  lower power consumption and higher levels of integration.
Beginning in the mid-1980s, advances in the design of MOS circuits, in
particular  complementary MOS (CMOS)  circuits, vastly increased their perfor- complementary MOS
DO NOT COPY
mance and popularity. By far the majority of new large-scale integrated circuits, (CMOS)
such as microprocessors and memories, use CMOS. Likewise, small- to medi-
um-scale applications, for which TTL was once the logic family of choice, are
now likely to use CMOS devices with equivalent functionality but higher speed
and  lower power consumption. CMOS circuits now account for the vast majority
DO NOT COPY
of the worldwide IC market.
CMOS logic is both the most capable and the easiest to understand com-
mercial digital logic technology. Beginning in the next section, we describe the
basic structure of CMOS logic circuits and introduce the most commonly used
commercial CMOS logic families.DO NOT COPY
GREEN STUFF  Nowadays, the acronym “MOS” is usually spoken as “moss,” rather than spelled out.
And “CMOS” has always been spoken as “sea moss.”
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

82  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
As a consequence of the industry’s transition from TTL to CMOS over a
long period of time, many CMOS families were designed to be somewhat com-
patible with TTL. In Section 3.12, we show how TTL and CMOS families can
DO NOT COPY
be mixed within a single system.
3.3 CMOS Logic
The functional behavior of a CMOS logic circuit is fairly easy to understand,
DO NOT COPY
even if your knowledge of analog electronics is not particularly deep. The basic
(and typically only) building blocks in CMOS logic circuits are MOS transis-
tors, described shortly. Before introducing MOS transistors and CMOS logic
circuits, we must talk about logic levels.
DO NOT COPY
3.3.1 CMOS Logic Levels
Abstract logic elements process binary digits, 0 and 1. However, real logic cir-
cuits process electrical signals such as voltage levels. In any logic circuit, there
is a range of voltages (or other circuit conditions) that is interpreted as a logic 0,
DO NOT COPYand another, nonoverlapping range that is interpreted as a logic 1.
A typical CMOS logic circuit operates from a 5-volt power supply. Such a
circuit may interpret any voltage in the range 0–1.5 V as a logic 0, and in the
range 3.5–5.0 V as a logic 1. Thus, the definitions of  LOW  and  HIGH  for 5-volt
CMOS logic are as shown in Figure 3-6. Voltages in the intermediate range
DO NOT COPY(1.5–3.5 V)are not expected to occur except during signal transitions, and yield
undefined logic values (i.e., a circuit may interpret them as either 0 or 1). CMOS
circuits using other power supply voltages, such as 3.3 or 2.7 volts, partition the
voltage range similarly.
DO NOT COPY3.3.2 MOS Transistors
A MOS transistor can be modeled as a 3-terminal device that acts like a voltage-
controlled resistance. As suggested by Figure 3-7, an input voltage applied to
one terminal controls the resistance between the remaining two terminals. In
digital logic applications, a MOS transistor is operated so its resistance is always
DO NOT COPY
either very high (and the transistor is “off”) or very low (and the transistor is
“on”).
5.0 V
DO NOT COPY
Logic 1 (HIGH)
Figure 3-6
3.5 V
Logic levels for typical undefined
CMOS logic circuits. logic level
1.5 V
DO NOT COPYLogic 0 (LOW)
0.0 V
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.3  CMOS Logic  83
Figure 3-7
The MOS transistor as
VIN
a voltage-controlled
DO NOT COPY
resistance.
There are two types of MOS transistors,  n-channel and  p-channel; the
names refer to the type of semiconductor material used for the resistance-con-
trolled terminals. The circuit symbol for anDO NOT COPY  n-channel MOS (NMOS) transistor n-channel MOS
is shown in Figure 3-8. The terminals are called  gate,  source,  and  drain. (Note (NMOS) transistor
that the “gate” of a MOS transistor has nothing to do with a “logic gate.”) As you gate
might guess from the orientation of the circuit symbol, the drain is normally at a source
higher voltage than the source. drain
DO NOT COPY
Voltage-controlled resistance: Figure 3-8
drain increase V  ==> decrease R 
gate  gs  ds Circuit symbol for an
n-channel MOS (NMOS)
+
source
V Note: normally, V gs ≥0 transistor.
DO NOT COPYgs
−
The voltage from gate to source (Vgs ) in an NMOS transistor is normally
zero or positive. If  Vgs  = 0, then the resistance from drain to source (Rds) is very
6 
high, on the order of a megohm (10DO NOT COPY  ohms) or more. As we increase  Vgs  (i.e.,
increase the voltage on the gate),  Rds  decreases to a very low value, 10 ohms or
less in some devices.
The circuit symbol for a  p-channel MOS (PMOS) transistor  is shown in p-channel MOS
Figure 3-9. Operation is analogous to that of an NMOS transistor, except that the (PMOS) transistor
source is normally at a higher voltage than the drain, andDO NOT COPY  V is normally zero or
gs 
negative. If Vgs  is zero, then the resistance from source to drain (Rds) is very high.
As we algebraically decrease  Vgs  (i.e.,  decrease  the voltage on the gate),  Rds
decreases to a very low value.
The gate of a MOS transistor has a very high impedance. That is, the gate
DO NOT COPY
is separated from the source and the drain by an insulating material with a very
high resistance. However, the gate voltage creates an electric field that enhances
or retards the flow of current between source and drain. This is the “field effect”
in the “MOSFET” name.
Regardless of gate voltage, almost no current flows from the gate to source,
DO NOT COPY
or from the gate to drain for that matter. The resistance between the gate and the
−
V Voltage-controlled resistance: Figure 3-9
gs
decrease V  ==> decrease R 
+ source gs  ds Circuit symbol for a
DO NOT COPYp-channel MOS (PMOS)
gate 
drain
Note: normally, Vgs ≤0 transistor.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

84  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
IMPEDANCE VS. Technically, there’s a difference between “impedance” and “resistance,” but electri-
RESISTANCE cal engineers often use the terms interchangeably. So do we in this text.
DO NOT COPY
other terminals of the device is extremely high, well over a megohm. The small
amount of current that flows across this resistance is very small, typically less
DO NOT COPY−6 
leakage current than one microampere (μA, 10 A), and is called a  leakage current.
The MOS transistor symbol itself reminds us that there is no connection
between the gate and the other two terminals of the device. However, the gate of
a MOS transistor is capacitively coupled to the source and drain, as the symbol
might suggest. In high-speed circuits, the power needed to charge and discharge
DO NOT COPY
this capacitance on each input-signal transition accounts for a nontrivial portion
of a circuit’s power consumption.
3.3.3 Basic CMOS Inverter Circuit
NMOS and PMOS transistors are used together in a complementary way to form
DO NOT COPY
CMOS logic CMOS logic. The simplest CMOS circuit, a logic inverter, requires only one of
each type of transistor, connected as shown in Figure 3-10(a). The power supply
voltage,  VDD , typically may be in the range 2–6 V, and is most often set at 5.0 V
for compatibility with TTL circuits.
DO NOT COPYIdeally, the functional behavior of the CMOS inverter circuit can be char-
acterized by just two cases tabulated in Figure 3-10(b):
1.  VIN  is 0.0 V. In this case, the bottom,  n-channel transistor  Q1  is off, since
its  Vgs is 0, but the top,  p-channel transistor Q2  is on, since its  Vgs  is a large
negative value (−5.0 V). Therefore,  Q2  presents only a small resistance
DO NOT COPY
between the power supply terminal (VDD ,  +5.0 V) and the output terminal
(VOUT ), and the output voltage is 5.0 V.
DO NOT COPYVDD = +5.0 V
(a)
Figure 3-10
CMOS inverter:
(a) circuit diagram; (b) VIN Q1 Q2 VOUT
Q2
(b) functional behavior;
(p-channel) 0.0 (L) off on 5.0 (H)
(c) logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY5.0 (H) on off 0.0 (L)
VOUT
Q1
VIN (n-channel)
(c) IN  OUT
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.3  CMOS Logic  85
2.  VIN  is 5.0 V. Here,  Q1  is on, since its  Vgs is a large positive value (+5.0 V),
but  Q2  is off, since its  Vgs  is 0. Thus,  Q1  presents a small resistance
between the output terminal and ground, and the output voltage is 0 V.
DO NOT COPY
With the foregoing functional behavior, the circuit clearly behaves as a logical
inverter, since a 0-volt input produces a 5-volt output, and vice versa
Another way to visualize CMOS operation uses switches. As shown in
Figure 3-11(a), the  n-channel (bottom) transistor is modeled by a normally-open
switch, and theDO NOT COPY  p-channel (top) transistor by a normally-closed switch. Applying
a  HIGH  voltage changes each switch to the opposite of its normal state, as shown
in (b).
VDD = +5.0 V VDD = +5.0 V
(a)  (b)  Figure 3-11
DO NOT COPY
Switch model for
CMOS inverter: (a)
LOW  input; (b)  HIGH
input.
V = L V = H V = H V = L
DO NOT COPYIN  OUT  IN  OUT 
DO NOT COPY
The switch model gives rise to a way of drawing CMOS circuits that makes
their logical behavior more readily apparent. As shown in Figure 3-12, different
symbols are used for the  p- and  n-channel transistors to reflect their logical
behavior. TheDO NOT COPY  n-channel transistor (Q1) is switched “on,” and current flows
between source and drain, when a  HIGH  voltage is applied to its gate; this seems
natural enough. The  p-channel transistor (Q2) has the opposite behavior. It is
DO NOT COPYVDD = +5.0 V
Figure 3-12
CMOS inverter logical
operation.
Q2
on when
(p-channel)
VIN  is low
DO NOT COPY
VOUT
Q1
on when
VIN (n-channel)
VIN  is high
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

86  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
WHAT’S IN A The “DD” in the name “VDD ” refers to the  drain  terminal of an MOS transistor. This
NAME? may seem strange, since in the CMOS inverter  V is actually connected to the
DO NOT COPYDD 
source  terminal of a PMOS transistor. However, CMOS logic circuits evolved from
NMOS logic circuits, where the supply was connected to the drain of an NMOS tran-
sistor through a load resistor, and the name “VDD ” stuck. Also note that ground is
sometimes referred to as “VSS ” in CMOS and NMOS circuits. Some authors and
most circuit manufacturers use “VCC ” as the symbol for the CMOS supply voltage,
DO NOT COPY
since this name is used in TTL circuits, which historically preceded CMOS. To get
you used to both, we’ll start using “VCC ” in Section 3.4.
“on” when a  LOW  voltage is applied; the inversion bubble on its gate indicates
DO NOT COPY
this inverting behavior.
3.3.4 CMOS  NAND  and  NOR  Gates
Both  NAND  and  NOR  gates can be constructed using CMOS. A  k-input
gate uses  k  p-channel and  k  n-channel transistors. Figure 3-13 shows a 2-input
DO NOT COPY
CMOS  NAND  gate. If either input is  LOW, the output  Z  has a low-impedance
connection to  VDD  through the corresponding “on”  p-channel transistor, and the
path to ground is blocked by the corresponding “off” n-channel transistor. If both
inputs are  HIGH, the path to  VDD  is blocked, and  Z has a low-impedance connec-
DO NOT COPYtion to ground. Figure 3-14 shows the switch model for the  NAND  gate’s
operation.
Figure 3-15 shows a CMOS  NOR  gate. If both inputs are  LOW, the output
Z  has a low-impedance connection to  VDD  through the “on”  p-channel transis-
tors, and the path to ground is blocked by the “off”  n-channel transistors. If
DO NOT COPYeither input is  HIGH, the path to V is blocked, and  Z  has a low-impedance con-
DD 
nection to ground.
VDD
Figure 3-13 (a)
CMOS 2-inputDO NOT COPY
NAND  gate: (b) A B Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Z
(a) circuit diagram; Q2  Q4
L L off on off on H
(b) function table;
L H off on on off H
(c) logic symbol.
Z H L on off off on H
DO NOT COPYH H on off on off L
A Q1
A
B Q3 (c) Z
B 
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.3  CMOS Logic  87
NAND  VS.  NOR  CMOS NAND and  NOR  gates do not have identical performance. For a given silicon
area, an  n-channel transistor has lower “on” resistance than a  p-channel transistor.
DO NOT COPY
Therefore, when transistors are put in series,  k n-channel transistors have lower “on”
resistance than do  k  p-channel ones. As a result, a  k-input  NAND  gate is generally
faster than and preferred over a  k-input  NOR  gate.
DO NOT COPY
VDD VDD VDD
(a) (b) (c)
DO NOT COPY
Z = H Z = H Z = L
DO NOT COPY
A = L A = H A = H
B = L B = L B = H
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-14  Switch model for CMOS 2-input NAND gate: (a) both inputs  LOW ;
(b) one input  HIGH ; (c) both inputs  HIGH .
DO NOT COPY
VDD
(a)
DO NOT COPYFigure 3-15
A (b) A B Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Z
Q2
CMOS 2-input
L L off on off on H NOR  gate:
L H off on on off L
(a) circuit diagram;
B Q4 H L on off off on L
(b) function table;
H H on off on off L
DO NOT COPYZ (c) logic symbol.
A
Q1  Q3 (c) Z
B 
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

88  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VDD
(a)  (b)
A B C Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Z
DO NOT COPY
Q2  Q4  Q6 L L L off on off on off on H
L L H off on off on on off H
L H L off on on off off on H
L H H off on on off on off H
Z H L L on off off on off on H
DO NOT COPYH L H on off off on on off H
H H L on off on off off on H
A  Q1
H H H on off on off on off L
B Q3
DO NOT COPY(c) A
B Z
C Q5 C
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-16  CMOS 3-input  NAND  gate: (a) circuit diagram;
(b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
3.3.5 Fan-In
The number of inputs that a gate can have in a particular logic family is called
DO NOT COPY
fan-in the logic family’s  fan-in. CMOS gates with more than two inputs can be
obtained by extending series-parallel designs on Figures 3-13 and 3-15 in the
obvious manner. For example, Figure 3-16 shows a 3-input CMOS  NAND  gate.
In principle, you could design a CMOS  NAND  or  NOR  gate with a very
DO NOT COPYlarge number of inputs. In practice, however, the additive “on” resistance of
series transistors limits the fan-in of CMOS gates, typically to 4 for  NOR  gates
and 6 for  NAND  gates.
As the number of inputs is increased, CMOS gate designers may compen-
sate by increasing the size of the series transistors to reduce their resistance and
DO NOT COPYthe corresponding switching delay. However, at some point this becomes ineffi-
cient or impractical. Gates with a large number of inputs can be made faster and
smaller by cascading gates with fewer inputs. For example, Figure 3-17 shows
I1
Figure 3-17 I1
DO NOT COPYI2
Logic diagram I2
I3
equivalent to the I3
I4
I4
internal structure of OUT OUT
I5
an 8-input CMOS I5
I6
NAND  gate. I6
DO NOT COPYI7
I7
I8
I8
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.3  CMOS Logic  89
VDD = +5.0 V
(a)
DO NOT COPY
(b) A Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Z
Q2 Q4
L off on on off L Figure 3-18
A  Z H on off off on H CMOS noninverting
buffer:
DO NOT COPYQ1 Q3 (a) circuit diagram;
(b) function table;
(c) A  Z
(c) logic symbol.
the logical structure of an 8-input CMOSDO NOT COPY  NAND  gate. The total delay through a
4-input  NAND, a 2-input  NOR, and an inverter is typically less than the delay of
a one-level 8-input  NAND  circuit.
3.3.6 Noninverting Gates
DO NOT COPY
In CMOS, and in most other logic families, the simplest gates are inverters, and
the next simplest are  NAND  gates and NOR  gates. A logical inversion comes “for
free,” and it typically is not possible to design a noninverting gate with a smaller
number of transistors than an inverting one.
CMOS noninverting buffers and  AND  and  OR  gates are obtained by con-
DO NOT COPY
necting an inverter to the output of the corresponding inverting gate. Combining
Figure 3-15(a) with an inverter yields an  OR  gate. Thus, Figure 3-18 shows a
noninverting buffer and Figure 3-19 shows an  AND  gate.
Figure 3-19DO NOT COPY  CMOS 2-input  AND  gate: (a) circuit diagram; (b) function table;
(c) logic symbol.
VDD
(a)
DO NOT COPY(b) A B Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Z
Q2  Q4  Q6
L L off on off on on off L
L H off on on off on off L
H L on off off on on off L
Z H H on off on off off on H
ADO NOT COPYQ1
A
B Q3  Q5 (c)  Z
B 
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

90  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VDD
(a) (b) A B C D Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Z
DO NOT COPY
A Q2  Q4
L L L L off on off on off on off on H
L L L H off on off on off on on off H
B L L H L off on off on on off off on H
L L H H off on off on on off on off L
L H L L off on on off off on off on H
DO NOT COPYQ6  Q8 L H L H off on on off off on on off H
L H H L off on on off on off off on H
Z
L H H H off on on off on off on off L
H L L L on off off on off on off on H
H L L H on off off on off on on off H
C Q5 Q3 H L H L on off off on on off off on H
DO NOT COPYH L H H on off off on on off on off L
H H L L on off on off off on off on L
H H L H on off on off off on on off L
D Q7 Q1
H H H L on off on off on off off on L
H H H H on off on off on off on off L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-20  CMOS  AND-OR-INVERT  gate: (a) circuit diagram; (b) function tab
3.3.7 CMOS  AND-OR-INVERT  and  OR-AND-INVERT  Gates
DO NOT COPYCMOS circuits can perform two levels of logic with just a single “level” of tran-
sistors. For example, the circuit in Figure 3-20(a) is a two-wide, two-input
AND-OR-INVERT CMOS AND-OR-INVERT (AOI) gate. The function table for this circuit is shown
(AOI)  gate in (b) and a logic diagram for this function using  AND  and  NOR  gates is shown
in Figure 3-21. Transistors can be added to or removed from this circuit to obtain
DO NOT COPY
an  AOI  function with a different number of  ANDs or a different number of inputs
per  AND.
The contents of each of the  Q1–Q8  columns in Figure 3-20(b) depends
only on the input signal connected to the corresponding transistor’s gate. The
last column is constructed by examining each input combination and determin-
DO NOT COPY
ing whether  Z  is connected to  VDD  or ground by “on” transistors for that input
combination. Note that  Z  is never connected to  both  VDD  and ground for any
input combination; in such a case the output would be a non-logic value some-
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-21 A
Logic diagram for CMOS
B
AND-OR-INVERT  gate.
Z
C
DO NOT COPY
D
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.3  CMOS Logic  91
VDD
(a) (b) A B C D Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Z
DO NOT COPY
A Q2  Q6
L L L L off on off on off on off on H
L L L H off on off on off on on off H
L L H L off on off on on off off on H
L L H H off on off on on off on off H
B Q4  Q8
L  H  L  L off  on on  off  off on  off on  H
DO NOT COPYL H L H off on on off off on on off L
Z
L H H L off on on off on off off on L
L H H H off on on off on off on off L
C Q5 Q7 H L L L on off off on off on off on H
H L L H on off off on off on on off L
H L H L on off off on on off off on L
DO NOT COPYD H L H H on off off on on off on off L
H H L L on off on off off on off on H
H H L H on off on off off on on off L
Q1 Q3
H H H L on off on off on off off on L
H H H H on off on off on off on off L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-22  CMOS OR-AND-INVERT gate: (a) circuit diagram; (b) function table.
where between  LOW  and  HIGH, and the output structure would consume
excessive power due to the low-impedance connection betweenDO NOT COPY V and ground.
DD 
A circuit can also be designed to perform an  OR-AND-INVERT  function.
For example, Figure 3-22(a) is a two-wide, two-input CMOS OR-AND-INVERT OR-AND-INVERT
(OAI )  gate. The function table for this circuit is shown in (b); the values in each (AOI)  gate
column are determined just as we did for the CMOS  AOI  gate. A logic diagram
DO NOT COPY
for the  OAI  function using  OR  and  NAND  gates is shown in Figure 3-23.
The speed and other electrical characteristics of a CMOS  AOI  or  OAI  gate
are quite comparable to those of a single CMOS  NAND  or NOR  gate. As a result,
these gates are very appealing because they can perform two levels of logic
(AND-OR  or  OR-AND) with just one level of delay. Most digital designers don’t
DO NOT COPY
bother to use  AOI gates in their discrete designs. However, CMOS VLSI devices
often use these gates internally, since many HDL synthesis tools can automati-
cally convert  AND/OR  logic into  AOI gates when appropriate.
DO NOT COPY
A Figure 3-23
Logic diagram for CMOS
B
OR-AND-INVERT  gate.
Z
C
DO NOT COPY
D
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

92  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
3.4 Electrical Behavior of CMOS Circuits
The next three sections discuss electrical, not logical, aspects of CMOS circuit
DO NOT COPYoperation. It’s important to understand this material when you design real cir-
cuits using CMOS or other logic families. Most of this material is aimed at
providing a framework for ensuring that the “digital abstraction” is really valid
for a given circuit. In particular, a circuit or system designer must provide in a
engineering design number of areas adequate engineering design margins—insurance that the cir-
marginsDO NOT COPY
cuit will work properly even under the worst of conditions.
3.4.1 Overview
The topics that we discuss in Sections 3.5–3.7 include the following:
DO NOT COPY•  Logic voltage levels. CMOS devices operating under normal conditions are
guaranteed to produce output voltage levels within well-defined  LOW  and
HIGH  ranges. And they recognize LOW  and HIGH  input voltage levels over
somewhat wider ranges. CMOS manufacturers specify these ranges and
operating  conditions  very  carefully  to  ensure  compatibility  among
DO NOT COPYdifferent  devices  in  the  same  family,  and  to  provide  a  degree  of
interoperability (if you’re careful) among devices in different families.
•  DC noise margins. Nonnegative DC noise margins ensure that the highest
LOW  voltage produced by an output is always lower than the highest volt-
DO NOT COPYage that an input can reliably interpret as  LOW, and that the lowest  HIGH
voltage produced by an output is always higher than the lowest voltage that
an input can reliably interpret as  HIGH. A good understanding of noise
margins is especially important in circuits that use devices from a number
of different families.
DO NOT COPY
•  Fanout. This refers to the number and type of inputs that are connected to
a given output. If too many inputs are connected to an output, the DC noise
margins of the circuit may be inadequate. Fanout may also affect the speed
at which the output changes from one state to another.
•  Speed. The time that it takes a CMOS output to change from the  LOW  state
DO NOT COPY
to the  HIGH  state, or vice versa, depends on both the internal structure of
the device and the characteristics of the other devices that it drives, even to
the extent of being affected by the wire or printed-circuit-board traces con-
nected to the output. We’ll look at two separate components of “speed”—
DO NOT COPYtransition time and propagation delay.
•  Power consumption. The power consumed by a CMOS device depends on
a number of factors, including not only its internal structure, but also the
input signals that it receives, the other devices that it drives, and how often
its output changes between  LOW  and  HIGH.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.4  Electrical Behavior of CMOS Circuits  93
•  Noise.  The main reason for providing engineering design margins is to
ensure proper circuit operation in the presence of noise. Noise can be gen-
erated by a number of sources; several of them are listed below, from the
DO NOT COPY
least likely to the (perhaps surprisingly) most likely:
–  Cosmic rays.
–  Magnetic fields from nearby machinery.
–  Power-supply disturbances.
DO NOT COPY
–  The switching action of the logic circuits themselves.
•  Electrostatic discharge.  Would you believe that you can destroy a CMOS
device just by touching it?
•  Open-drain outputs.  Some CMOS outputs omit the usual  p-channel pull-
DO NOT COPYup transistors. In the HIGH  state, such outputs are effectively a “no-connec-
tion,” which is useful in some applications.
•  Three-state outputs.  Some CMOS devices have an extra “output enable”
control input that can be used to disable both the  p-channel pull-up transis-
tors and the  n-channel pull-down transistors. Many such device outputs
DO NOT COPY
can be tied together to create a multisource bus, as long as the control logic
is arranged so that at most one output is enabled at a time.
3.4.2 Data Sheets and Specifications
The manufacturers of real-world devices provideDO NOT COPY  data sheets  that specify the data sheet
devices’ logical and electrical characteristics. The electrical specifications por-
tion of a minimal data sheet for a simple CMOS device, the 54/74HC00
quadruple  NAND  gate, is shown in Table 3-3. Different manufacturers typically
specify additional parameters, and they may vary in how they specify even the
“standard” parameters shown in the table. Thus, they usually also show the testDO NOT COPY
circuits and waveforms that they use to define various parameters, for example
as shown in Figure 3-24. Note that this figure contains information for some
parameters in addition to those used with the 54/74HC00.
Most of the terms in the data sheet and the waveforms in the figure are
probably meaningless to you at this point. However, after reading the next threeDO NOT COPY
sections you should know enough about the electrical characteristics of CMOS
circuits that you’ll be able to understand the salient points of this or any other
data sheet. As a logic designer, you’ll need this knowledge to create reliable and
robust real-world circuits and systems.
DO NOT COPY
DON’T BE AFRAID  Computer science students and other non-EE readers should not have undue fear of
the material in the next three sections. Only a basic understanding of electronics, at
about the level of Ohm’s law, is required.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

94  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 3  Manufacturer’s data sheet for a typical CMOS device,
the 54/74HC00 quad  NAND  gate.
DC ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OVER OPERATING RANGEDO NOT COPY
The following conditions apply unless otherwise specified:
Commercial:  TA  =  −40°C to +85°C,  VCC  =  5.0V±5%;  Military:  TA  =  −55°C to +125°C,  VCC  =  5.0V±10%
(1) (2) 
Sym.  Parameter Test Conditions  Min.  Typ.  Max.  Unit
DO NOT COPYV Input  HIGH  level  Guaranteed logic  HIGH  level  3.15  —  —  V
IH 
VIL  Input  LOW  level  Guaranteed logic  LOW  level  —  —  1.35  V
IIH  Input  HIGH  current  VCC  =  Max.,  VI  =  VCC  —  —  1 μA
IIL  Input  LOW  current  VCC  =  Max.,  VI  =  0 V  —  —  −1 μA
DO NOT COPY
VIK  Clamp diode voltage  VCC  =  Min., I N  =  −18 mA  —  −0.7  −1.2  V
(3) 
IIOS  Short-circuit current  VCC  =  Max.,  VO  =  GND  —  —  −35  mA
V =  Min., IOH  =  −20  μA  4.4  4.499  —  V
VOH  Output  HIGH  voltage  CC 
DO NOT COPYV =  V
IN  IL IOH  =  −4 mA  3.84  4.3  —  V
V =  Min. IOL  =  20  μA  —  .001  0.1  V
VOL  Output  LOW  voltage  CC 
VIN  =  VIH
IOL  =  4 mA  0.17  0.33
I Quiescent power V =  Max. —  2  10  μA
DO NOT COPYCC  CC 
supply current VIN  =  GND or  VCC , I O  =  0
SWITCHING CHARACTERISTICS OVER OPERATING RANGE, CL  = 50 pF
(4)
Sym.  Parameter  Test Conditions Min.  Typ.  Max.  Unit
DO NOT COPY
tPD  Propagation delay  A or B to Y  —  9  19  ns
CI  Input capacitance  VIN  =  0 V  —  3  10  pF
Cpd  Power dissipation capacitance per gate  No load  —  22  —  pF
NOTES:DO NOT COPY
1. For conditions shown as Max. or Min., use appropriate value specified under Electrical Characteristics.
2. Typical values are at VCC = 5.0 V, +25°C ambient.
3. Not more than one output should be shorted at a time. Duration of short-circuit test should not exceed one second.
4. This parameter is guaranteed but not tested.
DO NOT COPY
WHAT’S IN A Two different prefixes, “74” and “54,” are used in the part numbers of CMOS and
NUMBER? TTL devices. These prefixes simply distinguish between commercial and military
versions. A 74HC00 is the commercial part and the 54HC00 is the military version.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  95
TEST CIRCUIT FOR ALL OUTPUTS LOADING
VCC
VCC Parameter  RL  CL  S1 S2
tpZH 50 pF Open Closed
DO NOT COPYt en 1 KW or
t
S1 pZL 150 pF Closed Open
V
VIN  Device OUT R
Pulse L t  tpHZ  Open Closed
Under dis 1 KW
Generator t
Test pLZ Closed Open
S2 50 pF
C L t pd — or Open Open
R T
DO NOT COPY150 pF
DEFINITIONS:
CL = Load capacitance, includes jig and probe capacitance.
SETUP, HOLD, AND RELEASE TIMES R T =Termination resistance, should equal Z OUT of the Pulse Generator.
V 
Data CC
Input 50%
0.0 V
DO NOT COPYt t
SU H PULSE WIDTH
V
Clock CC
Input 50% LOW-HIGH-LOW VOH
0.0 V 50%
tREM Pulse
V 
V OL
Asyncronous Control CC tW 
Input (PR, CLR, etc.) 50% VOH
0.0 V HIGH-LOW-HIGH 50%
Pulse
DO NOT COPYVOL
V
Syncronous Control CC
Input (CLKEN, etc.) 50%
0.0 V
tSU  tH
PROPAGATION DELAY THREE-STATE ENABLE AND DISABLE TIMES
DO NOT COPYEnable  Disable
V V 
Same-Phase CC Control CC
Input Transition 50% Input 50%
0.0 V 0.0 V
tPLH  t PHL tPZL  tPLZ
V V
Output OH Output 50% CC
Transition 50% Normally LOW 10%
VOL VOL
t t  t  t 
DO NOT COPYPLH  PHL PZH PHZ V
V OH
Opposite-Phase CC Output
90%
Input Transition 50% Normally HIGH 50%
0.0 V 0.0 V
Figure 3-24  Test circuits and waveforms for HC-series logic.
DO NOT COPY
3.5 CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior
This section discusses the steady-state behavior of CMOS circuits, that is, the
circuits’ behavior when inputs and outputs are not changing. The next section
DO NOT COPY
discusses dynamic behavior, including speed and power dissipation.
3.5.1 Logic Levels and Noise Margins
The table in Figure 3-10(b) on page 84 defined the CMOS inverter’s behavior
only at two discrete input voltages; other input voltages may yield different out-
DO NOT COPY
put voltages. The complete input-output transfer characteristic can be described
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

96  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VOUT
Figure 3-25
Typical input-output
5.0
transfer characteristic
DO NOT COPY
HIGH
of a CMOS inverter.
3.5
undefined
DO NOT COPY
1.5
LOW
0 VIN
0  1.5  3.5  5.0
DO NOT COPY
LOW  undefined HIGH
by a graph such as Figure 3-25. In this graph, the input voltage is varied from 0
to 5 V, as shown on the X axis; the Y axis plots the output voltage.
DO NOT COPYIf we believed the curve in Figure 3-25, we could define a CMOS  LOW
input level as any voltage under 2.4 V, and a  HIGH  input level as anything over
2.6 V. Only when the input is between 2.4 and 2.6 V does the inverter produce a
nonlogic output voltage under this definition.
Unfortunately, the typical transfer characteristic shown in Figure 3-25 is
DO NOT COPY
just that—typical, but not guaranteed. It varies greatly under different conditions
of power supply voltage, temperature, and output loading. The transfer charac-
teristic may even vary depending on when the device was fabricated. For
example, after months of trying to figure out why gates made on some days were
good and on other days were bad, one manufacturer discovered that the bad
DO NOT COPY
gates were victims of airborne contamination by a particularly noxious perfume
worn by one of its production-line workers!
Sound engineering practice dictates that we use more conservative specifi-
cations for  LOW  and  HIGH. The conservative specs for a typical CMOS logic
DO NOT COPYfamily (HC-series) are depicted in Figure 3-26. These parameters are specified
by CMOS device manufacturers in data sheets like Table 3-3, and are defined as
follows:
VOHmin  The minimum output voltage in the  HIGH  state.
DO NOT COPYVIHmin  The minimum input voltage guaranteed to be recognized as a  HIGH.
VILmax  The maximum input voltage guaranteed to be recognized as a  LOW.
VOLmax  The maximum output voltage in the  LOW  state.
The input voltages are determined mainly by switching thresholds of the two
DO NOT COPYtransistors, while the output voltages are determined mainly by the “on”
resistance of the transistors.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  97
VCC V
OHmin
HIGH High-state
0.7 V V DC noise margin
CC IHmin Figure 3-26
DO NOT COPY
ABNORMAL Logic levels and
noise margins
0.3 VCC VILmax
for the HC-series
LOW Low-state
V DC noise margin CMOS logic family.
0 OLmax
DO NOT COPY
All of the parameters in Figure 3-26 are guaranteed by CMOS manufactur-
ers over a range of temperature and output loading. Parameters are also
guaranteed over a range of power-supply voltage  VCC , typically 5.0 V±10%.
The data sheet in Table 3-3 on page 94 specifies values for each of these
DO NOT COPY
parameters for HC-series CMOS. Notice that there are two values specified for
VOHmin  and  VOLmax, depending on whether the output current (IOH  or  IOL ) is
large or small. When the device outputs are connected only to other CMOS
inputs, the output current is low (e.g,  IOL  ≤  20  μA), so there’s very little voltage
drop across the output transistors. In the next few subsections, we’ll focus onDO NOT COPY
these “pure” CMOS applications.
The power-supply voltage  VCC  and ground are often called the  power- power-supply rails
supply rails. CMOS levels are typically a function of the power-supply rails:
VOHmin  VCC  −  0.1 V
DO NOT COPY
VIHmin  70% of  VCC
VILmax  30% of  VCC
VOLmax  ground + 0.1 V
Notice in Table 3-3 thatDO NOT COPY  VOHmin  is specified as 4.4 V. This is only a 0.1-V drop
from  VCC, since the worst-case number is specified with V CC  at its minimum
value of 5.0−10% = 4.5 V.
DC noise margin  is a measure of how much noise it takes to corrupt a DC noise margin
worst-case output voltage into a value that may not be recognized properly by an
input. For HC-series CMOS in theDO NOT COPY  LOW  state,  V (1.35 V) exceeds  V
ILmax  OLmax
(0.1 V) by 1.25 V so the  LOW-state DC noise margin is 1.25 V. Likewise, there is
DC noise margin of 1.25 V in the  HIGH  state. In general, CMOS outputs have
excellent DC noise margins when driving other CMOS inputs.
Regardless of the voltage applied to the input of a CMOS inverter, the input
DO NOT COPY
consumes very little current, only the leakage current of the two transistors’
gates. The maximum amount of current that can flow is also specified by the
device manufacturer:
IIH  The maximum current that flows into the input in the  LOW  state.
DO NOT COPY
IIL  The maximum current that flows into the input in the  HIGH  state.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

98  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC  = +5.0 V VCC  = +5.0 V Thevenin equivalent
(a) (b) of resistive load
CMOS CMOS
DO NOT COPYinverter inverter
Rp 1 kΩ Rp
RThev = 667 Ω
VOUT VOUT
VIN VIN
+
Rn 2 kΩ Rn
DO NOT COPY
V = 3.33 V
resistive Thev 
load −
DO NOT COPYFigure 3-27  Resistive model of a CMOS inverter with a resistive load:
(a) showing actual load circuit; (b) using Thévenin equivalent
of load.
The input current shown in Table 3-3 for the ’HC00 is only ±1 μA. Thus, it takes
DO NOT COPYvery little power to maintain a CMOS input in one state or the other. This is in
sharp contrast to bipolar logic circuits like TTL and ECL, whose inputs may
consume significant current (and power) in one or both states.
3.5.2 Circuit Behavior with Resistive Loads
DO NOT COPYAs mentioned previously, CMOS gate inputs have very high impedance and
consume very little current from the circuits that drive them. There are other
devices, however, which require nontrivial amounts of current to operate. When
resistive load such a device is connected to a CMOS output, we call it a  resistive load  or a  DC
DC load load.  Here are some examples of resistive loads:
DO NOT COPY
•  Discrete resistors may be included to provide transmission-line termina-
tion, discussed in Section 12.4.
•  Discrete resistors may not really be present in the circuit, but the load pre-
sented by one or more TTL or other non-CMOS inputs may be modeled by
DO NOT COPYa simple resistor network.
•  The resistors may be part of or may model a current-consuming device
such as a light-emitting diode (LED) or a relay coil.
When the output of a CMOS circuit is connected to a resistive load, the
DO NOT COPYoutput behavior is not nearly as ideal as we described previously. In either logic
state, the CMOS output transistor that is “on” has a nonzero resistance, and a
load connected to the output terminal will cause a voltage drop across this resis-
tance. Thus, in the  LOW  state, the output voltage may be somewhat higher than
0.1 V, and in the  HIGH  state it may be lower than 4.4 V. The easiest way to see
DO NOT COPY
how this happens is look at a resistive model of the CMOS circuit and load.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  99
VCC  = +5.0 V Thevenin equivalent
of resistive load
CMOS
DO NOT COPYinverter
> 1 MΩ
RThev = 667 Ω
VOUT = 0.43 V
VIN = +5.0 V
(LOW)  Figure 3-28
(HIGH)  +
100 Ω Resistive model for
DO NOT COPY
VThev = 3.33 V
CMOS LOW output
−
with resistive load.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-27(a) shows the resistive model. The  p-channel and  n-channel
transistors have resistances  Rp  and  Rn , respectively. In normal operation, one
resistance is high (>  1 MΩ) and the other is low (perhaps 100  Ω), depending on
whether the input voltage is  HIGH  or LOW. The load in this circuit consists of
two resistors attached to the supply rails; a real circuit may have any resistor val-DO NOT COPY
ues, or an even more complex resistive network. In any case, a resistive load,
consisting only of resistors and voltage sources, can always be modeled by a
Thévenin equivalent network, such as the one shown in Figure 3-27(b).
When the CMOS inverter has a  HIGH  input, the output should be  LOW; the
actual output voltage can be predicted using the resistive model shown inDO NOT COPY
Figure 3-28. The  p-channel transistor is “off” and has a very high resistance,
high enough to be negligible in the calculations that follow. The  n-channel tran-
DO NOT COPY
REMEMBERING Any two-terminal circuit consisting of only voltage sources and resistors can be
THÉVENIN modeled by a Thévenin equivalent  consisting of a single voltage source in series with
a single resistor. The  Thévenin voltage  is the open-circuit voltage of the original cir-
cuit, and the Thévenin resistance is the Thévenin voltage divided by the short-circuit
DO NOT COPYcurrent of the original circuit.
In the example of Figure 3-27, the Thévenin voltage of the resistive load,
including its connection to VCC , is established by the 1-kΩ  and 2-kΩ  resistors, which
form a voltage divider:
2 kΩ
V  = ------------------------------ ⋅ 5.0 V = 3.33 V
DO NOT COPYThev 2 kΩ + 1kΩ
The short-circuit current is (5.0 V)/(1 kΩ)  =  5 mA, so the Thévenin resistance
is (3.33 V)/(5 mA)  =  667  Ω. Experienced readers may recognize this as the parallel
resistance of the 1-kΩ  and 2-Ω  resistors.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

100  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
sistor is “on” and has a low resistance, which we assume to be 100  Ω. (The actual
“on” resistance depends on the CMOS family and other characteristics such as
operating temperature and whether or not the device was manufactured on a
DO NOT COPY
good day.) The “on” transistor and the Thévenin-equivalent resistor  RThev  in
Figure 3-28 form a simple voltage divider. The resulting output voltage can be
calculated as follows:
VOUT  = 3.33 V ⋅ [ 100 ⁄ ( 100 + 667)]
DO NOT COPY
= 0.43 V
Similarly, when the inverter has a  LOW  input, the output should be  HIGH,
and the actual output voltage can be predicted with the model in Figure 3-29.
We’ll assume that the  p-channel transistor’s “on” resistance is 200  Ω. Once
DO NOT COPYagain, the “on” transistor and the Thévenin-equivalent resistor R in the figure
Thev 
form a simple voltage divider, and the resulting output voltage can be calculated
as follows:
VOUT  = 3.33 V + ( 5 V – 3.33 V) ⋅ [ 667/ 200(   + 667)]
DO NOT COPY= 4.61 V
In practice, it’s seldom necessary to calculate output voltages as in the pre-
ceding examples. In fact, IC manufacturers usually don’t specify the equivalent
resistances of the “on” transistors, so you wouldn’t have the necessary informa-
DO NOT COPYtion to make the calculation anyway. Instead, IC manufacturers specify a
maximum load for the output in each state (HIGH  or  LOW), and guarantee a
worst-case output voltage for that load. The load is specified in terms of current:
IOLmax  The maximum current that the output can sink in the  LOW  state while
still maintaining an output voltage no greater than  V .
DO NOT COPYOLmax
IOHmax  The maximum current that the output can source in the  HIGH  state while
still maintaining an output voltage no less than  VOHmin .
VCC  = +5.0 V Thevenin equivalent
Figure 3-29DO NOT COPYof resistive load
Resistive model for
CMOS
CMOS  HIGH  output inverter
with resistive load. 200 Ω
RThev = 667 Ω
V = 4.61 V
DO NOT COPYOUT 
VIN = +0.0 V
(HIGH)
(LOW)  +
> 1 MΩ
VThev = 3.33 V
−
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  101
(a) VCC (b) VCC
"sourcing
current"
CMOS CMOS
DO NOT COPYinverter inverter
Rp R
p resistive
> 1 MΩ load
VOLmax VOHmin
VIN  VIN
IOLmax resistive IOHmax
R R
DO NOT COPYn n
load
> 1 MΩ
"sinking
current"
Figure 3-30DO NOT COPY  Circuit definitions of (a)  I ; (b)  I .
OLmax OHmax
These definitions are illustrated in Figure 3-30. A device output is said to  sink sinking current
current  when current flows from the power supply, through the load, and
through the device output to ground as in (a). The output is said to  source current
DO NOT COPYsourcing current
when current flows from the power supply, out of the device output, and through
the load to ground as in (b).
Most CMOS devices have two sets of loading specifications. One set is for
“CMOS loads,” where the device output is connected to other CMOS inputs,
which consume very little current. The other set is for “TTL loads,” where theDO NOT COPY
output is connected to resistive loads such as TTL inputs or other devices that
consume significant current. For example, the specifications for HC-series
CMOS outputs were shown in Table 3-3 and are repeated in Table 3-4.
Notice in the table that the output current in the  HIGH  state is shown as a
negative number. By convention, theDO NOT COPY  current flow  measured at a device terminal
current flow
is positive if positive current flows  into  the device; in the  HIGH  state, current
flows  out  of the output terminal.
Ta b l e  3 - 4  Output loading specifications for HC-series CMOS with a
DO NOT COPY
5-volt supply.
CMOS load TTL load
Parameter Name  Value  Name  Value
DO NOT COPY
Maximum  LOW-state output current (mA)  IOLmaxC  0.02  IOLmaxT  4.0
Maximum  LOW-state output voltage (V)  VOLmaxC  0.1  VOLmaxT  0.33
Maximum  HIGH-state output current (mA)  IOHmaxC  −0.02  IOHmaxT  −4.0
MinimumDO NOT COPY  HIGH-state output voltage (V)  V 4.4  V 3.84
OHminC  OHminT 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

102  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
As the table shows, with CMOS loads, the CMOS gate’s output voltage is
maintained within 0.1 V of the power-supply rail.With TTL loads, the output
voltage may degrade quite a bit. Also notice that for the same output current
DO NOT COPY
(±4 mA) the maximum voltage drop with respect to the power-supply rail
is twice as much in the  HIGH  state (0.66 V) as in the  LOW  state (0.33 V). This
suggests that the  p-channel transistors in HC-series CMOS have a higher “on”
resistance than the  n-channel transistors do. This is natural, since in any CMOS
circuit, a  p-channel transistor has over twice the “on” resistance of an  n-channel
DO NOT COPY
transistor with the same area. Equal voltage drops in both states could be
obtained by making the  p-channel transistors much larger than the  n-channel
transistors, but for various reasons this was not done.
Ohm’s law can be used to determine how much current an output sources
DO NOT COPYor sinks in a given situation. In Figure 3-28 on page 99, the “on”  n-channel tran-
sistor modeled by a 100-Ω  resistor has a 0.43-V drop across it; therefore it sinks
(0.43 V)/(100  Ω) =  4.3 mA of current. Similarly, the “on”  p-channel transistor in
Figure 3-29 sources (0.39 V)/(200  Ω)  =  1.95 mA.
The actual “on” resistances of CMOS output transistors usually aren’t pub-
DO NOT COPYlished, so it’s not always possible to use the exact models of the previous
paragraphs. However, you can estimate “on” resistances using the following
equations, which rely on specifications that are always published:
VDD – VOHminT
Rp on = -----------------------------------
(  )
DO NOT COPYIOHmaxT
VOLmaxT
Rn on = -------------------
(  )
IOLmaxT
These equations use Ohm’s law to compute the “on” resistance as the voltage
DO NOT COPY
drop across the “on” transistor divided by the current through it with a worst-
case resistive load. Using the numbers given for HC-series CMOS in Table 3-4,
we can calculate  Rp(on)  =  175  Ω  and  Rn(on)  =  82.5  Ω.
Very good  worst-case  estimates of output current can be made by assuming
that there is  no  voltage drop across the “on” transistor. This assumption simpli-
DO NOT COPY
fies the analysis, and yields a conservative result that is almost always good
enough for practical purposes. For example, Figure 3-31 shows a CMOS
inverter driving the same Thévenin-equivalent load that we’ve used in previous
examples. The resistive model of the output structure is not shown, because it is
DO NOT COPYno longer needed; we assume that there is no voltage drop across the “on”
CMOS transistor. In (a), with the output  LOW, the entire 3.33-V Thévenin-
equivalent voltage source appears across  RThev, and the estimated sink current is
(3.33 V)/(667  Ω)  =  5.0 mA. In (b), with the output  HIGH  and assuming a 5.0-V
supply, the voltage drop across  RThev  is 1.67 V, and the estimated source current
DO NOT COPYis (1.67 V)/(667  Ω)  =  2.5 mA.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  103
(a) Thevenin equivalent (b) Thevenin equivalent
CMOS of resistive load CMOS of resistive load
V = +5.0 V V = +5.0 V
CC  inverter CC  inverter
DO NOT COPY
RThev = 667 Ω RThev = 667 Ω
VOUT = 0 V VOUT = 5.0 V
VIN = HIGH VIN = LOW
IOUT = 5.0 mA + |IOUT| = 2.5 mA +
V = 3.33 V V = 3.33 V
DO NOT COPYThev  Thev 
− −
Figure 3-31  Estimating sink and source current: (a) output  LOW ; (b) output  HIGH .
DO NOT COPY
An important feature of the CMOS inverter (or any CMOS circuit) is that
the output structure by itself consumes very little current in either state,  HIGH  or
LOW. In either state, one of the transistors is in the high-impedance “off” state.
All of the current flow that we’ve been talking about occurs when a resistive loadDO NOT COPY
is connected to the CMOS output. If there’s no load, then there’s no current flow,
and the power consumption is zero. With a load, however, current flows through
both the load and the “on” transistor, and power is consumed in both.
DO NOT COPY
THE TRUTH As we’ve stated elsewhere, an “off” transistor’s resistance is over one megohm, but
ABOUT POWER it’s not infinite. Therefore, a very tiny leakage current actually does flow in “off”
CONSUMPTION transistors and the CMOS output structure does have a correspondingly tiny but non-
zero power consumption. In most applications, this power consumption is tiny
DO NOT COPY
enough to ignore. It is usually significant only in “standby mode” in battery-powered
devices, such as the laptop computer on which this chapter was first prepared.
DO NOT COPY
3.5.3 Circuit Behavior with Nonideal Inputs
So far, we have assumed that the  HIGH  and  LOW  inputs to a CMOS circuit are
ideal voltages, very close to the power-supply rails. However, the behavior of a
real CMOS inverter circuit depends on the input voltage as well as on the char-
acteristics of the load.DO NOT COPY
If the input voltage is not close to the power-supply rail, then the “on” tran-
sistor may not be fully “on” and its resistance may increase. Likewise, the “off”
transistor may not be fully “off’ and its resistance may be quite a bit less than
one megohm. These two effects combine to move the output voltage away from
the power-supply rail.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

104  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC  = +5.0 V VCC  = +5.0 V
(a) (b)
Iwasted  Iwasted
DO NOT COPY
400 Ω 4 kΩ
VIN = 1.5 V VOUT = 4.31 V VIN = 3.5 V VOUT = 0.24 V
2.5 kΩ 200 Ω
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-32  CMOS inverter with nonideal input voltages: (a) equivalent
DO NOT COPY
circuit with 1.5-V input; (b) equivalent circuit with 3.5-V input.
For example, Figure 3-32(a) shows a CMOS inverter’s possible behavior
with a 1.5-V input. The  p-channel transistor’s resistance has doubled at this
DO NOT COPY
point, and that the  n-channel transistor is beginning to turn on. (These values are
simply assumed for the purposes of illustration; the actual values depend on the
detailed characteristics of the transistors.)
In the figure, the output at 4.31 V is still well within the valid range for a
DO NOT COPYHIGH  signal, but not quite the ideal of 5.0 V. Similarly, with a 3.5-V input in (b),
the  LOW  output is 0.24 V, not 0 V. The slight degradation of output voltage is
generally tolerable; what’s worse is that the output structure is now consuming a
nontrivial amount of power. The current flow with the 1.5-V input is
Iwasted  = 5.0 V/400  Ω + 2.5 kΩ = 1.72 mA
DO NOT COPY
and the power consumption is
Pwasted  = 5.0 V  ⋅ Iwasted = 8.62 mW
The output voltage of a CMOS inverter deteriorates further with a resistive
DO NOT COPY
load. Such a load may exist for any of a variety of reasons discussed previously.
Figure 3-33 shows a CMOS inverter’s possible behavior with a resistive load.
With a 1.5-V input, the output at 3.98 V is still within the valid range for a  HIGH
signal, but it is far from the ideal of 5.0 V. Similarly, with a 3.5-V input as shown
in Figure 3-34, the  LOW  output is 0.93 V, not 0 V.
DO NOT COPY
In “pure” CMOS systems, all of the logic devices in a circuit are CMOS.
Since CMOS inputs have a very high impedance, they present very little resistive
load to the CMOS outputs that drive them. Therefore, the CMOS output levels
all remain very close to the power-supply rails (0 V and 5 V), and none of the
DO NOT COPYdevices waste power in their output structures. On the other hand, if TTL outputs
or other nonideal logic signals are connected to CMOS inputs, then the CMOS
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  105
VCC  = +5.0 V Thevenin equivalent
of resistive load
CMOS
DO NOT COPYinverter
400 Ω
RThev = 667 Ω
VOUT = 3.98 V
VIN = +1.5V
(HIGH)
(LOW)  +
2.5KΩ Figure 3-33
DO NOT COPY
VThev = 3.33 V CMOS inverter with
− load and nonideal
1.5-V input.
DO NOT COPY
outputs use power in the way depicted in this subsection; this is formalized in the
box at the top of page 135. In addition, if TTL inputs or other resistive loads are
connected to CMOS outputs, then the CMOS outputs use power in the way
depicted in the preceding subsection.
DO NOT COPY
3.5.4 Fanout
The  fanout  of a logic gate is the number of inputs that the gate can drive without fanout
exceeding its worst-case loading specifications. The fanout depends not only on
the characteristics of the output, but also on the inputs that it is driving. Fanout
DO NOT COPY
must be examined for both possible output states,  HIGH  and  LOW.
For example, we showed in Table 3-4 on page 101 that the maximum
LOW-state output current  IOLmaxC  for an HC-series CMOS gate driving CMOS
inputs is 0.02 mA (20 μA). We also stated previously that the maximum input
current  I for an HC-series CMOS input in any state is  ±1 μA. Therefore, the
DO NOT COPYImax 
LOW-state fanout  for an HC-series output driving HC-series inputs is 20. LOW-state fanout
Table 3-4 also showed that the maximum  HIGH-state output current  IOHmaxC  is
DO NOT COPY
VCC  = +5.0 V Thevenin equivalent
of resistive load Figure 3-34
CMOS inverter with
CMOS
inverter load and nonideal
4 KΩ 3.5-V input.
DO NOT COPYR = 667 Ω
Thev 
VOUT = 0.93 V
VIN = +3.5V
(LOW)
(HIGH)  +
200 Ω
VThev = 3.33 V
−
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

106  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
HIGH-state fanout −0.02 mA (−20 μA) Therefore, the HIGH-state fanout  for an HC-series output
driving HC-series inputs is also 20.
Note that the  HIGH-state and  LOW-state fanouts of a gate are not necessar-
DO NOT COPY
overall fanout ily equal. In general, the  overall fanout  of a gate is the minimum of its  HIGH-
state and  LOW-state fanouts, 20 in the foregoing example.
In the fanout example that we just completed, we assumed that we needed
to maintain the gate’s output at CMOS levels, that is, within 0.1 V of the power-
supply rails. If we were willing to live with somewhat degraded, TTL output
DO NOT COPY
levels, then we could use  IOLmaxT  and  IOHmaxT  in the fanout calculation. Accord-
ing to Table 3-4, these specifications are 4.0 mA and  −4.0 mA, respectively.
Therefore, the fanout of an HC-series output driving HC-series inputs at TTL
levels is 4000, virtually unlimited, apparently.
DC fanoutDO NOT COPYWell, not quite. The calculations that we’ve just carried out give the  DC
fanout,  defined as the number of inputs that an output can drive  with the output
in a constant state  (HIGH  or  LOW). Even if the DC fanout specification is met, a
CMOS output driving a large number of inputs may not behave satisfactorily on
transitions,  LOW-to-HIGH  or vice versa.
DO NOT COPYDuring transitions, the CMOS output must charge or discharge the stray
capacitance associated with the inputs that it drives. If this capacitance is too
large, the transition from  LOW  to  HIGH  (or vice versa) may be too slow, causing
improper system operation.
The ability of an output to charge and discharge stray capacitance is some-
DO NOT COPY
AC fanout times called  AC fanout, though it is seldom calculated as precisely as DC fanout.
As you’ll see in Section 3.6.1, it’s more a matter of deciding how much speed
degradation you’re willing to live with.
3.5.5 Effects of Loading
DO NOT COPY
Loading an output beyond its rated fanout has several effects:
•  In the  LOW  state, the output voltage (VOL) may increase beyond  VOLmax .
•  In the  HIGH  state, the output voltage (VOH ) may fall below  VOHmin .
DO NOT COPY•  Propagation delay to the output may increase beyond specifications.
•  Output rise and fall times may increase beyond their specifications.
•  The operating temperature of the device may increase, thereby reducing
the reliability of the device and eventually causing device failure.
DO NOT COPY
The first four effects reduce the DC noise margins and timing margins of the cir-
cuit. Thus, a slightly overloaded circuit may work properly in ideal conditions,
but experience says that it will fail once it’s out of the friendly environment of
the engineering lab.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.5  CMOS Steady-State Electrical Behavior  107
+5 V
(a)  (b)  (c) X 
Z
1 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
logic 1  logic 0
X Z
1 k  Ω
Z
X
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-35  Unused inputs: (a) tied to another input; (b)  NAND  pulled up;
(c)  NOR  pulled down.
3.5.6 Unused Inputs
DO NOT COPY
Sometimes not all of the inputs of a logic gate are used. In a real design problem,
you may need an  n-input gate but have only an  n+1-input gate available. Tying
together two inputs of the  n+1-input gate gives it the functionality of an  n-input
gate. You can convince yourself of this fact intuitively now, or use switching
algebra to prove it after you’ve studied Section 4.1. Figure 3-35(a) shows a
DO NOT COPY
NAND  gate with its inputs tied together.
You can also tie unused inputs to a constant logic value. An unused  AND  or
NAND  input should be tied to logic 1, as in (b), and an unused  OR  or  NOR  input
should be tied to logic 0, as in (c). In high-speed circuit design, it’s usually better
to use method (b) or (c) rather than (a), which increases the capacitive load onDO NOT COPY
the driving signal and may slow things down. In (b) and (c), a resistor value in
the range 1–10 kΩ  is typically used, and a single pull-up or pull-down resistor
can serve multiple unused inputs. It is also possible to tie unused inputs directly
to the appropriate power-supply rail.
DO NOT COPYUnused CMOS inputs should never be left unconnected (or  floating. On floating input
one hand, such an input will behave as if it had a  LOW  signal applied to it and
will normally show a value of 0 V when probed with an oscilloscope or volt-
meter. So you might think that an unused  OR  or  NOR  input can be left floating,
because it will act as if a logic 0 is applied and not affect the gate’s output. How-
DO NOT COPY
SUBTLE BUGS  Floating CMOS inputs are often the cause of mysterious circuit behavior, as an
unused input erratically changes its effective state based on noise and conditions
DO NOT COPY
elsewhere in the circuit. When you’re trying to debug such a problem, the extra
capacitance of an oscilloscope probe touched to the floating input is often enough to
damp out the noise and make the problem go away. This can be especially baffling
if you don’t realize that the input is floating!
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

108  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
ever, since CMOS inputs have such high impedance, it takes only a small
amount of circuit noise to temporarily make a floating input look  HIGH, creating
some very nasty intermittent circuit failures.
DO NOT COPY
3.5.7 Current Spikes and Decoupling Capacitors
When a CMOS output switches between  LOW  and  HIGH, current flows from
VCC  to ground through the partially-on  p- and  n-channel transistors. These cur-
current spikes rents, often called  current spikes  because of their brief duration, may show up as
DO NOT COPY
noise on the power-supply and ground connections in a CMOS circuit, especial-
ly when multiple outputs are switched simultaneously.
decoupling capacitors For this reason, systems that use CMOS circuits require  decoupling
capacitors  between  VCC  and ground. These capacitors must be distributed
DO NOT COPYthroughout the circuit, at least one within an inch or so of each chip, to supply
filtering capacitors current during transitions. The large  filtering capacitors  typically found in the
power supply itself don’t satisfy this requirement, because stray wiring induc-
tance prevents them from supplying the current fast enough, hence the need for a
physically distributed  system of decoupling capacitors.
DO NOT COPY
3.5.8 How to Destroy a CMOS Device
Hit it with a sledge hammer. Or simply walk across a carpet and then touch an
input pin with your finger. Because CMOS device inputs have such high imped-
electrostatic discharge ance, they are subject to damage from  electrostatic discharge (ESD).
(ESD)DO NOT COPYESD occurs when a buildup of charge on one surface arcs through a
dielectric to another surface with the opposite charge. In the case of a CMOS
input, the dielectric is the insulation between an input transistor’s gate and its
source and drain. ESD may damage this insulation, causing a short-circuit
between the device’s input and output.
DO NOT COPY
The input structures of modern CMOS devices use various measures to
reduce their susceptibility to ESD damage, but no device is completely immune.
Therefore, to protect CMOS devices from ESD damage during shipment and
handling, manufacturers normally package their devices in conductive bags,
tubes, or foam. To prevent ESD damage when handling loose CMOS devices,
DO NOT COPY
circuit assemblers and technicians usually wear conductive wrist straps that are
connected by a coil cord to earth ground; this prevents a static charge from build-
ing up on their bodies as they move around the factory or lab.
Once a CMOS device is installed in a system, another possible source of
latch-upDO NOT COPYdamage is  latch-up. The physical input structure of just about any CMOS device
contains parasitic bipolar transistors between  VCC  and ground configured as a
silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR).” In normal operation, this “parasitic SCR”
has no effect on device operation. However, an input voltage that is less than
ground or more than  VCC  can “trigger” the SCR, creating a virtual short-circuit
DO NOT COPYbetween  V and ground. Once the SCR is triggered, the only way to turn it off
CC 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.6  CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior  109
ELIMINATE RUDE, Some design engineers consider themselves above such inconveniences, but to be
DO NOT COPYSHOCKING safe you should follow several ESD precautions in the lab:
BEHAVIOR! Before handling a CMOS device, touch the grounded metal case of a plugged-
• 
in instrument or another source of earth ground.
•  Before transporting a CMOS device, insert it in conductive foam.
•  When carrying a circuit board containing CMOS devices, handle the board by
DO NOT COPY
the edges, and touch a ground terminal on the board to earth ground before pok-
ing around with it.
•  When handing over a CMOS device to a partner, especially on a dry winter day,
touch the partner first. He or she will thank you for it.
DO NOT COPY
is to turn off the power supply. Before you have a chance to do this, enough
power may be dissipated to destroy the device (i.e., you may see smoke).
One possible trigger for latch-up is “undershoot” on high-speed  HIGH-to-
LOWDO NOT COPY  signal transitions, discussed in Section 12.4. In this situation, the input sig-
nal may go several volts below ground for several nanoseconds before settling
into the normal  LOW  range. However, modern CMOS logic circuits are fabricat-
ed with special structures that prevent latch-up in this transient case.
Latch-up can also occur when CMOS inputs are driven by the outputs of
DO NOT COPY
another system or subsystem with a separate power supply. If a  HIGH  input is
applied to a CMOS gate before power is present, the gate may come up in the
“latched-up” state when power is applied. Again, modern CMOS logic circuits
are fabricated with special structures that prevent this in most cases. However, if
the driving output is capable of sourcing lots of current (e.g., tens of mA), latch-
DO NOT COPY
up is still possible. One solution to this problem is to apply power before hook-
ing up input cables.
3.6 CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior
DO NOT COPY
Both the speed and the power consumption of a CMOS device depend to a large
extent on AC or dynamic characteristics of the device and its load, that is, what
happens when the output changes between states. As part of the internal design
of CMOS ASICs, logic designers must carefully examine the effects of output
loading and redesign where the load is too high. Even in board-level design, theDO NOT COPY
effects of loading must be considered for clocks, buses, and other signals that
have high fanout or long interconnections.
Speed depends on two characteristics, transition time and propagation
delay, discussed in the next two subsections. Power dissipation is discussed in
the third subsection.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

110  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
(a)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-36 (b)
Transition times:
(a) ideal case of
zero-time switching; tr  tf
(b) a more realisticDO NOT COPY
approximation;
(c) HIGH VIHmin
(c) actual timing,
showing rise and fall LOW V
ILmax
times.
tr  tf
DO NOT COPY
3.6.1 Transition Time
The amount of time that the output of a logic circuit takes to change from one
transition time state to another is called the  transition time. Figure 3-36(a) shows how we might
DO NOT COPY
like outputs to change state—in zero time. However, real outputs cannot change
instantaneously, because they need time to charge the stray capacitance of the
wires and other components that they drive. A more realistic view of a circuit’s
rise time (t r) output is shown in (b). An output takes a certain time, called the  rise time  (tr ), to
fall time (tDO NOT COPY f ) change from  LOW  to  HIGH, and a possibly different time, called the fall time (tf ),
to change from  HIGH  to  LOW.
Even Figure 3-36(b) is not quite accurate, because the rate of change of the
output voltage does not change instantaneously, either. Instead, the beginning
and the end of a transition are smooth, as shown in (c). To avoid difficulties
DO NOT COPYin defining the endpoints, rise and fall times are normally measured at the
boundaries of the valid logic levels as indicated in the figure.
With the convention in (c), the rise and fall times indicate how long an
output voltage takes to pass through the “undefined” region between  LOW  and
HIGH. The initial part of a transition is not included in the rise- or fall-time
DO NOT COPY
number. Instead, the initial part of a transition contributes to the “propagation
delay” number discussed in the next subsection.
The rise and fall times of a CMOS output depend mainly on two factors,
the “on” transistor resistance and the load capacitance. A large capacitance
increases transition times; since this is undesirable, it is very rare for a logic
DO NOT COPY
designer to purposely connect a capacitor to a logic circuit’s output. However,
stray capacitance stray capacitance is present in every circuit; it comes from at least three sources:
1.  Output circuits, including a gate’s output transistors, internal wiring, and
packaging, have some capacitance associated with them, on the order of
DO NOT COPY
2–10 picofarads (pF) in typical logic families, including CMOS.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.6  CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior  111
2.  The wiring that connects an output to other inputs has capacitance, about
1 pF per inch or more, depending on the wiring technology.
3.  Input circuits, including transistors, internal wiring, and packaging, have
DO NOT COPY
capacitance, from 2 to 15 pF per input in typical logic families.
Stray capacitance is sometimes called a  capacitive load  or an  AC load. capacitive load
A CMOS output’s rise and fall times can be analyzed using the equivalent AC load
circuit shown in Figure 3-37. As in the preceding section, the  p-channel and  n-
DO NOT COPY
channel transistors are modeled by resistances  Rp and  Rn, respectively. In normal
operation, one resistance is high and the other is low, depending on the output’s
state. The output’s load is modeled by an  equivalent load circuit  with three equivalent load circuit
components:
RL ,DO NOT COPY  VL  These two components represent the DC load and determine the voltag-
es and currents that are present when the output has settled into a stable
HIGH  or  LOW  state. The DC load doesn’t have too much effect on tran-
sition times when the output changes states.
CL  This capacitance represents the AC load and determines the voltages
DO NOT COPY
and currents that are present while the output is changing, and how long
it takes to change from one state to the other
When a CMOS output drives only CMOS inputs, the DC load is negligible. To
simplify matters, we’ll analyze only this case, with  RL  =  ∞  and  VL  =  0, in the
remainder of this subsection. The presence of a nonnegligible DC load wouldDO NOT COPY
affect the results, but not dramatically (see Exercise 3.69).
We can now analyze the transition times of a CMOS output. For the pur-
poses of this analysis, we’ll assume  CL=  100 pF, a moderate capacitive load.
Also, we’ll assume that the “on” resistances of the  p-channel and  n-channel
DO NOT COPY
transistors are 200  Ω  and 100  Ω, respectively, as in the preceding subsection.
The rise and fall times depend on how long it takes to charge or discharge the
capacitive load  CL .
V = +5.0 V Equivalent load for
DO NOT COPYCC 
transition-time analysis
Figure 3-37
Equivalent circuit for CMOS
inverter
analyzing transition
Rp
times of a CMOS output.
RL
V
DO NOT COPYOUT
VIN
+
Rn
CL VL
−
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

112  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC  = +5.0 V VCC  = +5.0 V
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
200 Ω > 1 MΩ
AC load AC load
VOUT = 5.0 V VOUT
VIN VIN
IOUT = 0 
IOUT
> 1 MΩ 100 Ω
DO NOT COPY
100 pF 100 pF
DO NOT COPYFigure 3-38  Model of a CMOS  HIGH -to-LOW  transition: (a) in the  HIGH  state;
(b) after p-channel transistor turns off and n-channel transistor turns on.
First, we’ll look at fall time. Figure 3-38(a) shows the electrical conditions
in the circuit when the output is in a steady  HIGH state. (RL  and VL are not drawn;
DO NOT COPYthey have no effect, since we assume  RL  =  ∞.) For the purposes of our analysis,
we’ll assume that when CMOS transistors change between “on” and “off,” they
do so instantaneously. We’ll assume that at time  t  = 0 the CMOS output changes
to the  LOW  state, resulting in the situation depicted in (b).
At time  t  =  0,  VOUT  is still 5.0 V. (A useful electrical engineering maxim is
DO NOT COPY
that the voltage across a capacitor cannot change instantaneously.) At time  t  = ∞,
the capacitor must be fully discharged and  VOUT  will be 0 V. In between, the
value of  VOUT  is governed by an exponential law:
–t/R C
VOUT  = VDD ⋅ e  n L
DO NOT COPY–12
–t ( 100 ⋅ 100 ⋅10  )
= 5.0 ⋅ e 
–9
– t/ 10(   ⋅ 10  )
= 5.0 ⋅ e  V
RC time constant The factor  RnCL  has units of seconds, and is called an  RC  time constant.
DO NOT COPYThe preceding calculation shows that the  RC  time constant for  HIGH-to-LOW
transitions is 10 nanoseconds (ns).
Figure 3-39 plots  VOUT  as a function of time. To calculate fall time, recall
that 1.5 V and 3.5 V are the defined boundaries for  LOW  and  HIGH  levels for
CMOS inputs being driven by the CMOS output. To obtain the fall time, we
DO NOT COPY
must solve the preceding equation for  VOUT  =  3.5 and  VOUT  =  1.5, yielding:
VOUT – 9 VOUT
t  = –Rn CL  ⋅ ln------------  = –10 ⋅ 10  ⋅ ln------------
VDD 5.0
t3.5  = 3.57 ns
DO NOT COPY
t1.5  = 12.04 ns
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.6  CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior  113
Rp Rn
200 Ω > 1 MΩ
DO NOT COPY
> 1 MΩ 100 Ω
5 V
3.5 V
DO NOT COPYV
OUT
1.5 V Figure 3-39
Fall time for a  HIGH-
0 V 
time to- LOW  transition of
0
DO NOT COPYa CMOS output.
tf
The fall time  tf  is the difference between these two numbers, or about 8.5 ns.
Rise time can be calculated in a similar manner. Figure 3-40(a) shows the
conditions in the circuit when the output is in a steadyDO NOT COPY  LOW  state. If at time  t  =  0
the CMOS output changes to the  HIGH  state, the situation depicted in (b) results.
Once again,  VOUT  cannot change instantly, but at time t  =  ∞, the capacitor will be
fully charged and  VOUT  will be 5.0 V. Once again, the value of  VOUT  in between
is governed by an exponential law:
DO NOT COPY
–t/R  C 
VOUT  = VDD ⋅ ( 1 – e p  L)
–12
–t ( 200 ⋅ 100 ⋅ 10  )
= 5.0 ⋅ ( 1 – e )
–9
–t/ 20(   ⋅ 10  )
= 5.0 ⋅ ( 1 – e )  V
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-40  Model of a CMOS  LOW-to- HIGH  transition: (a) in the  LOW  state;
(b) after n-channel transistor turns off and p-channel transistor
turns on.
DO NOT COPYV = +5.0 V V = +5.0 V
CC  CC 
(a)  (b)
> 1 MΩ 200 Ω
AC load AC load
DO NOT COPY
VOUT = 0 V VOUT
VIN VIN
IOUT = 0 
IOUT
100 Ω > 1 MΩ
100 pF 100 pF
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

114  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Rp Rn
200 Ω > 1 MΩ
DO NOT COPY
> 1 MΩ 100 Ω
5 V
3.5 V
DO NOT COPYV
OUT
Figure 3-41
1.5 V
Rise time for a  LOW-
0 V  to- HIGH  transition of
time
0 a CMOS output.
DO NOT COPY
tr
The  RC  time constant in this case is 20 ns. Figure 3-41 plots  VOUT  as a function
of time. To obtain the rise time, we must solve the preceding equation for
DO NOT COPYVOUT  =  1.5 and  VOUT  =  3.5, yielding
VDD – V
OUT
t  = –RC ⋅ ln-----------------------------
VDD
– 9 5.0 – VOUT
= –20 ⋅ 10  ⋅ ln--------------------------
DO NOT COPY
5.0
t1.5  = 7.13 ns
t3.5  = 24.08 ns
DO NOT COPYThe rise time  tr  is the difference between these two numbers, or about 17 ns.
The foregoing example assumes that the  p-channel transistor has twice the
resistance of the  n-channel one, and as a result the rise time is twice as long as
the fall time. It takes longer for the “weak”  p-channel transistor to pull the output
up than it does for the “strong”  n-channel transistor to pull it down; the output’s
DO NOT COPY
drive capability is “asymmetric.” High-speed CMOS devices are sometimes
fabricated with larger  p-channel transistors to make the transition times more
nearly equal and output drive more symmetric.
Regardless of the transistors’ characteristics, an increase in the load capac-
itance cause an increase in the  RC  time constant, and a corresponding increase
DO NOT COPY
in the transition times of the output. Thus, it is a goal of high-speed circuit
designers to minimize load capacitance, especially on the most timing-critical
signals. This can be done by minimizing the number of inputs driven by the
signal, by creating multiple copies of the signal, and by careful physical layout
of the circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.6  CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior  115
When working with real digital circuits, it’s often useful to estimate transi-
tion times, without going through a detailed analysis. A useful rule of thumb is
that the transition time approximately equals the  RC  time constant of the charg-
DO NOT COPY
ing or discharging circuit. For example, estimates of 10 and 20 ns for fall and rise
time in the preceding example would have been pretty much on target, especially
considering that most assumptions about load capacitance and transistor “on”
resistances are approximate to begin with.
Manufacturers of commercial CMOS circuits typically do not specify tran-
DO NOT COPY
sistor “on” resistances on their data sheets. If you search carefully, you might
find this information published in the manufacturers’ application notes. In any
case, you can estimate an “on” resistance as the voltage drop across the “on”
transistor divided by the current through it with a worst-case resistive load, as we
showed in Section 3.5.2:DO NOT COPY
VDD – VOHminT
Rp(on) = -----------------------------------
IOHmaxT
VOLmaxT
R = ---------------------
DO NOT COPYn(on)
IOLmaxT
THERE’S A Calculated transition times are actually quite sensitive to the choice of logic levels.
DO NOT COPYCATCH! In the examples in this subsection, if we used 2.0 V and 3.0 V instead of 1.5 V and
3.5 V as the thresholds for  LOW  and  HIGH, we would calculate shorter transition
times. On the other hand, if we used 0.0 and 5.0 V, the calculated transition times
would be infinity! You should also be aware that in some logic families (most nota-
bly TTL), the thresholds are not symmetric around the voltage midpoint. Still, it is
DO NOT COPYthe  author’s experience  that the “time-constant-equals-transition-time” rule  of
thumb usually works for practical circuits.
3.6.2 Propagation Delay
DO NOT COPY
Rise and fall times only partially describe the dynamic behavior of a logic
element; we need additional parameters to relate output timing to input timing.
A  signal path  is the electrical path from a particular input signal to a particular signal path
output signal of a logic element. The  propagation delay  tp  of a signal path is the propagation delay tp
amount of time that it takes for a change in the input signal to produce a change
DO NOT COPY
in the output signal.
A complex logic element with multiple inputs and outputs may specify a
different value of  tp  for each different signal path. Also, different values may be
specified for a particular signal path, depending on the direction of the output
change. Ignoring rise and fall times, Figure 3-42(a) shows two different propa-DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

116  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
(a)
VIN
DO NOT COPY
VOUT
tpHL  tpLH
Figure 3-42 (b)
DO NOT COPYVIN
Propagation delays
for a CMOS inverter:
(a) ignoring rise and
VOUT
fall times; (b) measured at
midpoints of transitions.
t t
DO NOT COPYpHL  pLH
gation delays for the input-to-output signal path of a CMOS inverter, depending
on the direction of the output change:
tpHLDO NOT COPYtpHL  The time between an input change and the corresponding output change
when the output is changing from  HIGH  to  LOW.
tpLH tpLH  The time between an input change and the corresponding output change
when the output is changing from  LOW  to  HIGH.
Several factors lead to nonzero propagation delays. In a CMOS device, the
DO NOT COPY
rate at which transistors change state is influenced both by the semiconductor
physics of the device and by the circuit environment, including input-signal tran-
sition rate, input capacitance, and output loading. Multistage devices such as
noninverting gates or more complex logic functions may require several internal
DO NOT COPYtransistors to change state before the output can change state. And even when the
output begins to change state, with nonzero rise and fall times it takes quite some
time to cross the region between states, as we showed in the preceding subsec-
tion. All of these factors are included in propagation delay.
To factor out the effect of rise and fall times, manufacturers usually specify
DO NOT COPYpropagation delays at the midpoints of input and output transitions, as shown in
Figure 3-42(b). However, sometimes the delays are specified at the logic-level
boundary points, especially if the device’s operation may be adversely affected
by slow rise and fall times. For example, Figure 3-43 shows how the minimum
input pulse width for an SR  latch (discussed in Section 7.2.1) might be specified.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-43 HIGH
Worst-case timing S or R
specified using logic-DO NOT COPYLOW
level boundary points. tpw(min)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.6  CMOS Dynamic Electrical Behavior  117
In addition, a manufacturer may specify absolute maximum input rise and
fall times that must be satisfied to guarantee proper operation. High-speed
CMOS circuits may consume excessive current or oscillate if their input transi-
DO NOT COPY
tions are too slow.
3.6.3 Power Consumption
The power consumption of a CMOS circuit whose output is not changing is
called  static power dissipation  or  quiescent power dissipation.  (The words static power dissipation
DO NOT COPY
consumption  and  dissipation  are used pretty much interchangeably when dis-
cussing how much power a device uses.) Most CMOS circuits have very low quiescent power
static power dissipation. This is what makes them so attractive for laptop com- dissipation
puters and other low-power applications—when computation pauses, very little
power is consumed. A CMOS circuit consumes significant power only duringDO NOT COPY
transitions; this is called  dynamic power dissipation. dynamic power
One source of dynamic power dissipation is the partial short-circuiting of dissipation
the CMOS output structure. When the input voltage is not close to one of the
power supply rails (0 V or  VCC), both the  p-channel and  n-channel output tran-
sistors may be partially “on,” creating a series resistance of 600DO NOT COPY  Ω  or less. In this
case, current flows through the transistors from  VCC  to ground. The amount of
power consumed in this way depends on both the value of  VCC  and the rate at
which output transitions occur, according to the formula
2 
DO NOT COPYPT  = CPD ⋅ VCC ⋅ f
The following variables are used in the formula:
PT  The circuit’s internal power dissipation due to output transitions.
VCC  The power supply voltage. As all electrical engineers know, power dis-
DO NOT COPY
sipation  across  a  resistive  load  (the  partially-on  transistors)  is
proportional to the  square  of the voltage.
f  The  transition frequency  of the output signal. This specifies the number transition frequency
of power-consuming output transitions per second. (But note that fre-
DO NOT COPYquency is defined as the number of transitions divided by 2.)
CPD  The  power dissipation capacitance. This constant, normally specified power dissipation
by the device manufacturer, completes the formula.  CPD  turns out to capacitance
have units of capacitance, but does not represent an actual output capac-
itance. Rather, it embodies the dynamics of current flow through the
DO NOT COPY
changing output-transistor resistances during a single pair of output
transitions,  HIGH-to-LOW  and  LOW-to-HIGH. For example,  CPD  for
HC-series CMOS gates is typically 20–24 pF, even though the actual
output capacitance is much less.
DO NOT COPYThe  P formula is valid only if input transitions are fast enough, leading to
T 
fast output transitions. If the input transitions are too slow, then the output
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

118  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
transistors stay partially on for a longer time, and power consumption increases.
Device manufacturers usually recommend a maximum input rise and fall time,
below which the value specified for  CPD  is valid.
DO NOT COPY
A second, and often more significant, source of CMOS power consump-
tion is the capacitive load (CL ) on the output. During a  LOW-to-HIGH  transition,
current flows through a  p-channel transistor to charge  CL. Likewise, during a
HIGH-to-LOW  transition, current flows through an  n-channel transistor to dis-
charge  C . In each case, power is dissipated in the “on” resistance of the
DO NOT COPYL 
transistor. We’ll use  PL  to denote the total amount of power dissipated by charg-
ing and discharging  CL .
The units of  PL  are power, or energy usage per unit time. The energy for
one transition could be determined by calculating the current through the charg-
DO NOT COPYing  transistor  as  a  function  of  time  (using  the  RC  time  constant  as  in
Section 3.6.1), squaring this function, multiplying by the “on” resistance of the
charging transistor, and integrating over time. An easier way is described below.
During a transition, the voltage across the load capacitance  CL  changes by
±VCC . According to the definition of capacitance, the total amount of charge that
DO NOT COPYmust flow to make a voltage change of  V across  C is C ⋅ V . The total
CC  L  L  CC
amount of energy used in one transition is charge times the average voltage
change. The first little bit of charge makes a voltage change of  VCC , while the
last bit of charge makes a vanishingly small voltage change, hence the average
2 
change is  VCC /2. The total energy per transition is therefore CL ⋅ VCC /2.  If there
DO NOT COPY
are 2f  transitions per second, the total power dissipated due to the capacitive load
is
2 
PL  = CL ⋅ ( VCC /2)  ⋅ 2f
2 
= C ⋅ V ⋅ f
DO NOT COPYL  CC
The total dynamic power dissipation of a CMOS circuit is the sum of  PT
and  PL :
PD  = PT + PL
DO NOT COPY2  2 
= CPD ⋅ VCC ⋅ f + CL ⋅ VCC ⋅ f
2 
= ( CPD + CL) ⋅ VCC ⋅ f
2 2
CV  f power Based on this formula, dynamic power dissipation is often called  CV f  power. In
2
DO NOT COPYmost applications of CMOS circuits,  CV f  power is by far the major contributor
2
to total power dissipation. Note that  CV f  power is also consumed by bipolar
logic circuits like TTL and ECL, but at low to moderate frequencies it is insig-
nificant compared to the static (DC or quiescent) power dissipation of bipolar
circuits.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  119
/EN
normally Figure 3-44
DO NOT COPYcomplementary  A  B
CMOS transmission gate.
EN
3.7 Other CMOS Input and Output StructuresDO NOT COPY
Circuit designers have modified the basic CMOS circuit in many ways to pro-
duce gates that are tailored for specific applications. This section describes some
of the more common variations in CMOS input and output structures.
DO NOT COPY
3.7.1 Transmission Gates
A  p-channel and  n-channel transistor pair can be connected together to form a
logic-controlled switch. Shown in Figure 3-44(a), this circuit is called a CMOS
transmission gate. transmission gate
DO NOT COPYA transmission gate is operated so that its input signals  EN  and  /EN  are
always at opposite levels. When  EN  is  HIGH  and /EN  is  LOW, there is a low-
impedance connection (as low as 2–5  Ω) between points  A  and  B. When  EN  is
LOW  and /EN  is  HIGH, points  A  and  B  are disconnected.
Once a transmission gate is enabled, the propagation delay from  A  to  B  (or
vice versa) is very short. Because of their short delays and conceptual simplicity,DO NOT COPY
transmission gates are often used internally in larger-scale CMOS devices such
as multiplexers and flip-flops. For example, Figure 3-45 shows how transmis-
sion gates can be used to create a “2-input multiplexer.” When  S  is  LOW, the  X
“input” is connected to the  Z  “output”; when  S  is  HIGH,  Y  is connected to  Z.
DO NOT COPY
VCC
Figure 3-45
Two-input multiplexer using
CMOS transmission gates.
DO NOT COPY
X
Z
DO NOT COPY
Y
S
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

120  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
At least one commercial manufacturer (Quality Semiconductor) makes a
variety of logic functions based on transmission gates. In their multiplexer
devices, it takes several nanoseconds for a change in the “select” inputs (such as
DO NOT COPY
in Figure 3-45) to affect the input-output path (X  or Y  to Z). Once a path is set up,
however, the propagation delay from input to output is specified to be at most
0.25 ns; this is the fastest discrete CMOS multiplexer you can buy.
3.7.2 Schmitt-Trigger Inputs
DO NOT COPY
The input-output transfer characteristic for a typical CMOS gate was shown in
Figure 3-25 on page 96. The corresponding transfer characteristic for a gate with
Schmitt-trigger input Schmitt-trigger inputs  is shown in Figure 3-46(a). A Schmitt trigger is a special
circuit that uses feedback internally to shift the switching threshold depending
DO NOT COPYon whether the input is changing from  LOW  to  HIGH  or from  HIGH  to  LOW.
For example, suppose the input of a Schmitt-trigger inverter is initially at
0 V, a solid  LOW. Then the output is  HIGH, close to 5.0 V. If the input voltage is
increased, the output will not go  LOW  until the input voltage reaches about 2.9
V. However, once the output is  LOW, it will not go  HIGH  again until the input is
DO NOT COPYdecreased to about 2.1 V. Thus, the switching threshold for positive-going input
changes, denoted  VT+, is about 2.9 V, and for negative-going input changes,
denoted  VT−, is about 2.1 V. The difference between the two thresholds is called
hysteresis hysteresis. The Schmitt-trigger inverter provides about 0.8 V of hysteresis.
To demonstrate the usefulness of hysteresis, Figure 3-47(a) shows an input
DO NOT COPY
signal with long rise and fall times and about 0.5 V of noise on it. An ordinary
inverter, without hysteresis, has the same switching threshold for both positive-
going and negative-going transitions,  VT  ≈  2.5 V. Thus, the ordinary inverter
responds to the noise as shown in (b), producing multiple output changes each
time the noisy input voltage crosses the switching threshold. However, as shown
DO NOT COPY
in (c), a Schmitt-trigger inverter does not respond to the noise, because its hys-
teresis is greater than the noise amplitude.
DO NOT COPYV
OUT
Figure 3-46 (a) (b)
VT−  VT+
A Schmitt-trigger
5.0
inverter: (a) input-
output transfer
characteristic;DO NOT COPY
(b) logic symbol.
0.0 VIN
DO NOT COPY2.1  2.9 5.0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  121
VIN
(a) 5.0
DO NOT COPY
VT+ = 2.9
VT = 2.5
VT− = 2.1
DO NOT COPY
0
t
DO NOT COPYVOUT
(b)
HIGH
LOW
DO NOT COPY
t
VOUT
(c)
HIGH
DO NOT COPY
LOW
t
Figure 3-47  Device operation with slowly changing inputs: (a) a noisy, slowly
DO NOT COPY
changing input; (b) output produced by an ordinary inverter;
(c) output produced by an inverter with 0.8 V of hysteresis.
DO NOT COPY
FIXING YOUR Schmitt-trigger inputs have better noise immunity than ordinary gate inputs for sig-
TRANSMISSION nals that contain transmission-line reflections, discussed in Section 12.4, or that have
long rise and fall times. Such signals typically occur in physically long connections,
such as input-output buses and computer interface cables. Noise immunity is impor-
tant in these applications because long signal lines are more likely to have reflections
DO NOT COPY
or to pick up noise from adjacent signal lines, circuits, and appliances.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

122  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC
(a)  (b)
EN A B C D Q1 Q2 OUT
DO NOT COPYEN
C L L H H L off off Hi-Z
Q2
L H H H L off off Hi-Z
H L L H H on off L
OUT H H L L L off on H
A D
DO NOT COPYB Q1 (c)
EN
A  OUT
Figure 3-48  CMOS three-state buffer: (a) circuit diagram; (b) function table;
DO NOT COPY
(c) logic symbol.
3.7.3 Three-State Outputs
Logic outputs have two normal states,  LOW  and  HIGH, corresponding to logic
DO NOT COPY
values 0 and 1. However, some outputs have a third electrical state that is not a
high impedance state logic state at all, called the  high impedance,  Hi-Z,  or  floating state.  In this state,
Hi-Z state the output behaves as if it isn’t even connected to the circuit, except for a small
floating state leakage current that may flow into or out of the output pin. Thus, an output can
have one of three states—logic 0, logic 1, and Hi-Z.
DO NOT COPY
three-state output An output with three possible states is called (surprise!) a  three-state
tri-state output output  or, sometimes, a  tri-state output. Three-state devices have an extra input,
usually called “output enable” or “output disable,” for placing the device’s
output(s) in the high-impedance state.
three-state busDO NOT COPYA  three-state bus  is created by wiring several three-state outputs together.
Control circuitry for the “output enables” must ensure that at most one output is
enabled (not in its Hi-Z state) at any time. The single enabled device can transmit
logic levels (HIGH  and  LOW) on the bus. Examples of three-state bus design are
given in Section 5.6.
three-state bufferDO NOT COPYA  circuit  diagram  for  a  CMOS  three-state  buffer  is  shown  in
Figure 3-48(a). To simplify the diagram, the internal  NAND,  NOR, and inverter
functions are shown in functional rather than transistor form; they actually use a
total of 10 transistors (see Exercise 3.79). As shown in the function table (b),
when the enable (EN) input is  LOW, both output transistors are off, and the out-
DO NOT COPY
put is in the Hi-Z state. Otherwise, the output is  HIGH  or  LOW  as controlled by
LEGAL NOTICE  “TRI-STATE” is a trademark of National Semiconductor Corporation. Their lawyer
DO NOT COPYthought you’d like to know.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  123
the “data” input  A. Logic symbols for three-state buffers and gates are normally
drawn with the enable input coming into the top, as shown in (c).
In practice, the three-state control circuit may be different from what we
DO NOT COPY
have shown, in order to provide proper dynamic behavior of the output transis-
tors during transitions to and from the Hi-Z state. In particular, devices with
three-state outputs are normally designed so that the output-enable delay (Hi-Z
to  LOW  or  HIGH) is somewhat longer than the output-disable delay (LOW  or
HIGH  to Hi-Z). Thus, if a control circuit activates one device’s output-enable
DO NOT COPY
input at the same time that it deactivates a second’s, the second device is guaran-
teed to enter the Hi-Z state before the first places a  HIGH  or  LOW  level on the
bus.
If two three-state outputs on the same bus are enabled at the same time and
try to maintain opposite states, the situation is similar to tying standard active-DO NOT COPY
pull-up outputs together as in Figure 3-56 on page 129—a nonlogic voltage is
produced on the bus. If fighting is only momentary, the devices probably will not
be damaged, but the large current drain through the tied outputs can produce
noise pulses that affect circuit behavior elsewhere in the system.
DO NOT COPYThere is a leakage current of up to 10 μA associated with a CMOS three-
state output in its Hi-Z state. This current, as well as the input currents of
receiving gates, must be taken into account when calculating the maximum
number of devices that can be placed on a three-state bus. That is, in the  LOW  or
HIGH  state, an enabled three-state output must be capable of sinking or sourcing
DO NOT COPY
up to 10 μA of leakage current for every other three-state output on the bus, as
well as handling the current required by every input on the bus. As with standard
CMOS logic, separate  LOW-state and  HIGH-state calculations must be made to
ensure that the fanout requirements of a particular circuit configuration are met.
DO NOT COPY
*3.7.4 Open-Drain Outputs
The  p-channel transistors in CMOS output structures are said to provide  active
pull-up, since they actively pull up the output voltage on a  LOW-to-HIGH  tran- active pull-up
sition. These transistors are omitted in gates with  open-drain outputs, such as the open-drain output
NAND  gate in Figure 3-49(a). The drain of the topmost  n-channel transistor is
DO NOT COPY
left unconnected internally, so if the output is not  LOW  it is “open,” as indicated
in (b). The underscored diamond in the symbol in (c) is sometimes used to indi-
cate an open-drain output. A similar structure, called an “open-collector output,”
is provided in TTL logic families as described in Section 3.10.5.
DO NOT COPYAn open-drain output requires an external  pull-up resistor  to provide pull-up resistor
passive pull-up  to the  HIGH  level. For example, Figure 3-50 shows an open- passive pull-up
drain CMOS  NAND  gate, with its pull-up resistor, driving a load.
For the highest possible speed, an open-drain output’s pull-up resistor
should be as small as possible; this minimizes the  RC  time constant for  LOW-to-
DO NOT COPY
* Throughout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

124  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC
(a)  (b)
A B Q1 Q2 Z
DO NOT COPYL L off off open
Z
L H off on open
H L on off open
A Q1
Figure 3-49 H H on on L
Open-drain CMOS
NAND  gate: (a) circuit
DO NOT COPYB Q2
diagram; (b) function A
(c) Z
table; (c) logic symbol. B 
DO NOT COPY
HIGH  transitions  (rise  time).  However,  the  pull-up  resistance  cannot  be
arbitrarily small; the minimum resistance is determined by the open-drain
output’s maximum sink current,  IOLmax. For example, in HC- and HCT-series
CMOS,  IOLmax  is 4 mA, and the pull-up resistor can be no less than 5.0 V/4 mA,
or 1.25 kΩ. Since this is an order of magnitude greater than the “on” resistance
DO NOT COPY
of the  p-channel transistors in a standard CMOS gate, the  LOW-to-HIGH  output
transitions are much slower for an open-drain gate than for standard gate with
active pull-up.
As an example, let us assume that the open-drain gate in Figure 3-50 is
DO NOT COPYHC-series CMOS, the pull-up resistance is 1.5 kΩ, and the load capacitance is
100 pF. We showed in Section 3.5.2 that the “on” resistance of an HC-series
CMOS output in the  LOW  state is about 80  Ω, Thus, the  RC  time constant for a
HIGH-to-LOW  transition is about 80  Ω ⋅  100 pF =  8 ns, and the output’s fall time
is about 8 ns. However, the  RC  time constant for a  LOW-to-HIGH  transition is
DO NOT COPYabout 1.5 kΩ ⋅  100 pF  =  150 ns, and the rise time is about 150 ns. This relatively
slow rise time is contrasted with the much faster fall time in Figure 3-51. A
ooze friend of the author calls such slow rising transitions  ooze.
DO NOT COPY
+5 V
pull-up
Figure 3-50 resistor
R = 1.5 kΩ
Open-drain CMOS
NAND  gate driving
a load.DO NOT COPY
A Z  C
B
open-drain
output
D
DO NOT COPY
E
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  125
VOUT
5 V
DO NOT COPY3.5 V
1.5 V
0 V
time
DO NOT COPY0  50  100  150  200  250  300 
tf tr
Figure 3-51  Rising and falling transitions of an open-drain CMOS output.
DO NOT COPYSo why use open-drain outputs? Despite slow rise times, they can be useful
in at least three applications: driving light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and other
devices; performing wired logic; and driving multisource buses.
*3.7.5 Driving LEDs
An open-drain output can drive an LED as shown in Figure 3-52. If either inputDO NOT COPY
A  or  B  is  LOW, the corresponding  n-channel transistor is off and the LED is off.
When  A  and  B  are both  HIGH, both transistors are on, the output  Z  is  LOW, and
the LED is on. The value of the pull-up resistor  R  is chosen so that the proper
amount of current flows through the LED in the “on” state.
DO NOT COPY
Typical LEDs require 10 mA for normal brightness. HC- and HCT-series
CMOS outputs are only specified to sink or source 4 mA and are not normally
used to drive LEDs. However, the outputs in advanced CMOS families such as
74AC and 74ACT can sink 24 mA or more, and can be used quite effectively to
drive LEDs.
DO NOT COPY
VCC
Figure 3-52
ILED = 10 mA Driving an LED with an
R
DO NOT COPYopen-drain output.
LED
Z
V = 0.37 V
DO NOT COPYOLmax 
A Q1
B Q2
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

126  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Three pieces of information are needed to calculate the proper value of the
pull-up resistor  R:
DO NOT COPY1.  The LED current  ILED  needed for the desired brightness, 10 mA for typical
LEDs.
2.  The voltage drop  VLED  across the LED in the “on” condition, about 1.6 V
for typical LEDs.
3.  The output voltage  VOL  of the open-drain output that sinks the LED cur-
DO NOT COPY
rent. In the 74AC and 74ACT CMOS families,  VOLmax  is 0.37 V. If an
output can sink  ILED  and maintain a lower voltage, say 0.2 V, then the cal-
culation below yields a resistor value that is a little too low, but normally
with no harm done. A little more current than  ILED  will flow and the LED
DO NOT COPYwill be just a little brighter than expected.
Using the above information, we can write the following equation:
VOL + VLED + ( I LED ⋅ R) = VCC
Assuming  VCC  =  5.0 V and the other typical values above, we can solve for the
DO NOT COPY
required value of  R:
VCC – VOL – VLED
R  = --------------------------------------------
ILED
= ( 5.0 – 0.37 – 1.6)  V/10 mA  = 303  Ω
DO NOT COPY
Note that you don’t have to use an open-drain output to drive an LED.
Figure 3-53(a) shows an LED driven by ordinary an CMOS  NAND-gate output
with active pull-up. If both inputs are  HIGH, the bottom (n-channel) transistors
pull the output  LOW  as in the open-drain version. If either input is  LOW, the
DO NOT COPY
output is  HIGH; although one or both of the top (p-channel) transistors is on, no
current flows through the LED.
With some CMOS families, you can turn an LED “on” when the output is
in the  HIGH  state, as shown in Figure 3-53(b). This is possible if the output can
source enough current to satisfy the LED’s requirements. However, method (b)
DO NOT COPY
isn’t used as often as method (a), because most CMOS and TTL outputs cannot
source as much current in the  HIGH  state as they can sink in the  LOW  state.
DO NOT COPY
RESISTOR In most applications, the precise value of LED series resistors is unimportant, as long
VALUES as groups of nearby LEDs have similar drivers and resistors to give equal apparent
brightness. In the example in this subsection, one might use an off-the-shelf resistor
value of 270, 300, or 330 ohms, whatever is readily available.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  127
VCC VCC
(a) (b)
DO NOT COPY
R
Q2  Q4 Q2  Q4
LED
Z Z
DO NOT COPY
A Q1 A Q1 R
LED
B Q3 B Q3
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-53  Driving an LED with an ordinary CMOS output: (a) sinking current,
DO NOT COPY
“on” in the  LOW  state; (b) sourcing current, “on” in the  HIGH  state.
*3.7.6 Multisource Buses
Open-drain outputs can be tied together to allow several devices, one at a time, open-drain bus
DO NOT COPY
to put information on a common bus. At any time all but one of the outputs on
the bus are in their  HIGH  (open) state. The remaining output either stays in the
HIGH  state or pulls the bus  LOW, depending on whether it wants to transmit a
logical 1 or a logical 0 on the bus. Control circuitry selects the particular device
that is allowed to drive the bus at any time.DO NOT COPY
For example, in Figure 3-54, eight 2-input open-drain  NAND-gate outputs
drive a common bus. The top input of each  NAND  gate is a data bit, and the
Figure 3-54  Eight open-drain outputs driving a bus.
DO NOT COPY
VCC
R 
DATAOUT
DO NOT COPY
Data1 Data3 Data5 Data7
Enable1 Enable3 Enable5 Enable7
Data2 Data4 Data6 Data8
Enable2DO NOT COPYEnable4 Enable6 Enable8
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

128  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC
DO NOT COPYVCC
VCC
A Q1
VCC R
B Q2 C Q1
Z
DO NOT COPY
D Q2 E Q1
F
2-input Q2
DO NOT COPY
open-drain
NAND gates
Figure 3-55  Wired- AND  function on three open-drain  NAND -gate outputs.
DO NOT COPY
bottom input of each is a control bit. At most one control bit is  HIGH  at any time,
enabling the corresponding data bit to be passed through to the bus. (Actually,
the complement of the data bit is placed on the bus.) The other gate outputs are
HIGH, that is, “open,” so the data input of the enabled gate determines the value
DO NOT COPY
on the bus.
*3.7.7 Wired Logic
If the outputs of several open-drain gates are tied together with a single pull-up
wired logic resistor, then  wired logic  is performed. (That’s  wired, not  weird!) An  AND  func-
DO NOT COPY
tion is obtained, since the wired output is  HIGH  if and only if all of the individual
gate outputs are  HIGH  (actually, open); any output going  LOW  is sufficient to
wired AND pull the wired output  LOW. For example, a three-input  wired AND  function is
shown in Figure 3-55. If any of the individual 2-input  NAND  gates has both
DO NOT COPYinputs  HIGH, it pulls the wired output  LOW; otherwise, the pull-up resistor  R
pulls the wired output  HIGH.
Note that wired logic cannot be performed using gates with active pull-up.
Two such outputs wired together and trying to maintain opposite logic values
result in a very high current flow and an abnormal output voltage. Figure 3-56
fightingDO NOT COPYshows this situation, which is sometimes called  fighting. The exact output volt-
age depends on the relative “strengths” of the fighting transistors, but with 5-V
CMOS devices it is typically about 1–2 V, almost always a nonlogic voltage.
Worse, if outputs are left fighting continuously for more than a few seconds, the
chips can get hot enough to sustain internal damage  and  to burn your fingers!
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.7  Other CMOS Input and Output Structures  129
VCC
trying to pull HIGH
DO NOT COPY
Q2  Q4
Z
DO NOT COPYHIGH Q1
LOW Q3
DO NOT COPY
5 V
V I  ≈  ≈ 20 mA
CC R + R 
p(on)  n(on)
(HC or HCT)
DO NOT COPY
Q2  Q4
HIGH
DO NOT COPYQ1 Figure 3-56
Two CMOS outputs
trying to maintain
trying to pull LOW
HIGH Q3 opposite logic values
on the same line.
DO NOT COPY
*3.7.8 Pull-Up Resistors
A proper choice of value for the pull-up resistor  R  must be made in open-drain pull-up resistor
applications. Two calculations are made to bracket the allowable values of  R: calculation
DO NOT COPY
Minimum  The sum of the current through  R  in the  LOW  state and the  LOW-
state input currents of the gates driven by the wired outputs must not
exceed the  LOW-state driving capability of the active output, 4 mA
for HC and HCT, 24 mA for AC and ACT.
DO NOT COPY
Maximum  The voltage drop across  R  in the HIGH  state must not reduce the out-
put voltage below 2.4 V, which is  VIHmin  for typical driven gates plus
a 400-mV noise margin. This drop is produced by the  HIGH-state
output leakage current of the wired outputs and the HIGH-state input
DO NOT COPYcurrents of the driven gates.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

130  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
HCT open-drain
NAND gates
VCC = +5 V
LOW
DO NOT COPY
LOW
3.2 mA
R
LOW
0.4 mA
LOW
DO NOT COPY
≤ 0.4 V
LOW LS-TTL gates
LOW
0.4 mA
Figure 3-57
Four open-drainDO NOT COPY
4 mA
outputs driving two HIGH
inputs in the  LOW HIGH
state.
DO NOT COPY
For example, suppose that four HCT open-drain outputs are wired together
and drive two LS-TTL inputs (Section 3.11) as shown in Figure 3-57. A  LOW
output must sink 0.4 mA from each LS-TTL input as well as sink the current
through the pull-up resistor  R. For the total current to stay within the HCT IOLmax
DO NOT COPY
spec of 4 mA, the current through  R  may be no more than
IR(max)  = 4 – ( 2 ⋅ 0.4) = 3.2 mA
DO NOT COPYHCT open-drain
Figure 3-58 NAND gates
Four open-drain VCC = +5 V
outputs driving two HIGH
inputs in the  HIGH HIGH
state. 60 μA
5 μA
DO NOT COPY
R
HIGH
20 μA
HIGH
5 μA ≥ 2.4 V
DO NOT COPYHIGH LS-TTL gates
HIGH
20 μA
5 μA
HIGH
DO NOT COPYHIGH
5 μA
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.8  CMOS Logic Families  131
Assuming that  VOL  of the open-drain output is 0.0 V, the minimum value of  R  is
Rmin  = ( 5.0 – 0.0)/IR(max)  = 1562.5  Ω
DO NOT COPY
In the HIGH state, typical open-drain outputs have a maximum leakage cur-
rent of 5 μA, and typical LS-TTL inputs require 20 μA of source current. Hence,
the  HIGH-state current requirement as shown in Figure 3-58 is
IR(leak)  = ( 4 ⋅ 5) + ( 2 ⋅ 20) = 60  μA
DO NOT COPY
This current produces a voltage drop across  R, and must not lower the output
voltage below  VOHmin  =  2.4 V; thus the maximum value of  R  is
Rmax  = ( 5.0 – 2.4)/IR(leak)  = 43.3  Ω
Hence, any value ofDO NOT COPY  R  between 1562.5  Ω  and 43.3 kΩ  may be used. Higher val-
ues reduce power consumption and improve the  LOW-state noise margin, while
lower values increase power consumption but improve both the  HIGH-state
noise margin and the speed of  LOW-to-HIGH  output transitions.
DO NOT COPY
OPEN-DRAIN In our open-drain resistor calculations, we assume that the output voltage can be as
ASSUMPTION low as 0.0 V rather than 0.4 V (VOLmax) in order to obtain a worst-case result. That
is, even if the open-drain output is so strong that it can pull the output voltage all the
way down to 0.0 V (it’s only required to pull down to 0.4 V), we’ll never allow  it to
DO NOT COPYsink more than 4 mA, so it doesn’t get overstressed. Some designers prefer to use 0.4
V in this calculation, figuring that if the output is so good that it can pull  lower than
0.4 V, a little bit of excess sink current beyond 4 mA won’t hurt it.
DO NOT COPY
3.8 CMOS Logic Families
The first commercially successful CMOS family was  4000-series CMOS. 4000-series CMOS
Although 4000-series circuits offered the benefit of low power dissipation, they
were fairly slow and were not easy to interface with the most popular logic fam-
DO NOT COPY
ily of the time, bipolar TTL. Thus, the 4000 series was supplanted in most
applications by the more capable CMOS families discussed in this section.
All of the CMOS devices that we discuss have part numbers of the form
“74FAMnn,” where “FAM” is an alphabetic family mnemonic and  nn  is a
numeric function designator. Devices in different families with the same value ofDO NOT COPY
nn  perform the same function. For example, the 74HC30, 74HCT30, 74AC30,
74ACT30, and 74AHC30 are all 8-input  NAND  gates.
The prefix “74” is simply a number that was used by an early, popular sup-
plier of TTL devices, Texas Instruments. The prefix “54” is used for identical
parts that are specified for operation over a wider range of temperature andDO NOT COPY
power-supply voltage, for use in military applications. Such parts are usually
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

132  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
HC Logic Levels  HCT Logic Levels
VCC  = 5.0 V VCC  = 5.0 V
HIGH
VOHminT = 3.84V VOHminT = 3.84V
DO NOT COPYV = 3.5 V HIGH
IHmin 
ABNORMAL
VIHmin = 2.0 V
VILmax = 1.5 V ABNORMAL
LOW VILmax = 0.8 V
LOW
V = 0.33 V V = 0.33 V
0.0 V  OLmaxT  0.0 V OLmaxT 
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)
Figure 3-59  Input and output levels for CMOS devices using a 5-V supply:
(a) HC; (b) HCT.
DO NOT COPYfabricated in the same way as their 74-series counterparts, except that they are
tested, screened, and marked differently, a lot of extra paperwork is generated,
and a higher price is charged, of course.
3.8.1 HC and HCT
HC (High-speedDO NOT COPYThe first two 74-series CMOS families are  HC (High-speed CMOS)  and  HCT
CMOS) (High-speed CMOS, TTL compatible).  Compared with the original 4000 family,
HCT (High-speed HC and HCT both have higher speed and better current sinking and sourcing
CMOS, TTL capability. The HCT family uses a power supply voltage  VCC  of 5 V and can be
compatible)
intermixed with TTL devices, which also use a 5-V supply.
DO NOT COPY
The HC family is optimized for use in systems that use CMOS logic exclu-
sively, and can use any power supply voltage between 2 and 6 V. A higher
voltage is used for higher speed, and a lower voltage for lower power dissipation.
Lowering the supply voltage is especially effective, since most CMOS power
2
dissipation is proportional to the square of the voltage (CV f  power).
DO NOT COPY
Even when used with a 5-V supply, HC devices are not quite compatible
with TTL. In particular, HC circuits are designed to recognize CMOS input lev-
els. Assuming a supply voltage of 5.0 V, Figure 3-59(a) shows the input and
output levels of HC devices. The output levels produced by TTL devices do not
quite match this range, so HCT devices use the different input levels shown in
DO NOT COPY
(b). These levels are established in the fabrication process by making transistors
with different switching thresholds, producing the different transfer characteris-
tics shown in Figure 3-60.
V
DO NOT COPYOUT
Figure 3-60 5.0
Transfer characteristics of HCT
HC and HCT circuits under
HC
typical conditions.
DO NOT COPY
0 V
IN
0  1.4  2.5  5.0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.8  CMOS Logic Families  133
We’ll have more to say about CMOS/TTL interfacing in Section 3.12. For
now, it is useful simply to note that HC and HCT are essentially identical in their
output specifications; only their input levels differ.
DO NOT COPY
3.8.2 VHC and VHCT
Several new CMOS families were introduced in the 1980s and the 1990s. Two VHC (Very High-speed
of the most recent and probably the most versatile are  VHC (Very High-Speed CMOS)
CMOS)  and  VHCT (Very High-Speed CMOS, TTL compatible). These families VHCT (Very High-
DO NOT COPY
are about twice as fast as HC/HCT while maintaining backwards compatibility speed CMOS, TTL
with their predecessors. Like HC and HCT, the VHC and VHCT families differ compatible)
from each other only in the input levels that they recognize; their output charac-
teristics are the same.
DO NOT COPYAlso like HC/HCT, VHC/VHCT outputs have  symmetric output drive. symmetric output drive
That is, an output can sink or source equal amounts of current; the output is just
as “strong” in both states. Other logic families, including the FCT and TTL fam-
ilies introduced later, have  asymmetric output drive;  they can sink much more asymmetric output drive
current in the  LOW  state than they can source in the  HIGH  state.
DO NOT COPY
3.8.3 HC, HCT, VHC, and VHCT Electrical Characteristics
Electrical characteristics of the HC, HCT, VHC, and VHCT families are sum-
marized in this subsection. The specifications assume that the devices are used
with a nominal 5-V power supply, although (derated) operation is possible with
any supply voltage in the range 2–5.5 V (up to 6 V for HC/HCT). We’ll take aDO NOT COPY
closer look at low-voltage and mixed-voltage operation in Section 3.13.
Commercial (74-series) parts are intended to be operated at temperatures
between 0°C and 70°C, while military (54-series) parts are characterized for
operation between  −55°C and 125°C. The specs in Table 3-5 assume an
DO NOT COPY
operating temperature of 25°C. A full manufacturer’s data sheet provides addi-
tional specifications for device operation over the entire temperature range.
Most devices within a given logic family have the same electrical specifi-
cations for inputs and outputs, typically differing only in power consumption
and propagation delay. Table 3-5 includes specifications for a 74x00 two-input
DO NOT COPY
NAND  gate and a 74x138 3-to-8 decoder in the HC, HCT, VHC, and VHCT fam-
ilies. The ’00  NAND  gate is included as the smallest logic-design building block
in each family, while the ’138 is a “medium-scale” part containing the equivalent
of about 15  NAND  gates. (The ’138 spec is included to allow comparison with
DO NOT COPY
VERY=ADVANCED, The VHC and VHCT logic families are manufactured by several companies,
SORT OF including Motorola, Fairchild, and Toshiba. Compatible families with similar but
not identical specifications are manufactured by Texas Instruments and Philips;
DO NOT COPY
they are called AHC and AHCT, where the “A” stands for “Advanced.”
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

134  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 5  Speed and power characteristics of CMOS families operating at 5 V
Family
DO NOT COPY
Description Part  Symbol  Condition  HC  HCT  VHC  VHCT
Typical propagation delay (ns)  ’00 tPD  9 10 5.2 5.5
’138 18 20 7.2 8.1
DO NOT COPYQuiescent power-supply ’00 I V =  0 or  V 2.5 2.5 5.0 5.0
CC  in  CC
current (μA) ’138 Vin  =  0 or  VCC 40 40 40 402
Quiescent power dissipation ’00 Vin  =  0 or  VCC 0.0125 0.0125 0.025 0.025
(mW) ’138 Vin  =  0 or  VCC 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2
DO NOT COPYPower dissipation capacitance ’00 CPD 22 15 19 17
(pF) ’138 CPD 55 51 34 49
Dynamic power dissipation ’00 0.55 0.38 0.48 0.43
(mW/MHz) ’138 1.38 1.28 0.85 1.23
DO NOT COPYTotal power dissipation (mW)  ’00 f  =  100 kHz 0.068 0.050 0.073 0.068
’00 f  =  1 MHz 0.56 0.39 0.50 0.45
’00 f  =  10 MHz 5.5 3.8 4.8 4.3
’138 f  =  100 kHz 0.338 0.328 0.285 0.323
’138 f  =  1 MHz 1.58 1.48 1.05 1.43
’138 f  =  10 MHz 14.0 13.0 8.7 12.5
DO NOT COPY
Speed-power product (pJ)  ’00 f  =  100 kHz 0.61 0.50 0.38 0.37
’00 f  =  1 MHz 5.1 3.9 2.6 2.5
’00 f  =  10 MHz 50 38 25 24
’138 f  =  100 kHz 6.08 6.55 2.05 2.61
DO NOT COPY’138 f  =  1 MHz 28.4 29.5 7.56 11.5
’138 f  =  10 MHz 251 259 63 101
the faster FCT family in Section 3.8.4; ’00 gates are not manufactured in the
FCT family.)
DO NOT COPY
The first row of Table 3-5 specifies propagation delay. As discussed in
Section 3.6.2, two numbers,  tpHL  and  tpLH  may be used to specify delay; the
number in the table is the worst-case of the two. Skipping ahead to Table 3-11 on
page 163, you can see that HC and HCT are about the same speed as LS TTL,
DO NOT COPYand that VHC and VHCT are almost as fast as ALS TTL. The propagation delay
NOTE ON The “x” in the notation“74x00” takes the place of a family designator such as HC,
NOTATION HCT, VHC, VHCT, FCT, LS, ALS, AS, or F. We may also refer to such a generic
DO NOT COPYpart simply as a “ ’00” and leave off the “74x.”
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.8  CMOS Logic Families  135
QUIETLY GETTING HCT and VHCT circuits can also be driven by TTL devices, which may produce
MORE DISS’ED HIGH  output levels as low as 2.4 V. As we explained in Section 3.5.3, a CMOS
DO NOT COPY
output may draw additional current from the power supply if any of the inputs are
nonideal. In the case of an HCT or VHCT inverter with a  HIGH  input of 2.4 V, the
bottom,  n-channel output transistor is fully “on.” However, the top,  p-channel
transistor is also partially “on.” This allows the additional quiescent current flow,
specified as  ∆ICC  or  ICCT  in the data sheet, which can be as much as 2–3 mA per
DO NOT COPY
nonideal input in HCT and VHCT devices.
for the ’138 is somewhat longer than for the ’00, since signals must travel
through three or four levels of gates internally.DO NOT COPY
The second and third rows of the table show that the quiescent power dissi-
pation of these CMOS devices is practically nil, well under a milliwatt (mW) if
the inputs have CMOS levels—0 V for  LOW  and  VCC for HIGH. (Note that in the
table, the quiescent power dissipation numbers given for the ’00 are per gate,
while for the ’138 they apply to the entire MSI device.)DO NOT COPY
As we discussed in Section 3.6.3, the dynamic power dissipation of a
CMOS gate depends on the voltage swing of the output (usually  VCC ), the output
transition frequency (f), and the capacitance that is being charged and dis-
charged on transitions, according to the formula
DO NOT COPY
2 
PD  = ( CL + CPD)  ⋅ VDD ⋅ f
Here,  CPD  is the power dissipation capacitance of the device and  CL  is the
capacitance of the load attached to the CMOS output in a given application. The
table lists both  C and an equivalent dynamic power dissipation factor in units
DO NOT COPYPD 
of milliwatts per megahertz, assuming that  CL  =  0. Using this factor, the total
power dissipation is computed at various frequencies as the sum of the dynamic
power dissipation at that frequency and the quiescent power dissipation.
Shown next in the table, the  speed-power product  is simply the product of speed-power product
the propagation delay and power consumption of a typical gate; the result isDO NOT COPY
measured in picojoules (pJ). Recall from physics that the joule is a unit of ener-
gy, so the speed-power product measures a sort of efficiency—how much energy
a logic gate uses to switch its output. In this day and age, it’s obvious that the
lower the energy usage, the better.
DO NOT COPY
SAVING ENERGY  There are practical as well as geopolitical reasons for saving energy in digital sys-
tems. Lower energy consumption means lower cost of power supplies and cooling
systems. Also, a digital system’s reliability is improved more by running it cooler
DO NOT COPY
than by any other single reliability improvement strategy.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

136  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 6  Input specifications for CMOS families with  VCC
between 4.5 and 5.5 V.
DO NOT COPYFamily
Description Symbol  Condition  HC  HCT  VHC  VHCT
Input leakage current (μA)  IImax  Vin  =  any  ±1  ±1  ±1  ±1
DO NOT COPYMaximum input capacitance (pF)  CINmax  10  10  10  10
LOW-level input voltage (V)  VILmax  1.35  0.8  1.35  0.8
HIGH-level input voltage (V)  VIHmin  3.85  2.0  3.85  2.0
DO NOT COPY
Table 3-6 gives the input specs of typical CMOS devices in each of the
families. Some of the specs assume that the 5-V supply has a  ±10% margin; that
is,  VCC  can be anywhere between 4.5 and 5.5 V. These parameters were dis-
cussed in previous sections, but for reference purposes their meanings are
DO NOT COPYsummarized here:
IImax  The maximum input current for any value of input voltage. This spec
states that the current flowing into or out of a CMOS input is 1 μA or
less for any value of input voltage. In other words, CMOS inputs create
almost no DC load on the circuits that drive them.
DO NOT COPY
CINmax  The maximum capacitance of an input. This number can be used when
figuring the AC load on an output that drives this and other inputs. Most
manufacturers also specify a lower, typical input capacitance of about
5 pF, which gives a good estimate of AC load if you’re not unlucky.
DO NOT COPY
VILmax  The maximum voltage that an input is guaranteed to recognize as  LOW.
Note that the values are different for HC/VHC versus HCT/VHCT. The
“CMOS” value, 1.35 V, is 30% of the minimum power-supply voltage,
while the “TTL” value is 0.8 V for compatibility with TTL families.
DO NOT COPY
CMOS VS. TTL At high transition frequencies (f), CMOS families actually use more power than
POWER TTL. For example, compare HCT CMOS in Table 3-5 at  f  =  10 MHz with LS TTL
DISSIPATION in Table 3-11; a CMOS gate uses three times as much power as a TTL gate at this
DO NOT COPYfrequency. Both HCT and LS may be used in systems with maximum “clock” fre-
quencies of up to about 20 MHz, so you might think that CMOS is not so good for
high-speed systems. However, the transition frequencies of most outputs in typical
systems are much less than the maximum frequency present in the system (e.g., see
Exercise 3.76). Thus, typical CMOS systems have a lower total power dissipation
than they would have if they were built with TTL.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.8  CMOS Logic Families  137
Ta b l e  3 - 7  Output specifications for CMOS families operating with  VCC
between 4.5 and 5.5 V.
DO NOT COPYFamily
Description Symbol  Condition  HC  HCT  VHC  VHCT
LOW-level output current (mA)  IOLmaxC CMOS load 0.02 0.02 0.05 0.05
IOLmaxT TTL load 4.0 4.0 8.0 8.0
DO NOT COPY
LOW-level output voltage (V)  VOLmaxC Iout ≤  I OLmaxC 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
VOLmaxT Iout ≤  IOLmaxT 0.33 0.33 0.44 0.44
HIGH-level output current (mA)  IOHmaxC CMOS load −0.02 −0.02 −0.05 −0.05
IOHmaxT TTL load −4.0 −4.0 −8.0 −8.0
DO NOT COPY
HIGH-level output voltage (V)  VOHminC |I out |≤|I OHmaxC | 4.4 4.4 4.4 4.4
VOHminT |I out |≤|I OHmaxT | 3.84 3.84 3.80 3.80
V The minimum voltage that an input is guaranteed to recognize as  HIGH.
IHminDO NOT COPY 
The “CMOS” value, 3.85 V, is 70% of the maximum power-supply
voltage, while the “TTL” value is 2.0 V for compatibility with TTL
families. (Unlike CMOS levels, TTL input levels are not symmetric
with respect to the power-supply rails.)
DO NOT COPY
The specifications for TTL-compatible CMOS outputs usually have two
sets of output parameters; one set or the other is used depending on how an out-
put is loaded. A  CMOS load  is one that requires the output to sink and source CMOS load
very little DC current, 20 μA for HC/HCT and 50 μA for VHC/VHCT. This is,
of course, the case when the CMOS outputs drive only CMOS inputs. With
DO NOT COPY
CMOS loads, CMOS outputs maintain an output voltage within 0.1 V of the
supply rails, 0 and  VCC. (A worst-case  VCC  =  4.5 V is used for the table entries;
hence,  VOHminC  =  4.4 V.)
A  TTL load  can consume much more sink and source current, up to 4 mA TTL load
from and HC/HCT output and 8 mA from a VHC/VHCT output. In this case, aDO NOT COPY
higher voltage drop occurs across the “on” transistors in the output circuit, but
the output voltage is still guaranteed to be within the normal range of TTL output
levels.
Table 3-7 lists CMOS output specifications for both CMOS and TTL
loads. These parameters have the following meanings:DO NOT COPY
IOLmaxC  The maximum current that an output can supply in the  LOW  state
while driving a CMOS load. Since this is a positive value, current
flows  into  the output pin.
IOLmaxTDO NOT COPY  The maximum current that an output can supply in the  LOW  state
while driving a TTL load.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

138  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VOLmaxC  The maximum voltage that a  LOW  output is guaranteed to produce
while driving a CMOS load, that is, as long as IOLmaxC  is not exceeded.
V The maximum voltage that a  LOW  output is guaranteed to produce
DO NOT COPYOLmaxT 
while driving a TTL load, that is, as long as  IOLmaxT  is not exceeded.
IOHmaxC  The maximum current that an output can supply in the  HIGH  state
while driving a CMOS load. Since this is a negative value, positive
current flows out of the output pin.
DO NOT COPY
IOHmaxT  The maximum current that an output can supply in the  HIGH  state
while driving a TTL load.
VOHminC  The minimum voltage that a  HIGH  output is guaranteed to produce
while driving a CMOS load, that is, as long as IOHmaxC  is not exceeded.
DO NOT COPYVOHminT  The minimum voltage that a  HIGH  output is guaranteed to produce
while driving a TTL load, that is, as long as  IOHmaxT  is not exceeded.
The voltage parameters above determine DC noise margins. The  LOW-
state DC noise margin is the difference between  VOLmax  and  VILmax . This
depends on the characteristics of both the driving output and the driven inputs.
DO NOT COPY
For example, the LOW-state DC noise margin of a HCT driving a few HCT
inputs (a CMOS load) is 0.8  −  0.1 = 0.7 V. With a TTL load, the noise margin for
the HCT inputs drops to 0.8  −  0.33  =  0.47 V. Similarly, the  HIGH-state DC noise
margin is the difference between  VOHmin  and  VIHmin . In general, when different
DO NOT COPYfamilies are interconnected, you have to compare the appropriate  VOLmax  and
VOHmin of the driving gate with  VILmax  and  VIHmin  of all the driven gates to deter-
mine the worst-case noise margins.
The  IOLmax  and  IOHmax  parameters in the table determine fanout capability,
and are especially important when an output drives inputs in one or more differ-
DO NOT COPYent families. Two calculations must be performed to determine whether an
output is operating within its rated fanout capability:
HIGH-state fanout  The  IIHmax  values for all of the driven inputs are added. The
sum must be less than  IOHmax  of the driving output.
DO NOT COPYLOW-state fanout  The  I values for all of the driven inputs are added. The
ILmax 
sum must be less than  IOLmax  of the driving output
Note that the input and output characteristics of specific components may vary
from the representative values given in Table 3-7, so you must always consult
DO NOT COPYthe manufacturers’ data sheets when analyzing a real design.
*3.8.4 FCT and FCT-T
FCT (Fast CMOS, TTL In the early 1990s, yet another CMOS family was launched. The key benefit of
compatible) the  FCT (Fast CMOS, TTL compatible) family was its ability to meet or exceed
DO NOT COPYthe speed and the output drive capability of the best TTL families while reducing
power consumption and maintaining full compatibility with TTL.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.8  CMOS Logic Families  139
The original FCT family had the drawback of producing a full 5-V CMOS
2
VOH , creating enormous  CV f  power dissipation and circuit noise as its outputs
swung from 0 V to almost 5 V in high-speed (25 MHz+) applications. A varia-
DO NOT COPY
tion of the family,  FCT-T (Fast CMOS, TTL compatible with TTL  VOH), was FCT-T (Fast CMOS,
quickly introduced with circuit innovations to reduce the  HIGH-level output TTL compatible with
TTL V
voltage, thereby reducing both power consumption and switching noise while OH
maintaining the same high operating speed as the original FCT. A suffix of “T”
is used on part numbers to denote the FCT-T output structure, for example,
DO NOT COPY
74FCT138T versus 74FCT138.
The FCT-T family remains very popular today. A key application of FCT-T
is driving buses and other heavy loads. Compared with other CMOS families, it
can source or sink gobs of current, up to 64 mA in the  LOW  state.
DO NOT COPY
*3.8.5 FCT-T Electrical Characteristics
Electrical characteristics of the 5-V FCT-T family are summarized in Table 3-8.
The family is specifically designed to be intermixed with TTL devices, so its
operation is only specified with a nominal 5-V supply and TTL logic levels.
Some manufacturers are beginning to sell parts with similar capabilities using aDO NOT COPY
3.3-V supply, and using the FCT designation. However, they are different devic-
es with different part numbers.
Individual logic gates are not manufactured in the FCT family. Perhaps the
simplest FCT logic element is a 74FCT138T decoder, which has six inputs, eight
DO NOT COPY
outputs, and contains the equivalent of about a dozen 4-input gates internally.
(This function is described later, in Section 5.4.4.) Comparing its propagation
delay and power consumption in Table 3-8 with the corresponding HCT and
VHCT numbers in Table 3-5 on page 134, you can see that the FCT-T family is
superior in both speed and power dissipation. When comparing, note that FCT-T
DO NOT COPY
manufacturers specify only maximum, not typical propagation delays.
Unlike other CMOS families, FCT-T does not have a  CPD  specification.
Instead, it has an  ICCD  specification:
ICCD  Dynamic power supply current, in units of mA/MHz. This is the amount
DO NOT COPYof additional power supply current that flows when one input is chang-
ing at the rate of 1 MHz.
EXTREME Device outputs in the FCT and FCT-T families have very low impedance and as a
DO NOT COPY
SWITCHING consequence extremely fast rise and fall times. In fact, they are so fast that they are
often a major source of “analog” problems, including switching noise and “ground
bounce,” so extra care must be taken in the analog and physical design of printed-
circuit boards using these and other extremely high-speed parts. To reduce the
effects of transmission-line reflections (Section 12.4.3), another high-speed design
DO NOT COPY
worry, some FCT-T outputs have built-in 25-Ω  series resistors.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

140  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 8  Specifications for a 74FCT138T decoder in the FCT-T logic family.
Description Symbol  Condition  Value
DO NOT COPY
Maximum propagation delay (ns)  tPD  5.8
Quiescent power-supply current (μA)  ICC  Vin  =  0 or V CC  200
Quiescent power dissipation (mW)  Vin  =  0 or V CC  1.0
DO NOT COPY
Dynamic power supply current (mA/MHz)  ICCD  Outputs open, 0.12
one input changing
Quiescent power supply current ∆ICC  Vin  =  3.4 V  2.0
per TTL input (mA)
DO NOT COPYTotal power dissipation (mW)  f  =  100 kHz 0.60
f  =  1 MHz 1.06
f  =  10 MHz 1.6
Speed-power product (pJ)  f  =  100 kHz 6.15
f  =  1 MHz 9.3
DO NOT COPY
f  =  10 MHz 41
Input leakage current (μA)  IImax  Vin  =  any  ±5
Typical input capacitance (pF)  CINtyp  5
DO NOT COPYLOW-level input voltage (V)  VILmax  0.8
HIGH-level input voltage (V)  VIHmin  2.0
LOW-level output current (mA)  IOLmax  64
LOW-level output voltage (V)  VOLmax  Iout  ≤  I OLmax  0.55
DO NOT COPY
HIGH-level output current (mA)  IOHmax  −15
HIGH-level output voltage (V)  VOHmin |Iout|  ≤  |I OHmax| 2.4
VOHtyp |Iout|  ≤  |I OHmax| 3.3
DO NOT COPY
The ICCD specification gives the same information as  CPD , but in a different
way. The circuit’s internal power dissipation due to transitions at a given fre-
quency  f  can be calculated by the formula
PT  = VCC ⋅ ICCD ⋅ f
DO NOT COPY
Thus,  ICCD/VCC  is algebraically equivalent to the  CPD  specification of other
CMOS families (see Exercise 3.83). FCT-T also has a  ∆ICC  specification for the
extra quiescent current that is consumed with nonideal  HIGH  inputs (see box at
the top of page 135).
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  141
3.9 Bipolar Logic
Bipolar logic families use semiconductor diodes and bipolar junction transistors
as the basic building blocks of logic circuits. The simplest bipolar logic elementsDO NOT COPY
use diodes and resistors to perform logic operations; this is called diode logic. diode logic
Most TTL logic gates use diode logic internally and boost their output drive
capability using transistor circuits. Some TTL gates use parallel configurations
of transistors to perform logic functions. ECL gates, described in Section 3.14,
DO NOT COPY
use transistors as current switches to achieve very high speed.
This section covers the basic operation of bipolar logic circuits made from
diodes and transistors, and the next section covers TTL circuits in detail.
Although TTL is the most commonly used bipolar logic family, it has been
largely supplanted by the CMOS families that we studied in previous sections.
DO NOT COPY
Still, it is useful to study basic TTL operation for the occasional applica-
tion that requires TTL/CMOS interfacing, discussed in Section 3.12. Also, an
understanding of TTL may give you insight into the fortuitous similarity of logic
levels that allowed the industry to migrate smoothly from TTL to 5-V CMOS
logic, and now to lower-voltage, higher-performance 3.3-V CMOS logic, as
DO NOT COPY
described in Section 3.13. If you’re not interested in all the gory details of TTL,
you can skip to Section 3.11 for an overview of TTL families.
3.9.1 Diodes
A  semiconductor diodeDO NOT COPY  is fabricated from two types of semiconductor material, semiconductor diode
called  p-type and  n-type, that are brought into contact with each other as shown p-type material
in Figure 3-61(a). This is basically the same material that is used in  p-channel n-type material
and  n-channel MOS transistors. The point of contact between the  p  and  n  mate-
rials is called a  pn junction.  (Actually, a diode is normally fabricated from a pn junction
single monolithic crystal of semiconductor material in which the two halves areDO NOT COPY
“doped” with different impurities to give them  p-type and  n-type properties.)
The physical properties of a  pn  junction are such that positive current can
easily flow from the  p-type material to the  n-type. Thus, if we build the circuit
shown in Figure 3-61(b), the  pn  junction acts almost like a short circuit. How-
DO NOT COPY
ever, the physical properties also make it very difficult for positive current to
Figure 3-61  Semiconductor diodes: (a) the pn junction; (b) forward-biased
junction allowing current flow; (c) reverse-biased junction block-
DO NOT COPYing current flow.
R R
(a) (b) (c)
p n
I p I n
DO NOT COPYV n V p
I   V / R I    0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

142  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
I I
p n
(a) (b) (c)
DO NOT COPY
I
anode  cathode
V V
+ −
DO NOT COPYV 
Figure 3-62  Diodes: (a) symbol; (b) transfer characteristic of an ideal diode;
(c) transfer characteristic of a real diode.
DO NOT COPY
flow in the opposite direction, from  n  to  p. Thus, in the circuit of Figure 3-61(c),
diode action the  pn  junction behaves almost like an open circuit. This is called  diode action.
Although it’s possible to build vacuum tubes and other devices that exhibit
diode action, modern systems use  pn  junctions—semiconductor diodes—which
diode we’ll henceforth call simply  diodes.  Figure 3-62(a) shows the schematic symbol
DO NOT COPY
for a diode. As we’ve shown, in normal operation significant amounts of current
anode can flow only in the direction indicated by the two arrows, from  anode  to
cathode cathode. In effect, the diode acts like a short circuit as long as the voltage across
the anode-to-cathode junction is nonnegative. If the anode-to-cathode voltage is
DO NOT COPYnegative, the diode acts like an open circuit and no current flows.
The transfer characteristic of an ideal diode shown in Figure 3-62(b) fur-
ther illustrates this principle. If the anode-to-cathode voltage,  V, is negative, the
reverse-biased diode diode is said to be  reverse biased  and the current  I  through the diode is zero. If  V
forward-biased diode is nonnegative, the diode is said to be  forward biased  and  I  can be an arbitrarily
DO NOT COPYlarge positive value. In fact,  V  can never get larger than zero, because an ideal
diode acts like a zero-resistance short circuit when forward biased.
A nonideal, real diode has a resistance that is less than infinity when
reverse biased, and greater than zero when forward biased, so the transfer char-
acteristic looks like Figure 3-62(c). When forward biased, the diode acts like a
DO NOT COPY
YES, THERE ARE . . . in Figure 3-62(a). The second arrow is built into the diode symbol to help you
TWO ARROWS remember the direction of current flow. Once you know this, there are many ways to
DO NOT COPY
remember which end is called the anode and which is the cathode. Aficionados of
vacuum-tube hi-fi amplifiers may remember that electrons travel from the hot cath-
ode to the anode, and therefore positive current flow is from anode to cathode. Those
of us who were still watching “Sesame Street” when most vacuum tubes went out of
style might like to think in terms of the alphabet—current flows alphabetically from
DO NOT COPY
A to C.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  143
(a) (b) (c) I
anode  cathode anode  cathode
DO NOT COPY
Slope
+ V <  0.6 V − + V ≥ 0.6 V − = 1/Rf
Rf
V
V d
V = 0.6 V
DO NOT COPYd 
Figure 3-63  Model of a real diode: (a) reverse biased; (b) forward biased;
(c) transfer characteristic of forward-biased diode.
DO NOT COPY
small nonlinear resistance; its voltage drop increases as current increases, but
not strictly proportionally. When the diode is reverse biased, a small amount of
negative  leakage current  flows. If the voltage is made too negative, the diode leakage current
breaks down,  and large amounts of negative current can flow; in most applica- diode breakdown
tions, this type of operation is avoided.
DO NOT COPY
A real diode can be modeled very simply as shown in Figure 3-63(a) and
(b). When the diode is reverse biased, it acts like an open circuit; we ignore leak-
age current. When the diode is forward biased, it acts like a small resistance,  R f,
in series with  V d, a small voltage source. R f is called the  forward resistance of the forward resistance
diode, andDO NOT COPY  V d  is called a  diode-drop. diode-drop
Careful choice of values for  R f  and  V d  yields a reasonable piecewise-linear
approximation to the real diode transfer characteristic, as in Figure 3-63(c). In a
typical small-signal diode such as a 1N914, the forward resistance  R f  is about
25  Ω  and the diode-drop  V d  is about 0.6 V.
DO NOT COPYIn order to get a feel for diodes, you should remember that a real diode does
not actually contain the 0.6-V source that appears in the model. It’s just that, due
to the nonlinearity of the real diode’s transfer characteristic, significant amounts
of current do not begin to flow until the diode’s forward voltage  V  has reached
about 0.6 V. Also note that in typical applications, the 25-Ω  forward resistance
DO NOT COPY
of the diode is small compared to other resistances in the circuit, so that very
little additional voltage drop occurs across the forward-biased diode once  V  has
reached 0.6 V. Thus, for practical purposes, a forward-biased diode may be
considered to have a fixed drop of 0.6 V or so .
DO NOT COPY
ZENER DIODES  Zener diodes  take advantage of diode breakdown, in particular the steepness of the
V–I slope in the breakdown region. A Zener diode can function as a voltage regulator
when used with a resistor to limit the breakdown current. A wide variety of Zeners
DO NOT COPY
with different breakdown voltages are produced for voltage-regulator applications.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

144  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 9
Signal Level  Designation  Binary Logic Value
Logic levels in a
LOW 
simple diode logic 0–2 volts  0
DO NOT COPYsystem. 2–3 volts  noise margin  undefined
3–5 volts  HIGH  1
3.9.2 Diode Logic
DO NOT COPYDiode action can be exploited to perform logical operations. Consider a logic
system with a 5-V power supply and the characteristics shown in Table 3-9.
LOW Within the 5-volt range, signal voltages are partitioned into two ranges,  LOW
HIGH and  HIGH, with a 1-volt noise margin between. A voltage in the  LOW  range is
considered to be a logic 0, and a voltage in the  HIGH  range is a logic 1.
DO NOT COPY
diode AND  gate With these definitions, a  diode AND  gate  can be constructed as shown in
Figure 3-64(a). In this circuit, suppose that both inputs  X  and  Y  are connected to
HIGH  voltage sources, say 4 V, so that  VX  and  VY  are both 4 V as in (b). Then
both diodes are forward biased, and the output voltage  VZ  is one diode-drop
above 4 V, or about 4.6 V. A small amount of current, determined by the value of
DO NOT COPY
R, flows from the 5-V supply through the two diodes and into the 4-V sources.
The colored arrows in the figure show the path of this current flow.
(a) +5 V (b) +5 V
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-64
Diode  AND  gate:
R R
(a) electrical circuit;
(b) both inputs  HIGH ; D1 D1
V V V
X  X Z Z X V Z  = 4.6 V
(c) one input  HIGH ,
I
oneDO NOT COPY  LOW ; (d) function 4 V D1
table; (e) truth table. D2 D2
VY VY
Y 4 V
I D2
DO NOT COPY
+5 V
(c) (d) (e)
V  V V X Y  Z
R X  Y Z
DO NOT COPYD1 low  low low 0 0 0
VX VZ  = 1.6V low  high low 0 1 0
I
1 V D1 high  low low 1 0 0
D2 high  high high 1 1 1
VY
4 V
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  145
X
1 Z 
Y C
(a) 1 0
B
0
DO NOT COPY
+5 V +5 V
(b)
R1 R2
V =
DO NOT COPYC 
D1
V V  = 4.6V D3 1.6 V
X Z 
C
I
4 V leak
D2 D4 Figure 3-65
VY V
B Two  AND  gates:
4 V  1 V
(a) logic diagram;
DO NOT COPY
(b) electrical circuit.
Now suppose that  VX  drops to 1 V as in Figure 3-64(c). In the diode  AND
gate, the output voltage equals the lower of the two input voltages plus a diode-DO NOT COPY
drop. Thus,  VZ drops to 1.6 V, and diode  D2  is reverse biased (the anode is at 1.6
V and the cathode is still at 4 V). The single  LOW  input “pulls down” the output
of the diode  AND  gate to a LOW  value. Obviously, two LOW  inputs create a  LOW
output as well. This functional operation is summarized in (d) and is repeated in
terms of binary logic values in (e); clearly, this is anDO NOT COPY  AND  gate.
Figure 3-65(a) shows a logic circuit with two  AND  gates connected
together; Figure 3-65(b) shows the equivalent electrical circuit with a particular
set of input values. This example shows the necessity of diodes in the  AND  cir-
cuit:  D3  allows the output  Z  of the first  AND  gate to remain  HIGH  while the
DO NOT COPY
output  C  of the second  AND  gate is being pulled  LOW  by input  B  through  D4.
When diode logic gates are cascaded as in Figure 3-65, the voltage levels
of the logic signals move away from the power-supply rails and towards the
undefined region. Thus, in practice, a diode  AND  gate normally must be fol-
lowed by a transistor amplifier to restore the logic levels; this is the scheme used
DO NOT COPY
in TTL  NAND  gates, described in Section 3.10.1. However, logic designers are
occasionally tempted to use discrete diodes to perform logic under special
circumstances; for example, see Exercise 3.94.
3.9.3 Bipolar Junction Transistors
DO NOT COPY
A  bipolar junction transistor  is a three-terminal device that, in most logic cir- bipolar junction
cuits, acts like a current-controlled switch. If we put a small current into one of transistor
the terminals, called the  base, then the switch is “on”—current may flow base
between the other two terminals, called the  emitter  and the  collector. If no cur- emitter
rent is put into the base, then the switch is “off”—no current flows between theDO NOT COPYcollector
emitter and the collector.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

146  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
(a)  C (b)  C (c)  C (d) C
n Ic
p
DO NOT COPY
collector
B B B n B base 
p
n
Ib emitter
p
n Ie = Ib + Ic
DO NOT COPY
E E E E
Figure 3-66  Development of an npn transistor: (a) back-to-back diodes;
(b) equivalent pn junctions; (c) structure of an npn transistor;
DO NOT COPY(d) npn transistor symbol.
To study the operation of a transistor, we first consider the operation of a
pair of diodes connected as shown in Figure 3-66(a). In this circuit, current can
flow from node  B  to node  C  or node  E, when the appropriate diode is forward
DO NOT COPY
biased. However, no current can flow from  C  to  E, or vice versa, since for any
choice of voltages on nodes  B,  C, and  E, one or both diodes will be reverse
biased. The  pn  junctions of the two diodes in this circuit are shown in (b).
Now suppose that we fabricate the back-to-back diodes so that they share a
common  p-type region, as shown in Figure 3-66(c). The resulting structure is
DO NOT COPY
npn transistor called an  npn transistor  and has an amazing property. (At least, the physicists
working on transistors back in the 1950s thought it was amazing!) If we put cur-
rent across the base-to-emitter  pn  junction, then current is also enabled to flow
across the collector-to-base  np  junction (which is normally impossible) and
DO NOT COPYfrom there to the emitter.
The circuit symbol for the  npn  transistor is shown in Figure 3-66(d).
Notice that the symbol contains a subtle arrow in the direction of positive current
flow. This also reminds us that the base-to-emitter junction is a  pn  junction, the
same as a diode whose symbol has an arrow pointing in the same direction.
pnp transistorDO NOT COPYIt is also possible to fabricate a  pnp transistor,  as shown in Figure 3-67.
However,  pnp  transistors are seldom used in digital circuits, so we won’t discuss
them any further.
The current  I e  flowing out of the emitter of an  npn  transistor is the sum of
the currents  I b  and  I c  flowing into the base and the collector. A transistor is often
DO NOT COPY
amplifier used as a signal  amplifier, because over a certain operating range (the  active
active region region) the collector current is equal to a fixed constant times the base current
(I c  = β  ⋅  I b). However, in digital circuits, we normally use a transistor as a simple
switch that’s always fully “on” or fully “off,” as explained next.
common-emitter Figure 3-68 shows the  common-emitter configuration  of an  npn  transistor,
DO NOT COPY
configuration which is most often used in digital switching applications. This configuration
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  147
(a)  E (b) E
Ie
DO NOT COPY
emitter
B p B base
n
p
Ib collector
Figure 3-67
I = I + I A pnp transistor:
DO NOT COPYc  b  e
(a) structure; (b) symbol.
C C
uses two discrete resistors,  R1  and  R2, in addition to a single  npn  transistor. In
this circuit, ifDO NOT COPY  VIN  is 0 or negative, then the base-to-emitter diode junction is
reverse biased, and no base current (I b) can flow. If no base current flows, then
no collector current (I c) can flow, and the transistor is said to be  cut off (OFF). cut off (OFF)
Since the base-to-emitter junction is a  real  diode, as opposed to an ideal
one,  VIN  must reach at least  +0.6 V (one diode-drop) before any base current can
flow. Once this happens, Ohm’s law tells us thatDO NOT COPY
I  = ( VIN – 0.6)  /  R1
b 
(We ignore the forward resistance  R f  of the forward-biased base-to-emitter
junction, which is usually small compared to the base resistor  R1.) When base
DO NOT COPY
current flows, then collector current can flow in an amount proportional to  I b,
that is,
I  = β ⋅ I 
c b
The constant of proportionality, β, is called the  gain  of the transistor, and is in β
DO NOT COPY
the range of 10 to 100 for typical transistors. gain
VCC
DO NOT COPYFigure 3-68
R2 Common-emitter
configuration of an
npn transistor.
Ic
DO NOT COPY+
R1
VIN VCE
+
Ib −
VBE
−
Ie = Ib + Ic
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

148  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Although the base current  I b  controls the collector current flow  Ic ,  it also
indirectly controls the voltage  VCE  across the collector-to-emitter junction, since
VCE  is just the supply voltage  VCC minus the voltage drop across resistor  R2:
DO NOT COPY
VCE  = V  – I  ⋅ R2
CC  c 
= V  – β  ⋅ I  ⋅ R2
CC b 
= V  – ( VIN – 0.6) ⋅ R2  /  R1
CC 
DO NOT COPY
However, in an ideal transistor  VCE  can never be less than zero (the transis-
tor cannot just create a negative potential), and in a real transistor  VCE  can never
be less than  VCE(sat) , a transistor parameter that is typically about 0.2 V.
If the values of  V IN, β,  R1, and  R2  are such that the above equation predicts
DO NOT COPYa value of  VCE  that is less than  VCE(sat), then the transistor cannot be operating in
the active region and the equation does not apply. Instead, the transistor is
saturation regionsaturated (ON) operating in the  saturation region,  and is said to be  saturated (ON).  No matter
how much current  I b  we put into the base,  VCE  cannot drop below  VCE(sat), and
the collector current  I c  is determined mainly by the load resistor R2:
DO NOT COPY
I  = ( VCC – VCE(sat))  / ( R2 + RCE(sat))
c 
saturation resistance Here,  RCE(sat)  is the  saturation resistance  of the transistor. Typically,  RCE(sat)  is
50  Ω  or less and is insignificant compared with  R2.
transistor simulation Computer scientists might like to imagine an  npn  transistor as a device that
DO NOT COPY
continuously looks at its environment and executes the program in  Table 3-10.
3.9.4 Transistor Logic Inverter
Figure 3-69 shows that we can make a logic inverter from an  npn  transistor in
the common-emitter configuration. When the input voltage is  LOW, the output
DO NOT COPY
voltage is  HIGH, and vice versa.
In digital switching applications, bipolar transistors are often operated so
they are always either cut off or saturated. That is, digital circuits such as the
V
DO NOT COPYCC
Figure 3-69 VOUT
Transistor inverter:
(a) logic symbol;
(b) circuit diagram; R2 V
CC
(c) transfer characteristic.
DO NOT COPYVOUT
R1
VIN Q1
IN  OUT  VCE(sat)
VIN
DO NOT COPYLOW undefined HIGH
(a)  (b)  (c)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  149
Ta b l e  3 - 1 0  A C program that simulates the function of an npn
transistor in the common-emitter configuration.
/* Transistor parameters */DO NOT COPY
#define DIODEDROP 0.6 /* volts */
#define BETA 10;
#define VCE_SAT 0.2  /* volts */
#define RCE_SAT 50  /* ohms  */
DO NOT COPY
main()
{
float Vcc, Vin, R1, R2;  /* circuit parameters */
float Ib, Ic, Vce;  /* circuit conditions */
DO NOT COPYif (Vin < DIODEDROP) {  /* cut off */
Ib  =  0.0;
Ic  =  0.0;
Vce  =  Vcc;
}
else {  /* active or saturated */
DO NOT COPYIb  =  (Vin - DIODEDROP) / R1;
if ((Vcc - ((BETA * Ib) * R2)) >=  VCE_SAT) {  /* active */
Ic  =  BETA * Ib;
Vce  =  Vcc - (Ic * R2);
}
else {  /* saturated */
DO NOT COPY
Vce  =  VCE_SAT;
Ic  =  (Vcc - Vce) / (R2 + RCE_SAT);
}
}
}
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-70  Normal states of an npn transistor in a digital switching circuit:
(a) transistor symbol and currents; (b) equivalent circuit for a cut-off
( OFF ) transistor; (c) equivalent circuit for a saturated ( ON ) transistor.
DO NOT COPY
(a) C (b)  C (c) C
Ic Ic = 0 Ic > 0
DO NOT COPY
B B B
RCE(sat)
Ib + Ib = 0 + Ib > 0 V
CE(sat)
= 0.2 V
I = I + I V < 0.6 V I = 0 V = 0.6 V I = I + I
DO NOT COPYe  b  c  BE  e  BE  e  b  c
− −
E E E
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

150  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC = +5 V
DO NOT COPY
R
VOUT
V
DO NOT COPYIN
Switch is closed
when V is HIGH .
RCEsat IN 
Figure 3-71 < 50 á
Switch model for a VCEsat
â 0.2 V
DO NOT COPYtransistor inverter.
inverter in Figure 3-69 are designed so that their transistors are always (well,
DO NOT COPYalmost always) in one of the states depicted in Figure 3-70. When the input volt-
age  VIN  is  LOW, it is low enough that  I b  is zero and the transistor is cut off; the
collector-emitter junction looks like an open circuit. When  VIN  is  HIGH, it is
high enough (and  R1  is low enough and β  is high enough) that the transistor will
be saturated for any reasonable value of  R2; the collector-emitter junction looks
DO NOT COPYalmost like a short circuit. Input voltages in the undefined region between  LOW
and  HIGH  are not allowed, except during transitions. This undefined region cor-
responds to the noise margin that we discussed in conjunction with Table 3-1.
Another way to visualize the operation of a transistor inverter is shown in
Figure 3-71. When  VIN  is  HIGH, the transistor switch is closed, and the output
DO NOT COPY
terminal is connected to ground, definitely a  LOW  voltage. When  VIN  is  LOW,
the transistor switch is open and the output terminal is pulled to  +5 V through a
resistor; the output voltage is  HIGH  unless the output terminal is too heavily
loaded (i.e., improperly connected through a low impedance to ground).
DO NOT COPY
3.9.5 Schottky Transistors
When the input of a saturated transistor is changed, the output does not change
storage time immediately; it takes extra time, called  storage time, to come out of saturation.
In fact, storage time accounts for a significant portion of the propagation delay
in the original TTL logic family.
DO NOT COPY
Storage time can be eliminated and propagation delay can be reduced by
ensuring that transistors do not saturate in normal operation. Contemporary TTL
Schottky diode logic families do this by placing a  Schottky diode  between the base and collector
Schottky-clamped of each transistor that might saturate, as shown in Figure 3-72. The resulting
transistorDO NOT COPYtransistors, which do not saturate, are called  Schottky-clamped transistors  or
Schottky transistor Schottky transistors  for short.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.9  Bipolar Logic  151
Schottky
diode
DO NOT COPY
collector collector
base base
Figure 3-72
emitter emitter Schottky-clamped
transistor: (a) circuit;
DO NOT COPY
(b) symbol.
(a)  (b)
When forward biased, a Schottky diode’s voltage drop is much less than a
standard diode’s, 0.25 V vs. 0.6 V. In a standard saturated transistor, the base-to-
collector voltage is 0.4 V, as shown in Figure 3-73(a). In a Schottky transistor,DO NOT COPY
the Schottky diode shunts current from the base into the collector before the
transistor goes into saturation, as shown in (b). Figure 3-74 is the circuit diagram
of a simple inverter using a Schottky transistor.
DO NOT COPY
+ 0.25 V −
)  (b)
− −
VBC = 0.4 V Ic Ic
VBC = 0.25 V
DO NOT COPY+  + +  +
VCE = 0.2 V VCE = 0.35 V
Ib + − Ib + −
VBE = 0.6 V
VBE = 0.6 V − −
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-73  Operation of a transistor with large base current: (a) standard
saturated transistor; (b) transistor with Schottky diode to
prevent saturation.
DO NOT COPY
VCC
Figure 3-74
Inverter using Schottky
transistor.
R2
DO NOT COPY
VOUT
R1
VIN Q1
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

152  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
3.10 Transistor-Transistor Logic
The most commonly used bipolar logic family is transistor-transistor logic.
DO NOT COPYActually, there are many different TTL families, with a range of speed, power
consumption, and other characteristics. The circuit examples in this section are
based on a representative TTL family, Low-power Schottky (LS or LS-TTL).
TTL families use basically the same logic levels as the TTL-compatible
CMOS families in previous sections. We’ll use the following definitions of  LOW
DO NOT COPY
and  HIGH  in our discussions of TTL circuit behavior:
LOW  0–0.8 volts.
HIGH  2.0–5.0 volts.
DO NOT COPY3.10.1 Basic TTL  NAND  Gate
The circuit diagram for a two-input LS-TTL  NAND  gate, part number 74LS00,
is shown in Figure 3-75. The  NAND  function is obtained by combining a diode
AND  gate with an inverting buffer amplifier. The circuit’s operation is best
understood by dividing it into the three parts that are shown in the figure and
DO NOT COPY
discussed in the next three paragraphs:
•  Diode  AND  gate and input protection.
•  Phase splitter.
•  Output stage.
DO NOT COPY
diode AND  gate Diodes  D1X  and  D1Y  and resistor  R1  in Figure 3-75 form a  diode AND
clamp diode gate,  as in Section 3.9.2.  Clamp diodes  D2X  and  D2Y  do nothing in normal
operation, but limit undesirable negative excursions on the inputs to a single
diode drop. Such negative excursions may occur on  HIGH-to-LOW  input transi-
DO NOT COPY
tions as a result of transmission-line effects, discussed in Section 12.4.
phase splitter Transistor  Q2  and the surrounding resistors form a  phase splitter  that
controls the output stage. Depending on whether the diode  AND  gate produces
a “low” or a “high” voltage at  VA ,  Q2  is either cut off or turned on.
DO NOT COPY
WHERE IN THE Notice that there is no transistor  Q1  in Figure 3-75, V
CC
WORLD IS Q1? but the other transistors are named in a way that’s tra-
ditional;  some  TTL  devices  do  in  fact  have  a
DO NOT COPYR1
transistor named  Q1. Instead of diodes like  D1X  and 2.8 kΩ
D1Y, these devices use a multiple-emitter transistor
Q1  to perform logic. This transistor has one emitter
X V
per logic input, as shown in the figure to the right. A
Q1
Pulling any one of the emitters  LOW  is sufficient to
Y
DO NOT COPY
turn the transistor  ON and thus pull  VA  LOW.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.10  Transistor-Transistor Logic  153
VCC = +5 V
DO NOT COPYR1 R2 R5
20 kΩ 8 kΩ 120 Ω
D1X
X Q3
Q4
DO NOT COPYD1Y
Y
V D3 R6
A Q2 Z
4 kΩ
D4
D2X  D2Y R3
12 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
Q5
R4 R7
1.5 kΩ 3 kΩ
Figure 3-75
Q6
DO NOT COPYCircuit diagram of
two-input LS-TTL
NAND  gate.
Diode AND gate
and input protection  Phase splitter  Output stage
DO NOT COPYThe  output stage has two transistors,  Q4  and Q5, only one of which is on at
output stage
any time. The TTL output stage is sometimes called a  totem-pole  or  push-pull totem-pole output
output. Similar to the  p-channel and  n-channel transistors in CMOS,  Q4  and  Q5 push-pull output
provide active pull-up and pull-down to the  HIGH  and  LOW  states, respectively.
The functional operation of the TTL  NAND  gate is summarized in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-76(a). The gate does indeed perform the  NAND  function, with the truth
table and logic symbol shown in (b) and (c). TTL  NAND  gates can be designed
with any desired number of inputs simply by changing the number of diodes in
DO NOT COPY(a) X Y VA Q2 Q3  Q4  Q5 Q6 VZ Z Figure 3-76
Functional operation
L L ≤1.05 off on on off off 2.7 H
L H ≤1.05 off on on off off 2.7 H of a TTL two-input
H L ≤1.05 off on on off off 2.7 H NAND  gate:
H H 1.2 on off off on on ≤0.35 L
(a) function table;
DO NOT COPY(b) truth table;
(c) logic symbol.
(b)  X Y Z (c)
X
0 0 1
0 1 1 Z
DO NOT COPY1 0 1 Y
1 1 0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

154  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
the diode  AND  gate in the figure. Commercially available TTL NAND  gates have
as many as 13 inputs. A TTL inverter is designed as a 1-input  NAND  gate, omit-
ting diodes  D1Y  and  D2Y  in Figure 3-75.
DO NOT COPY
Since the output transistors  Q4  and  Q5  are normally complementary—one
ON  and the other OFF—you might question the purpose of the 120  Ω  resistor  R5
in the output stage. A value of 0  Ω  would give even better driving capability in
the  HIGH  state. This is certainly true from a DC point of view. However, when
the TTL output is changing from  HIGH  to  LOW  or vice versa, there is a short
DO NOT COPY
time when both transistors may be on. The purpose of  R5  is to limit the amount
of current that flows from  VCC  to ground during this time. Even with a 120  Ω
resistor in the TTL output stage, higher-than-normal currents called current
spikes flow when TTL outputs are switched. These are similar to the current
DO NOT COPYspikes that occur when high-speed CMOS outputs switch.
So far we have shown the input signals to a TTL gate as ideal voltage
sources. Figure 3-77 shows the situation when a TTL input is driven  LOW  by the
output of another TTL gate. Transistor  Q5A  in the driving gate is  ON, and there-
by provides a path to ground for the current flowing out of the diode  D1XB  in the
DO NOT COPYdriven gate. When current flows  into  a TTL output in the  LOW  state, as in this
sinking current case, the output is said to be  sinking current.
Figure 3-78 shows the same circuit with a  HIGH  output. In this case,  Q4A
in the driving gate is turned on enough to supply the small amount of leakage
current flowing through reverse-biased diodes  D1XB  and  D2XB  in the driven
DO NOT COPY
gate. When current flows out of a TTL output in the  HIGH  state, the output is
sourcing current said to be  sourcing current.
3.10.2 Logic Levels and Noise Margins
At the beginning of this section, we indicated that we would consider TTL
DO NOT COPY
signals between 0 and 0.8 V to be  LOW, and signals between 2.0 and 5.0 V to be
HIGH. Actually, we can be more precise by defining TTL input and output levels
in the same way as we did for CMOS:
VOHmin  The minimum output voltage in the  HIGH  state, 2.7 V for most TTL
DO NOT COPYfamilies.
VIHmin  The minimum input voltage guaranteed to be recognized as a  HIGH,
2.0 V for all TTL families.
DO NOT COPY
CURRENT SPIKES Current spikes can show up as noise on the power-supply and ground connections in
AGAIN TTL and CMOS circuits, especially when multiple outputs are switched simulta-
neously. For this reason, reliable circuits require decoupling capacitors between  VCC
and ground, distributed throughout the circuit so that there is a capacitor within an
inch or so of each chip. Decoupling capacitors supply the instantaneous current need-
DO NOT COPY
ed during transitions.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.10  Transistor-Transistor Logic  155
VCC = +5 V
DO NOT COPY
R2A R5A R1B R2B
8 kΩ 120 Ω 20 kΩ 8 kΩ
D1XB
Q3A ≤ 0.35 V
(OFF) Q4A
(OFF)
D1YB
DO NOT COPY
Q2A D3A R6A Q2B
(ON) D4A 4 kΩ (OFF)
D2XB  D2YB R3B
2 V
12 kΩ
Q5A
(ON)
DO NOT COPY
R4A R7A R4B
1.5 kΩ 3 kΩ 1.5 kΩ
Q6A
(ON)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-77  A TTL output driving a TTL input  LOW.
DO NOT COPY
VCC = +5 V
R2A R5A R1B R2B
8 kΩ 120 Ω 20 kΩ 8 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
D1XB
Q3A 2.7 V
(ON) Q4A
(ON)
D1YB
Q2A D3A R6A Q2B
DO NOT COPY(OFF) D4A 4 kΩ (ON)
D2XB  D2YB R3B
2 V
12 kΩ
Q5A
(OFF)
R4A R7A Ileak R4B
1.5 kΩ 3 kΩ 1.5 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
Q6A
(OFF)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-78  A TTL output driving a TTL input  HIGH .
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

156  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
VCC = 5 V
HIGH
Figure 3-79DO NOT COPYV = 2.7 V High-state
OHmin 
Noise margins for V = 2.0 V DC noise margin
IHmin 
popular TTL logic ABNORMAL
VILmax = 0.8 V Low-state
families (74LS, 74S,
LOW DC noise margin
VOLmax = 0.5 V
74ALS, 74AS, 74F).
0
DO NOT COPY
VILmax  The maximum input voltage guaranteed to be recognized as a  LOW,
0.8 V for most TTL families.
VOLmax  The maximum output voltage in the  LOW  state, 0.5 V for most families.
DO NOT COPYThese noise margins are illustrated in Figure 3-79.
In the  HIGH  state, the  VOHmin  specification of most TTL families exceeds
DC noise margin VIHmin  by 0.7 V, so TTL has a  DC noise margin  of 0.7 V in the  HIGH  state. That
is, it takes at least 0.7 V of noise to corrupt a worst-case  HIGH  output into a volt-
age that is not guaranteed to be recognizable as a  HIGH  input. In the  LOW  state,
DO NOT COPY
however,  VILmax  exceeds  VOLmax  by only 0.3 V, so the DC noise margin in the
LOW  state is only 0.3 V. In general, TTL and TTL-compatible circuits tend to be
more sensitive to noise in the  LOW  state than in the  HIGH  state.
3.10.3 Fanout
DO NOT COPY
fanout As we defined it previously in Section 3.5.4,  fanout  is a measure of the number
of gate inputs that are connected to (and driven by) a single gate output. As we
showed in that section, the DC fanout of CMOS outputs driving CMOS inputs
is virtually unlimited, because CMOS inputs require almost no current in either
DO NOT COPYstate,  HIGH  or  LOW. This is not the case with TTL inputs. As a result, there are
very definite limits on the fanout of TTL or CMOS outputs driving TTL inputs,
as you’ll learn in the paragraphs that follow.
current flow As in CMOS, the  current flow  in a TTL input or output lead is defined to be
positive if the current actually flows  into  the lead, and negative if current flows
DO NOT COPYout  of the lead. As a result, when an output is connected to one or more inputs,
the algebraic sum of all the input and output currents is 0.
The amount of current required by a TTL input depends on whether the
input is  HIGH  or  LOW, and is specified by two parameters:
I The maximum current that an input requires to pull it  LOW. Recall from
DO NOT COPYILmax 
the discussion of Figure 3-77 that positive current is actually flowing
from  VCC, through  R1B, through diode  D1XB, out of the input lead,
through the driving output transistor  Q5A, and into ground.
Since current flows out of a TTL input in the  LOW  state,  IILmax  has a
DO NOT COPYnegative value. Most LS-TTL inputs have  I =  −0.4 mA, which is
ILmax 
LOW-state unit load sometimes called a LOW-state unit load  for LS-TTL.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.10  Transistor-Transistor Logic  157
IIHmax  The maximum current that an input requires to pull it  HIGH. As shown
in Figure 3-78 on page 155, positive current flows from  VCC , through
R5A  and  Q4A  of the driving gate, and  into  the driven input, where it
DO NOT COPY
leaks to ground through reversed-biased diodes  D1XB  and  D2XB.
Since current flows  into  a TTL input in the  HIGH  state,  IIHmax  has a pos-
itive value. Most LS-TTL inputs have  IIHmax  =  20 μA, which is
sometimes called a HIGH-state unit load  for LS-TTL. HIGH-state unit load
DO NOT COPYLike CMOS outputs, TTL outputs can source or sink a certain amount of
current depending on the state,  HIGH  or  LOW:
IOLmax  The maximum current an output can sink in the  LOW  state while main-
taining an output voltage no more than  VOLmax. Since current flows into
the output,  IOLmax  has a positive value, 8 mA for most LS-TTL outputs.
DO NOT COPY
IOHmax  The maximum current an output can source in the  HIGH  state while
maintaining an output voltage no less than  VOHmin . Since current flows
out of the output,  IOHmax  has a negative value,  −400 μA for most LS-
TTL outputs.
DO NOT COPY
Notice that the value of  IOLmax  for typical LS-TTL outputs is exactly 20
times the absolute value of  IILmax . As a result, LS-TTL is said to have a LOW-
state fanout  of 20, because an output can drive up to 20 inputs in the  LOW  state. LOW-state fanout
Similarly, the absolute value of  IOHmax  is exactly 20 times  IIHmax , so LS-TTL is
said to have a HIGH-state fanout of 20 also. The  overall fanout is the lesser of the HIGH-state fanout
DO NOT COPY
LOW- and  HIGH-state fanouts. overall fanout
Loading a TTL output with more than its rated fanout has the same delete-
rious effects that were described  for CMOS devices in Section 3.5.5  on
page 106. That is, DC noise margins may be reduced or eliminated, transition
times and delays may increase, and the device may overheat.DO NOT COPY
TTL OUTPUT Although LS-TTL’s numerical fanouts for HIGH and LOW states are equal, LS-TTL
ASYMMETRY and other TTL families have a definite asymmetry in current driving capability—an
DO NOT COPY
LS-TTL output can sink 8 mA in the LOW state, but can source only 400 μA in the
HIGH  state.
This asymmetry is no problem when TTL outputs drive other TTL inputs,
because it is matched by a corresponding asymmetry in TTL input current require-
ments (IILmax is large, while  IIHmax  is small). However, it is a limitation when TTL is
DO NOT COPY
used to drive LEDs, relays, solenoids, or other devices requiring large amounts of
current, often tens of milliamperes. Circuits using these devices must be designed so
that current flows (and the driven device is “on”) when the TTL output is in the LOW
state, and so little or no current flows in the  HIGH  state. Special TTL buffer/driver
gates are made that can sink up to 60 mA in the  LOW state, but that still have a rather
DO NOT COPY
puny current sourcing capability in the  HIGH  state (2.4 mA).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

158  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
BURNED FINGERS  If a TTL or CMOS output is forced to sink a lot more than  IOLmax, the device may be
damaged, especially if high current is allowed to flow for more than a second or so.
DO NOT COPY
For example, suppose that a TTL output in the  LOW  state is short-circuited directly
to the 5 V supply. The  ON  resistance,  RCE(sat), of the saturated  Q5  transistor in a typ-
2 
ical TTL output stage is less than 10  Ω. Thus,  Q5  must dissipate about 5 /10 or 2.5
watts. Don’t try this yourself unless you’re prepared to deal with the consequences!
That’s enough heat to destroy the device (and burn your finger) in a very short time.
DO NOT COPY
In general, two calculations must be carried out to confirm that an output is
not being overloaded:
DO NOT COPY
HIGH  state  The  IIHmax  values for all of the driven inputs are added. This sum
must be less than or equal to the absolute value of  IOHmax  for the
driving output.
LOW  state  The  IILmax  values for all of the driven inputs are added. The abso-
DO NOT COPYlute value of this sum must be less than or equal to  I for the
OLmax 
driving output.
For example, suppose you designed a system in which a certain LS-TTL
output drives ten LS-TTL and three S-TTL gate inputs. In the  HIGH  state, a total
DO NOT COPYof 10  ⋅  20 + 3  ⋅  50 μA = 350 μA is required. This is within an LS-TTL output’s
HIGH-state current-sourcing capability of 400 μA. But in the  LOW  state, a total
of 10  ⋅  0.4 + 3  ⋅  2.0 mA = 10.0 mA is required. This is more than an LS-TTL out-
put’s  LOW-state current-sinking capability of 8 mA, so the output is overloaded.
DO NOT COPY3.10.4 Unused Inputs
Unused inputs of TTL gates can be handled in the same way as we described for
CMOS gates in Section 3.5.6 on page 107. That is, unused inputs may be tied to
used ones, or unused inputs may be pulled  HIGH  or  LOW  as is appropriate for
the logic function.
DO NOT COPYThe resistance value of a pull-up or pull-down resistor is more critical with
TTL gates than CMOS gates, because TTL inputs draw significantly more cur-
rent, especially in the  LOW  state. If the resistance is too large, the voltage drop
across the resistor may result in a gate input voltage beyond the normal  LOW  or
HIGH  range.
DO NOT COPY
For example, consider the pull-down resistor shown in Figure 3-80. The
pull-down resistor must sink 0.4 mA of current from each of the unused LS-TTL
inputs that it drives. Yet the voltage drop across the resistor must be no more than
0.5 V in order to have a LOW input voltage no worse than that produced by a
normal gate output. If the resistor drives  n  LS-TTL inputs, then we must have
DO NOT COPY
n ⋅ 0.4 mA  ⋅ Rpd < 0.5 V
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.10  Transistor-Transistor Logic  159
FLOATING TTL Analysis of the TTL input structure shows that unused inputs left unconnected (or
INPUTS floating) behave as if they have a  HIGH  voltage applied—they are pulled  HIGH  by
DO NOT COPY
base resistor  R1  in Figure 3-75 on page 153. However,  R1’s pull-up is much weaker
than that of a TTL output driving the input. As a result, a small amount of circuit noise,
such as that produced by other gates when they switch, can make a floating input spu-
riously behave like it’s LOW. Therefore, for the sake of reliability, unused TTL inputs
should be tied to a stable  HIGH  or  LOW  voltage source.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
IILmax
Vin ≤0.5 V 
DO NOT COPYsink current from R Figure 3-80
LOW inputs pd
Pull-down resistor for
TTL inputs.
Thus, if the resistor must pull 10 LS-TTL inputsDO NOT COPY  LOW, then we must have R pd  <
−3 
0.5  /  (10  ⋅  4  ⋅  10 ), or  Rpd  <  125  Ω.
Similarly, consider the pull-up resistor shown in Figure 3-81. It must
source 20 μA of current to each unused input while producing a HIGH  voltage no
worse than that produced by a normal gate output, 2.7 V. Therefore, the voltage
drop across the resistor must be no more than 2.3 V; ifDO NOT COPY  n  LS-TTL input are driv-
en, we must have
n ⋅ 20  μA ⋅ Rpu < 2.3 V
-6 
Thus, if 10 LS-TTL inputs are pulled up, then  Rpu  < 2.3 / (10  ⋅  20⋅10  ), or
DO NOT COPY
Rpu  <  11.5 KΩ.
+5 V
Figure 3-81
Pull-up resistor for
source current
DO NOT COPYRpu TTL inputs.
to HIGH inputs
IIHmax
Vin  2.7 V 
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

160  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
WHY USE A You might be asking yourself, “Why use a pull-up or pull-down resistor, when a
RESISTOR? direct connection to ground or the 5-V power supply should be a perfectly good
DO NOT COPY
source of  LOW  or  HIGH?”
Well, for a  HIGH  source, a direct connection to the 5 V power supply is not
recommended, since an input transient of over 5.5 V can damage some TTL devices,
ones that use a multi-emitter transistor in the input stage. The pull-up resistor limits
current and prevents damage in this case.
DO NOT COPY
For a  LOW  source, a direct connection to ground without the pull-down
resistor is actually OK in most cases. You’ll see many examples of this sort of con-
nection throughout this book. However, as explained in Section 12.2.2 on page 803,
the pull-down resistor is still desirable in some cases so that the “constant”  LOW
signal it produces can be overridden and driven  HIGH  for system-testing purposes.
DO NOT COPY
3.10.5 Additional TTL Gate Types
Although the  NAND  gate is the “workhorse” of the TTL family, other types of
DO NOT COPYgates can be built with the same general circuit structure.
The circuit diagram for an LS-TTL  NOR  gate is shown in Figure 3-82. If
either input  X  or  Y  is  HIGH, the corresponding phase-splitter transistor  Q2X  or
Q2Y  is turned on, which turns off  Q3  and  Q4  while turning on  Q5  and  Q6, and
the output is  LOW. If both inputs are  LOW, then both phase-splitter transistors are
DO NOT COPYoff, and the output is forced  HIGH. This functional operation is summarized in
Figure 3-83.
The LS-TTL  NOR  gate’s input circuits, phase splitter, and output stage are
almost identical to those of an LS-TTL  NAND  gate. The difference is that an LS-
TTL  NAND  gate uses diodes to perform the  AND  function, while an LS-TTL
DO NOT COPY
NOR  gate uses parallel transistors in the phase splitter to perform the  OR
function.
The speed, input, and output characteristics of a TTL  NOR gate are compa-
rable to those of a TTL  NAND. However, an  n-input  NOR  gate uses more
transistors and resistors and is thus more expensive in silicon area than an  n-
DO NOT COPY
input NAND. Also, internal leakage current limits the number of  Q2  transistors
that can be placed in parallel, so  NOR  gates have poor fan-in. (The largest dis-
crete TTL  NOR  gate has only 5 inputs, compared with a 13-input  NAND.) As a
result,  NOR  gates are less commonly used than  NAND  gates in TTL designs.
DO NOT COPYThe most “natural” TTL gates are inverting gates like  NAND  and  NOR.
Noninverting TTL gates include an extra inverting stage, typically between the
input stage and the phase splitter. As a result, noninverting TTL gates are typi-
cally larger and slower than the inverting gates on which they are based.
Like CMOS, TTL gates can be designed with three-state outputs. Such
DO NOT COPYgates have an “output-enable” or “output-disable” input that allows the output to
be placed in a high-impedance state where neither output transistor is turned on.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.10  Transistor-Transistor Logic  161
VCC = +5 V
DO NOT COPY
R1X R2 R5
20 kΩ 8 kΩ 120 Ω
D1X
V
X AX Q2X Q3
Q4
R1Y
DO NOT COPYD1Y 20 kΩ R3X
10 kΩ
Y
V D3 R6
AY Q2Y Z
4 kΩ
D4
D2X  D2Y R3Y
10 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
Q5
R4 R7
1.5 kΩ 3 kΩ
DO NOT COPYQ6
Diode inputs and
input protection  OR function and phase splitter  Output stage
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-82  Circuit diagram of a two-input LS-TTL NOR gate.
(a) X Y VAX Q2X VAY Q2Y Q3  Q4  Q5 Q6 VZ Z
Figure 3-83
DO NOT COPY
L L ≤1.05  off ≤1.05 off on on off off ≥2.7 H Two-input LS-TTL
L H ≤1.05 off 1.2 on off off on on ≤0.35 L
NOR  gate:
H L 1.2 on ≤1.05 off off off on on ≤0.35 L
(a) function table;
H H 1.2 on 1.2 on off off on on ≤0.35 L
(b) truth table;
(c) logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY
(b)  X Y Z (c)
0 0 1 X
Z
0 1 0
Y
1 0 0
1 1 0
DO NOT COPY
Some TTL gates are also available with  open-collector outputs. Such gates open-collector output
omit the entire upper half of the output stage in Figure 3-75, so that only passive
pull-up to the  HIGH  state is provided by an external resistor. The applications
and required calculations for TTL open-collector gates are similar to those forDO NOT COPY
CMOS gates with open-drain outputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

162  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
3.11 TTL Families
TTL families have evolved over the years in response to the demands of digital
DO NOT COPYdesigners for better performance. As a result, three TTL families have come and
gone, and today’s designers have five surviving families from which to choose.
All of the TTL families are compatible in that they use the same power supply
voltage and logic levels, but each family has its own advantages in terms of
speed, power consumption, and cost.
DO NOT COPY
3.11.1 Early TTL Families
The original TTL family of logic gates was introduced by Sylvania in 1963. It
was popularized by Texas Instruments, whose “7400-series” part numbers for
gates and other TTL components quickly became an industry standard.
DO NOT COPY
As in 7400-series CMOS, devices in a given TTL family have part num-
bers of the form 74FAMnn, where “FAM” is an alphabetic family mnemonic and
nn  is a numeric function designator. Devices in different families with the same
value of nn  perform the same function. In the original TTL family, “FAM” is null
74-series TTL and the family is called  74-series TTL.
DO NOT COPY
Resistor values in the original TTL circuit were changed to obtain two
74H (High-speed TTL) more TTL families with different performance characteristics. The  74H (High-
speed TTL)  family used lower resistor values to reduce propagation delay at the
74L (Low-power TTL) expense of increased power consumption. The  74L (Low-power TTL)  family
DO NOT COPYused higher resistor values to reduce power consumption at the expense of prop-
agation delay.
The availability of three TTL families allowed digital designers in the
1970s to make a choice between high speed and low power consumption for
their circuits. However, like many people in the 1970s, they wanted to “have it
DO NOT COPYall, now.” The development of Schottky transistors provided this opportunity,
and made 74, 74H, and 74L TTL obsolete. The characteristics of better-
performing, contemporary TTL families are discussed in the rest of this section.
3.11.2 Schottky TTL Families
DO NOT COPY
74S (Schottky TTL) Historically, the first family to make use of Schottky transistors was  74S (Schot-
tky TTL). With Schottky transistors and low resistor values, this family has much
higher speed, but higher power consumption, than the original 74-series TTL.
Perhaps the most widely used and certainly the least expensive TTL family
74LS (Low-power is  74LS (Low-power Schottky TTL), introduced shortly after 74S. By combining
DO NOT COPY
Schottky TTL) Schottky transistors with higher resistor values, 74LS TTL matches the speed of
74-series TTL but has about one-fifth of its power consumption. Thus, 74LS is a
preferred logic family for new TTL designs.
Subsequent IC processing and circuit innovations gave rise to two more
74AS (AdvancedDO NOT COPYSchottky logic families. The  74AS (Advanced Schottky TTL)  family offers
Schottky TTL) speeds approximately twice as fast as 74S with approximately the same power
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.11  TTL Families  163
Ta b l e 3 - 1 1  Characteristics of gates in TTL families.
Family
DO NOT COPY
Description Symbol  74S  74LS  74AS  74ALS  74F
Maximum propagation delay (ns)  3  9  1.7  4  3
Power consumption per gate (mW)  19  2  8  1.2  4
DO NOT COPY
Speed-power product (pJ)  57  18  13.6  4.8  12
LOW-level input voltage (V)  VILmax  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8  0.8
LOW-level output voltage (V)  VOLmax  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5  0.5
DO NOT COPY
HIGH-level input voltage (V)  VIHmin  2.0  2.0  2.0  2.0  2.0
HIGH-level output voltage (V)  VOHmin  2.7  2.7  2.7  2.7  2.7
LOW-level input current (mA)  IILmax  −2.0  −0.4  −0.5  −0.2  −0.6
DO NOT COPY
LOW-level output current (mA)  IOLmax  20  8  20  8  20
HIGH-level input current (μA)  IIHmax  50  20  20  20  20
HIGH-level output current (μA)  IOHmax  −1000  −400  −2000  −400  −1000
DO NOT COPY
consumption. The  74ALS (Advanced Low-power Schottky TTL)  family offers 74ALS (Advanced Low-
both lower power and higher speeds than 74LS, and rivals 74LS in popularity for power Schottky TTL)
general-purpose requirements in new TTL designs. The  74F (Fast TTL)  family
is positioned between 74AS and 74ALS in the speed/power tradeoff, and isDO NOT COPY74F (Fast TTL)
probably the most popular choice for high-speed requirements in new TTL
designs.
3.11.3 Characteristics of TTL Families
The important characteristics of contemporary TTL families are summarized inDO NOT COPY
Table 3-11. The first two rows of the table list the propagation delay (in nano-
seconds) and the power consumption (in milliwatts) of a typical 2-input  NAND
gate in each family.
One figure of merit of a logic family is its speed-power product listed in the
DO NOT COPY
third row of the table. As discussed previously, this is simply the product of the
propagation delay and power consumption of a typical gate. The speed-power
product measures a sort of efficiency—how much energy a logic gate uses to
switch its output.
The remaining rows in Table 3-11 describe the input and output parameters
DO NOT COPY
of typical TTL gates in each of the families. Using this information, you can
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

164  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
analyze the external behavior of TTL gates without knowing the details of the
internal TTL circuit design. These parameters were defined and discussed in
Sections 3.10.2 and 3.10.3. As always, the input and output characteristics of
DO NOT COPY
specific  components  may  vary  from  the  representative  values  given  in
Table 3-11, so you must always consult the manufacturer’s data book when
analyzing a real design.
3.11.4 A TTL Data Sheet
DO NOT COPY
Table 3-12 shows the part of a typical manufacturer’s data sheet for the 74LS00.
The 54LS00 listed in the data sheet is identical to the 74LS00, except that it is
specified to operate over the full “military” temperature and voltage range, and
it costs more. Most TTL parts have corresponding 54-series (military) versions.
DO NOT COPYThree sections of the data sheet are shown in the table:
recommended •  Recommended operating conditions  specify power-supply voltage, input-
operating conditions voltage ranges, DC output loading, and temperature values under which
the device is normally operated.
electrical •  Electrical characteristics  specify additional DC voltages and currents that
DO NOT COPY
characteristics are observed at the device inputs and output when it is operated under the
recommended conditions:
II  Maximum input current for a very high  HIGH  input voltage.
I Output current with  HIGH  output shorted to ground.
DO NOT COPYOS 
ICCH  Power-supply current when all outputs (on four  NAND  gates) are
HIGH. (The number given is for the entire package, which contains
four  NAND  gates, so the current per gate is one-fourth of the spec-
ified amount.)
DO NOT COPY
ICCL  Power-supply current when all outputs (on four  NAND  gates) are
LOW.
switching •  Switching characteristics  give maximum and typical propagation delays
characteristics under “typical” operating conditions of  VCC  =  5 V and  TA  =  25°C. A con-
DO NOT COPYservative designer must increase these delays by 5%–10% to account for
different power-supply voltages and temperatures, and even more under
heavy loading conditions.
A fourth section is also included in the manufacturer’s data book:
absolute maximumDO NOT COPY•  Absolute maximum ratings  indicate the worst-case conditions for operating
ratings or storing the device without damage.
A complete data book also shows test circuits that are used to measure the
parameters when the device is manufactured, and graphs that show how the typ-
DO NOT COPYical parameters vary with operating conditions such as power-supply voltage
(VCC), ambient temperature (TA ), and load (RL ,  CL).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 3.11  TTL Families  165
Ta b l e 3 - 1 2  Typical manufacturer’s data sheet for the 74LS00.
RECOMMENDED OPERATING CONDITIONS
DO NOT COPY
SN54LS00 SN74LS00
Parameter Description Min.  Nom.  Max.  Min.  Nom.  Max.  Unit
VCC  Supply voltage  4.5  5.0  5.5  4.75  5.0  5.25  V
DO NOT COPY
VIH  High-level input voltage  2.0  2.0  V
VIL  Low-level input voltage  0.7  0.8  V
IOH  High-level output current  −0.4  −0.4  mA
DO NOT COPYIOL  Low-level output current  4  4  mA
TA  Operating free-air temperature  −55  125  0  70  °C
ELECTRICAL CHARACTERISTICS OVER RECOMMENDED FREE-AIR TEMPERATURE RANGE
SN54LS00  SN74LS00
DO NOT COPY
(1) (2)  (2) 
Parameter Test Conditions  Min.  Typ.  Max.  Min.  Typ. Max.  Unit
VIK  VCC  =  Min.,  IN  =  −18 mA  −1.5  −1.5  V
VOH  VCC  =  Min.,  VIL =  Max.,  IOH  =  −0.4 mA  2.5  3.4  2.7  3.4  V
DO NOT COPY
VCC  =  Min.,  VIH  =  2.0 V,  IOL  =  4 mA  0.25  0.4  0.25  0.4  V
VOL
VCC  =  Min.,  VIH  =  2.0 V,  IOL  =  8 mA  0.35
II  VCC  =  Max.,  VI  =  7.0 V  0.1  0.1  mA
I V =  Max.  V =  2.7 V  20  20 μA
DO NOT COPYIH  CC  I 
IIL  VCC  =  Max.  VI  =  0.4 V  −0.4  −0.4  mA
(3) 
IIOS VCC  =  Max.  −20  −100  −20  −100  mA
ICCH  VCC  =  Max.,  VI  =  0 V  0.8  1.6  0.8  1.6  mA
DO NOT COPY
ICCL  VCC  =  Max.,  VI  =  4.5 V  2.4  4.4  2.4  4.4  mA
SWITCHING CHARACTERISTICS,  VCC  =  5.0 V,  TA  =  25°C
Parameter  From (Input)  To (Output)  Test Conditions  Min.  Typ.  Max.  Unit
DO NOT COPYt 9  15  ns
PLH 
A  or  B  Y  RL  =  2 kΩ,  CL  =  15 pF 
tPHL  10  15
NOTES:
1. For conditions shown as Max. or Min., use appropriate value specified under Recommended Operating Conditions.
DO NOT COPY
2. All typical values are at V CC = 5.0 V, TA = 25°C.
3. Not more than one output should be shorted at a time; duration of short-circuit should not exceed one second.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

166  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
*3.12 CMOS/TTL Interfacing
A digital designer selects a “default” logic family to use in a system, based on
DO NOT COPYgeneral requirements of speed, power, cost, and so on. However, the designer
may select devices from other families in some cases because of availability or
other special requirements. (For example, not all 74LS part numbers are avail-
able in 74HCT, and vice versa.) Thus, it’s important for a designer to understand
the implications of connecting TTL outputs to CMOS inputs, and vice versa.
DO NOT COPY
There are several factors to consider in TTL/CMOS interfacing, and the
first is noise margin. The  LOW-state DC noise margin depends on  VOLmax  of the
driving output and  VILmax  of the driven input, and equals  VILmax  −  VOLmax. Simi-
larly, the  HIGH-state DC noise margin equals  VOHmin  −  VIHmin . Figure 3-84
shows the relevant numbers for TTL and CMOS families.
DO NOT COPY
For example, the  LOW-state DC noise margin of HC or HCT driving TTL
is 0.8  −  0.33  =  0.47 V, and the  HIGH-state is 3.84  −  2.0  =1.84 V. On the other
hand, the HIGH-state margin of TTL driving HC or VHC is 2.7  −  3.85  =  −1.15 V.
In other words, TTL driving HC or AC doesn’t work, unless the TTL  HIGH  out-
put happens to be higher and the CMOS  HIGH input  threshold happens to be
DO NOT COPY
lower by a total of 1.15 V compared to their worst-case specs. To drive CMOS
inputs properly from TTL outputs, the CMOS devices should be HCT, VHCT. or
FCT rather than HC or VHC.
The next factor to consider is fanout. As with pure TTL (Section 3.10.3), a
DO NOT COPYdesigner must sum the input current requirements of devices driven by an output
and compare with the output’s capabilities in both states. Fanout is not a problem
when TTL drives CMOS, since CMOS inputs require almost no current in either
state. On the other hand, TTL inputs, especially in the  LOW  state, require sub-
DO NOT COPY
OUTPUTS 5.0 INPUTS
Figure 3-84
Output and input levels VOHmin  , VOLmax VIHmin  , VOLmax
HIGH
for interfacing TTL and
CMOS families. (Note HC, HCT 3.84 3.85 (HC, VHC)
that HC and VHC inputsDO NOT COPYVHC, VHCT 3.80
are not TTL compatible.) High-state
DC noise margin
LS, S, ALS, AS, F 2.7
2.0 LS, S, ALS, AS, F,
DO NOT COPY
HCT, VHCT, FCT
(not drawn to scale)
ABNORMAL 1.35 (HC, VHC)
0.8 LS, S, ALS, AS, F,
FCT 0.55
HCT, VHCT, FCT
LS, S, ALS, AS, F 0.5
Low-state
DO NOT COPYVHC, VHCT 0.44
DC noise margin
HC, HCT 0.33 LOW
0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.13  Low-Voltage CMOS Logic and Interfacing  167
stantial current, especially compared to HC and HCT output capabilities. For
example, an HC or HCT output can drive 10 LS or only two S-TTL inputs.
The last factor is capacitive loading. We’ve seen that load capacitance
DO NOT COPY
increases both the delay and the power dissipation of logic circuits. Increases in
delay are especially noticeable with HC and HCT outputs, whose transition
times increase about 1 ns for each 5 pF of load capacitance. The transistors in
FCT outputs have very low “on” resistances, so their transition times increase
only about 0.1 ns for each 5 pF of load capacitance.
DO NOT COPY
For a given load capacitance, power-supply voltage, and application, all of
the CMOS families have similar dynamic power dissipation, since each variable
2
in the  CV f equation is the same. On the other hand, TTL outputs have somewhat
lower dynamic power dissipation, since the voltage swing between TTL  HIGH
andDO NOT COPY  LOW  levels is smaller.
*3.13 Low-Voltage CMOS Logic and Interfacing
Two important factors have led the IC industry to move towards lower power-
supply voltages in CMOS devices:DO NOT COPY
•  In most applications, CMOS output voltages swing from rail to rail, so the
2
V  in the  CV f  equation is the power-supply voltage. Cutting power-supply
voltage reduces dynamic power dissipation more than proportionally.
•DO NOT COPY  As the industry moves towards ever-smaller transistor geometries, the
oxide insulation between a CMOS transistor’s gate and its source and drain
is getting ever thinner, and thus incapable of insulating voltage potentials
as “high” as 5 V.
As a result, JEDEC, an IC industry standards group, selected 3.3V ± 0.3V,
DO NOT COPY
2.5V ± 0.2V, and 1.8V ± 0.15V as the next “standard” logic power-supply volt-
ages. JEDEC standards specify the input and output logic voltage levels for
devices operating with these power-supply voltages.
The migration to lower voltages has occurred in stages, and will continue
to do so. For discrete logic families, the trend has been to produce parts that
DO NOT COPY
operate and produce outputs at the lower voltage, but that can also tolerate inputs
at the higher voltage. This approach has allowed 3.3-V CMOS families to oper-
ate with 5-V CMOS and TTL families, as we’ll see in the next section.
Many ASICs and microprocessors have followed a similar approach, but
another approach is often used as well. These devices are large enough that it canDO NOT COPY
make sense to provide them with two power-supply voltages. A low voltage,
such as 2.5 V, is supplied to operate the chip’s internal gates, or  core logic. A core logic
higher voltage, such as 3.3 V, is supplied to operate the external input and output
circuits, or  pad ring, for compatibility with older-generation devices in the pad ring
DO NOT COPY
system. Special buffer circuits are used internally to translate safely and quickly
between the core-logic and the pad-ring logic voltages.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

168  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
*3.13.1 3.3-V LVTTL and LVCMOS Logic
The relationships among signal levels for standard TTL and low-voltage CMOS
devices operating at their nominal power-supply voltages are illustrated nicely
DO NOT COPY
in Figure 3-85, adapted from a Texas Instruments application note. The original,
symmetric signal levels for pure 5-V CMOS families such as HC and VHC are
shown in (a). TTL-compatible CMOS families such as HCT, VHCT, and FCT
shift the voltage levels downwards for compatibility with TTL as shown in (b).
The first step in the progression of lower CMOS power-supply voltages
DO NOT COPY
was 3.3 V. The JEDEC standard for 3.3-V logic actually defines two sets of
LVCMOS (low-voltage levels.  LVCMOS (low-voltage CMOS)  levels are used in pure CMOS applica-
CMOS) tions where outputs have light DC loads (less than 100  μA), so  VOL  and  VOH  are
LVTTL (low-voltage maintained within 0.2 V of the power-supply rails.  LVTTL (low-voltage TTL)
TTL)DO NOT COPYlevels, shown in (c), are used in applications where outputs have significant DC
loads, so  VOL  can be as high as 0.4 V and  VOH  can be as low as 2.4 V.
The positioning of TTL’s logic levels at the low end of the 5-V range was
really quite fortuitous. As shown in Figure 3-85(b) and (c), it was possible to
define the LVTTL levels to match up with TTL levels exactly. Thus, an LVTTL
DO NOT COPYoutput can drive a TTL input with no problem, as long as its output current spec-
ifications (IOLmax ,  IOHmax) are respected. Similarly, a TTL output can drive an
LVTTL input, except for the problem of driving it beyond LVTTL’s 3.3-V  VCC ,
as discussed next.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-85  Comparison of logic levels: (a) 5-V CMOS; (b) 5-V TTL,
including 5-V TTL-compatible CMOS; (c) 3.3-V LVTTL;
(d) 2.5-V CMOS; (e) 1.8-V CMOS.
(a)  (b)
5.0 V VCC 5.0 V VCC
DO NOT COPY
4.44 V VOH
3.5 V VIH (c)
3.3 V VCC
DO NOT COPY
(d)
2.5 V VT 2.5 V VCC
2.4 V VOH 2.4 V VOH
2.0 V VIH 2.0 V VIH 2.0 V VOH (e)
1.8 V V
1.7 V V CC
DO NOT COPYIH
1.5 V VIL 1.5 V VT 1.5 V VT 1.45 V V
OH
1.2 V VT 1.2 V VIH
0.9 V V
0.8 V VIL 0.8 V VIL T
0.7 V VIL 0.65 V V
IL
0.5 V VOL
0.4 V VOL 0.4 V VOL 0.4 V VOL 0.45 V VOL
DO NOT COPY5.0 V GND 5.0 V GND 5.0 V GND 5.0 V GND 5.0 V GND
5-V CMOS Families  5-V TTL Families  3.3-V LVTTL Families  2.5-V CMOS Families  1.8-V CMOS Families
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.13  Low-Voltage CMOS Logic and Interfacing  169
*3.13.2 5-V Tolerant Inputs
The inputs of a gate won’t necessarily tolerate voltages greater than  VCC . This
can easily occur when 5-V and 3.3-V logic families in a system. For example,
DO NOT COPY
5-V CMOS devices easily produce 4.9-V outputs when lightly loaded, and both
CMOS and TTL devices routinely produce 4.0-V outputs even when moderately
loaded.
The maximum voltage VImax that can be tolerated by an input is listed in the
“absolute maximum ratings” section of the manufacturer’s data sheet. For HC
DO NOT COPY
devices,  VImax  equals  VCC . Thus, if an HC device is powered by a 3.3-V supply,
its cannot be driven by any 5-V CMOS or TTL outputs. For VHC devices, on the
other hand,  VImax  is 7 V; thus, VHC devices with a 3.3-V power supply may be
used to convert 5-V outputs to 3.3-V levels for use with 3.3-V microprocessors,
memories, and other devices in a pure 3.3-V subsystem.DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-86 explains why some inputs are 5-V tolerant and others are not.
As shown in (a), the HC and HCT input structure actually contains two reverse-
biased  clamp diodes, which we haven’t shown before, between each input signal clamp diode
and  VCC  and ground. The purpose of these diodes is specifically to shunt any
transient input signal value less than 0 throughDO NOT COPY  D1  or greater than  V through
CC 
D2  to the corresponding power-supply rail. Such transients can occur as a result
of transmission-line reflections, as described in Section 12.4. Shunting the so-
called “undershoot” or “overshoot” to ground or  VCC  reduces the magnitude and
duration of reflections.
DO NOT COPY
Of course, diode  D2  can’t distinguish between transient overshoot and a
persistent input voltage greater than  VCC . Hence, if a 5-V output is connected to
one of these inputs, it will not see the very high impedance normally associated
with a CMOS input. Instead, it will see a relatively low impedance path to  VCC
through the now forward-biased diode  D2, and excessive current will flow.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 3-86(b) shows a 5-V tolerant CMOS input. This input structure
simply omits  D2; diode  D1  is still provided to clamp undershoot. The VHC and
AHC families use this input structure.
DO NOT COPYVCC VCC
(a)  (b)  Figure 3-86
CMOS input structures:
(a) non-5-V tolerant HC;
D2
(b) 5-V tolerant VHC.
Q2 Q2
DO NOT COPY
VI Q1 VI Q1
D1 D1
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

170  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
The kind of input structure shown in Figure 3-86(b) is necessary but not
sufficient to create 5-V tolerant inputs. The transistors in a device’s particular
fabrication process must also be able to withstand voltage potentials higher than
DO NOT COPY
VCC . On this basis,  VImax  in the VHC family is limited to 7.0 V. In many 3.3-V
ASIC processes, it’s not possible to get 5-V tolerant inputs, even if you’re will-
ing to give up the transmission-line benefits of diode  D2.
*3.13.3 5-V Tolerant Outputs
DO NOT COPY
Five-volt tolerance must also be considered for outputs, in particular, when
both 3.3-V and 5-V three-state outputs are connected to a bus. When the 3.3-V
output is in the disabled, Hi-Z state, a 5-V device may be driving the bus, and a
5-V signal may appear on the 3.3-V device’s  output.
DO NOT COPYIn this situation, Figure 3-87 explains why some outputs are 5-V tolerant
and others are not. As shown in (a), the standard CMOS three-state output has an
n-channel transistor  Q1  to ground and a  p-channel transistor  Q2  to  VCC . When
the output is disabled, circuitry (not shown) holds the gate of  Q1  near 0 V, and
the gate of  Q2  near  VCC , so both transistors are off and  Y  is Hi-Z.
DO NOT COPYNow consider what happens if  VCC  is 3.3 V and a different device applies a
5-V signal to the output pin  Y  in (a). Then the drain of  Q2  (Y) is at 5 V while the
gate (V2) is still at only 3.3 V. With the gate at a lower potential than the drain,
Q2  will begin to conduct and provide a relatively low-impedance path from  Y  to
VCC , and excessive current will flow. Both HC and VHC three-state outputs have
DO NOT COPY
this structure and therefore are not 5-V tolerant.
Figure 3-87(b) shows a 5-V tolerant output structure. An extra  p-channel
transistor  Q3  is used to prevent  Q2  from turning on when it shouldn’t. When
VOUT  is greater than  VCC ,  Q3  turns on. This forms a relatively low impedance
path from  Y  to the gate of  Q2, which now stays off because its gate voltage  V2
DO NOT COPY
can no longer be below the drain voltage. This output structure is used in Texas
Instruments’ LVC (Low-Voltage CMOS) family.
DO NOT COPY
VCC VCC
Figure 3-87 (a)  (b)
CMOS three-state
V2 »VCC V2»VOUT
output structures: Q2 Q2
(a) non-5-V tolerant
HC and VHC;
DO NOT COPYVOUT VCC  Q3 VOUT
b) 5-V tolerant LVC. Y Y
» 0V » 0V
Q1 Q1
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.14  Emitter-Coupled Logic  171
*3.13.4 TTL/LVTTL Interfacing Summary
Based on the information in the preceding subsections, TTL (5-V) and LVTTL
(3.3-V) devices can be mixed in the same system subject to just three rules:
DO NOT COPY
1.  LVTTL outputs can drive TTL inputs directly, subject to the usual con-
straints on output current (IOLmax,  IOHmax ) of the driving devices.
2.  TTL outputs can drive LVTTL inputs if the inputs are 5-V tolerant.
3.  TTL and LVTTL three-state outputs can drive the same bus if the LVTTL
DO NOT COPY
outputs are 5-V tolerant.
*3.13.5 2.5-V and 1.8-V Logic
The transition from 3.3-V to 2.5-V logic will not be so easy. It is true that 3.3-V
outputs can drive 2.5-V inputs as long as the inputs are 3.3-V tolerant. However,DO NOT COPY
a quick look at Figure 3-85(c) and (d) on page 168 shows that  VOH  of a 2.5-V
output equals  VIH  of a 3.3-V input. In other words, there is zero  HIGH-state DC
noise margin when a 2.5-V output drives a 3.3-V input, not a good situation.
The solution to this problem is to use a  level translator or level shifter, a level translator
device which is powered by both supply voltages and which internally boosts theDO NOT COPYlevel shifter
lower logic levels (2.5 V) to the higher ones (3.3 V). Many of today’s ASICs and
microprocessors contain level translators internally, allowing them to operate
with a 2.5-V or 2.7-V core and a 3.3-V pad ring, as we discussed at the beginning
of this section. If and when 2.5-V discrete devices become popular, we can
DO NOT COPY
expect the major semiconductor vendors produce level translators as stand-alone
components as well.
The next step will be a transition from 2.5-V to 1.8-V logic. Referring to
Figure 3-85(d) and (e), you can see that the  HIGH-state DC noise margin is actu-
ally negative when a 1.8-V output drives a 2.5-V input, so level translators will
DO NOT COPY
be needed in this case also.
*3.14 Emitter-Coupled Logic
The key to reducing propagation delay in a bipolar logic family is to prevent a
DO NOT COPY
gate’s transistors from saturating. In Section 3.9.5, we learned how Schottky
diodes prevent saturation in TTL gates. However, it is also possible to prevent
saturation by using a radically different circuit structure, called  current-mode current-mode logic
logic (CML)  or  emitter-coupled logic (ECL). (CML)
DO NOT COPYUnlike the other logic families in this chapter, CML does not produce a emitter-coupled logic
large voltage swing between the  LOW  and  HIGH  levels. Instead, it has a small (ECL)
voltage swing, less than a volt, and it internally switches current between two
possible paths, depending on the output state.
The first CML logic family was introduced by General Electric in 1961.
The concept was soon refined by Motorola and others to produce the still popu-DO NOT COPYemitter-coupled logic
lar 10K and 100K  emitter-coupled logic (ECL)  families. These families are (ECL)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

172  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
extremely fast, offering propagation delays as short as 1 ns. The newest ECL
family, ECLinPS (literally, ECL in picoseconds), offers maximum delays under
0.5 ns (500 ps), including the signal delay getting on and off of the IC package.
DO NOT COPY
Throughout the evolution of digital circuit technology, some type of ECL has
always been the fastest technology for discrete, packaged logic components.
Still, commercial ECL families aren’t nearly as popular as CMOS and
TTL, mainly because they consume much more power. In fact, high power con-
sumption made the design of ECL supercomputers, such as the Cray-1 and
DO NOT COPY
Cray-2, as much of a challenge in cooling technology as in digital design. Also,
ECL has a poor speed-power product, does not provide a high level of integra-
tion, has fast edge rates requiring design for transmission-line effects in most
applications, and is not directly compatible with TTL and CMOS. Nevertheless,
DO NOT COPYECL still finds its place as a logic and interface technology in very high-speed
communications gear, including fiber-optic transceiver interfaces for gigabit
Ethernet and Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM) networks.
*3.14.1 Basic CML Circuit
DO NOT COPYThe basic idea of current-mode logic is illustrated by the inverter/buffer circuit
in Figure 3-88. This circuit has both an inverting output (OUT1) and a noninvert-
differential amplifier ing output (OUT2). Two transistors are connected as a  differential amplifier  with
a common emitter resistor. The supply voltages for this example are  VCC  =  5.0,
VBB  =  4.0, and  VEE  =  0 V, and the input  LOW  and  HIGH  levels are defined to be
DO NOT COPY
3.6 and 4.4 V. This circuit actually produces output  LOW  and  HIGH  levels that
are 0.6 V higher (4.2 and 5.0 V), but this is corrected in real ECL circuits.
VCC = 5.0 V
Figure 3-88
DO NOT COPY
Basic CML inverter/buffer
circuit with input  HIGH .
R1 R2
300 Ω 330 Ω VOUT1 ≈ 4.2 V (LOW)
OUT1
DO NOT COPYV ≈ 5.0 V (HIGH)
OUT2 
OUT2
VIN ≈ 4.4 V (HIGH)
Q1  Q2
IN VBB = 4.0 V
on  OFF
VE ≈ 3.8 V
DO NOT COPY
R3
1.3 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
VEE = 0.0 V
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.14  Emitter-Coupled Logic  173
When  VIN  is HIGH, as shown in the figure, transistor  Q1  is on, but not satu-
rated, and transistor  Q2  is  OFF. This is true because of a careful choice of
resistor values and voltage levels. Thus,  VOUT2 is pulled to 5.0 V (HIGH) through
DO NOT COPY
R2, and it can be shown that the voltage drop across  R1  is about 0.8 V so that
VOUT1  is about 4.2 V (LOW).
When  VIN  is  LOW, as shown in Figure 3-89, transistor Q2  is on, but not sat-
urated, and transistor  Q1  is  OFF. Thus,  VOUT1  is pulled to 5.0 V through  R1, and
it can be shown that  V is about 4.2 V.
DO NOT COPYOUT2 
The outputs of this inverter are called  differential outputs  because they are differential outputs
always complementary, and it is possible to determine the output state by
looking at the difference between the output voltages (VOUT1  −  VOUT2 ) rather
than their absolute values. That is, the output is 1 if (VOUT1  −  VOUT2 ) > 0, and it
is 0 if (DO NOT COPYVOUT1  −  VOUT2) > 0. It is possible to build input circuits with two wires
per logical input that define the logical signal value in this way; these are called
differential inputs differential inputs
Differential signals are used in most ECL “interfacing” and “clock distri-
bution” applications because of their low skew and high noise immunity. They
are “low skew” because the timing of a 0-to-1 or 1-to-0 transition does notDO NOT COPY
depend critically on voltage thresholds, which may change with temperature or
between devices. Instead, the timing depends only on when the voltages cross
over relative to each other. Similarly, the “relative” definition of 0 and 1 provides
outstanding noise immunity, since noise created by variations in the power sup-
DO NOT COPY
ply or coupled from external sources tend to be  common-mode signals  that affect common-mode signals
both differential signals similarly, leaving the difference value unchanged.
VCC = 5.0 V
Figure 3-89
DO NOT COPY
Basic CML inverter/buffer
circuit with input  LOW.
R1 R2
300 Ω 330 Ω VOUT1 ≈ 5.0 V (HIGH)
OUT1
DO NOT COPY
VOUT2 ≈ 4.2 V (LOW)
OUT2
VIN ≈ 3.6 V (LOW)
Q1  Q2
IN VBB = 4.0 V
OFF  on
VE ≈ 3.4 V
DO NOT COPY
R3
1.3 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
VEE = 0.0 V
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

174  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
It is also possible, of course, to determine the logic value by sensing the
single-ended input absolute voltage level of one input signal, called a  single-ended input. Single-
ended signals are used in most ECL “logic” applications to avoid the obvious
DO NOT COPY
expense of doubling the number of signal lines. The basic CML inverter in
Figure 3-89 has a single-ended input. It always has both “outputs” available
internally; the circuit is actually either an inverter or a non-inverting buffer
depending on whether we use  OUT1  or  OUT2.
To perform logic with the basic circuit of Figure 3-89, we simply place
DO NOT COPY
additional transistors in parallel with  Q1, similar to the approach in a TTL  NOR
gate. For example, Figure 3-90 shows a 2-input CML  OR/NOR  gate. If any input
is  HIGH, the corresponding input transistor is active, and  VOUT1  is  LOW  (NOR
output). At the same time,  Q3  is  OFF, and  VOUT2 is  HIGH  (OR  output).
DO NOT COPYRecall that the input levels for the inverter/buffer are defined to be 3.6 and
4.4 V, while the output levels that it produces are 4.2 and 5.0 V. This is obviously
Figure 3-90  CML 2-input OR/NOR gate: (a) circuit diagram; (b) function table;
(c) logic symbol; (d) truth table.
DO NOT COPY
(a) VCC = 5.0 V
DO NOT COPYR1 R2
(c)
VX 300 Ω 330 Ω VOUT1
X  OUT1
X OUT1
VOUT2
OUT2 Y  OUT2
VY
DO NOT COPYY V = 4.0 V
Q1 Q2  Q3 BB 
VE
R3
1.3 kΩ
DO NOT COPY
VEE = 0.0 V
(b) (d)
DO NOT COPY
X Y VX VY Q1 Q2 Q3 VE VOUT1 VOUT2 OUT1 OUT2 X Y OUT1 OUT2
L L 3.6 3.6 OFF OFF on 3.4 5.0 4.2 H L 0 0 1 0
L H 3.6 4.4 OFF on OFF 3.8 4.2 5.0 L H 0 1 0 1
H L 4.4 3.6 on OFF OFF 3.8 4.2 5.0 L H 1 0 0 1
DO NOT COPY
H H 4.4 4.4 on on OFF 3.8 4.2 5.0 L H 1 1 0 1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.14  Emitter-Coupled Logic  175
a problem. We could put a diode in series with each output to lower it by 0.6 V to
match the input levels, but that still leaves another problem—the outputs have
poor fanout. A  HIGH  output must supply base current to the inputs that it drives,
DO NOT COPY
and this current creates an additional voltage drop across  R1  or  R2, reducing the
output voltage (and we don’t have much margin to work with). These problems
are solved in commercial ECL families, such as the 10K family described next.
*3.14.2 ECL 10K/10H Families
DO NOT COPY
The packaged components in today’s most popular ECL family have 5-digit part
numbers of the form “10xxx” (e.g., 10102, 10181, 10209), so the family is
generically called  ECL 10K. This family has several improvements over the ECL 10K family
basic CML circuit described previously:
DO NOT COPY
•  An emitter-follower output stage shifts the output levels to match the input
levels and provides very high current-driving capability, up to 50 mA per
output. It is also responsible for the family’s name, “emitter-coupled”
logic.
•  An internal bias network provides  V without the need for a separate,
DO NOT COPYBB 
external power supply.
•  The family is designed to operate with  VCC  = 0 (ground) and  VEE  =  −5.2 V.
In most applications, ground signals are more noise-free than the power-
supply signals. In ECL, the logic signals are referenced to the algebraically
DO NOT COPYhigher power-supply voltage rail, so the family’s designers decided to
make that 0 V (the “clean” ground) and use a negative voltage for  VEE . The
power-supply noise that does appear on  VEE  is a common-mod” signal that
is rejected by the input structure’s differential amplifier.
•  Parts with a 10H prefix (the  ECL 10H family) are fully voltage compen- ECL 10H family
DO NOT COPY
sated, so they will work properly with power-supply voltages other than
VEE  =  −5.2 V, as we’ll discuss in Section 3.14.4.
Logic  LOW  and  HIGH  levels are defined in the ECL 10K family as shown
in Figure 3-91. Note that even though the power supply is negative, ECL assigns
DO NOT COPY
the names  LOW  and  HIGH  to the  algebraically  lower and higher voltages,
respectively.
DC noise margins in ECL 10K are much less than in CMOS and TTL, only
0.155 V in the  LOW  state and 0.125 V in the HIGH  state. However, ECL gates do
not need as much noise margin as these families. Unlike CMOS and TTL, an
DO NOT COPY
ECL gate generates very little power-supply and ground noise when it changes
state; its current requirement remains constant as it merely steers current from
one path to another. Also, ECL’s emitter-follower outputs have very low imped-
ance in either state, and it is difficult to couple noise from an external source into
a signal line driven by such a low-impedance output.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

176  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
0 0
DO NOT COPY
ABNORMAL
VIHmax  –0.810  –0.810  VOHmax
HIGH
–0.980  VOHmin
V –1.105 High-state
DO NOT COPYIHmin 
DC noise margin
ABNORMAL
Low-state
V –1.475 DC noise margin
ILmax 
–1.630  VOLmax
Figure 3-91 LOW
DO NOT COPY
ECL 10K logic levels. VILmin  –1.850 –1.850  VOLmin
ABNORMAL
Figure 3-92(a) is the circuit for an ECL  OR/NOR  gate, one section of a
DO NOT COPY
quad  OR/NOR  gate with part number 10102. A pull-down resistor on each input
ensures that if the input is left unconnected, it is treated as  LOW. The bias net-
work has component values selected to generate  VBB  =  −1.29 V for proper
operation of the differential amplifier. Each output transistor, using the emitter-
DO NOT COPYfollower configuration, maintains its emitter voltage at one diode-drop below its
base voltage, thereby achieving the required output level shift. Figure 3-92(b)
summarizes the electrical operation of the gate.
The emitter-follower outputs used in ECL 10K require external pull-down
resistors, as shown in the figure. The 10K family is designed to use external
DO NOT COPYrather than internal pull-down resistors for good reason. The rise and fall times
of ECL output transitions are so fast (typically 2 ns) that any connection longer
than a few inches must be treated as a transmission line, and must be terminated
as discussed in Section 12.4. Rather than waste power with an internal pull-
down resistor, ECL 10K allows the designer to select an external resistor that
DO NOT COPY
satisfies both pull-down and transmission-line termination requirements. The
simplest termination, sufficient for short connections, is to connect a resistor in
the range of 270  Ω  to 2 kΩ  from each output to  VEE .
A typical ECL 10K gate has a propagation delay of 2 ns, comparable to
74AS TTL. With its outputs left unconnected, a 10K gate consumes about
DO NOT COPY
26 mW of power, also comparable to a 74AS TTL gate, which consumes about
20 mW. However, the termination required by ECL 10K also consumes power,
from 10 to 150 mW per output depending on the termination circuit configura-
tion. A  74AS TTL  output  may  or  may  not  require  a  power-consuming
DO NOT COPYtermination circuit, depending on the physical characteristics of the application.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *3.14  Emitter-Coupled Logic  177
differential amplifier
complementary
emitter-follower
multiple inputs  bias network outputs
DO NOT COPY
VCC2 = 0 V VCC1 = 0 V
(a)
DO NOT COPY
R3 R4 R7
220 Ω 245 Ω V 907 Ω Q5
C2
VX VOUT1 OUT1 (NOR)
X 
VC3
DO NOT COPYQ4
V V Q6
Y = –1.29 V
BB  V
Y Q1 Q2 Q3 OUT2 OUT2 (OR)
VE
DO NOT COPY
R1 R2 R5 R6 R8 R R
L1  L2
50 kΩ 50 kΩ 779 Ω 6.1 kΩ 4.98 kΩ 
DO NOT COPY
VEE = –5.2 V
DO NOT COPY(b) X Y VX VY Q1 Q2 Q3 VE VC2 VC3 VOUT1 VOUT2 OUT1 OUT2
L L –1.8 –1.8 OFF OFF on –1.9 –0.2 –1.2 –0.9 –1.8 H L
L H –1.8 –0.9 OFF on OFF –1.5 –1.2 –0.2 –1.8 –0.9 L H
H L –0.9 –1.8 on OFF OFF –1.5 –1.2 –0.2 –1.8 –0.9 L H
H H –0.9 –0.9 on on OFF –1.5 –1.2 –0.2 –1.8 –0.9 L H
DO NOT COPY
(c)  X Y OUT1 OUT2 (d)
X OUT1
0 0 1 0
Y  OUT2
0 1 0 1
DO NOT COPY
1 0 0 1
1 1 0 1
Figure 3-92  Two-input 10K ECL  OR/NOR  gate: (a) circuit diagram;
(b) function table; (c) truth table; (d) logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

178  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
*3.14.3 ECL 100K Family
ECL 100K family Members of the  ECL 100K family  have 6-digit part numbers of the form
“100xxx” (e.g., 100101, 100117, 100170), but in general have functions differ-
DO NOT COPY
ent than 10K parts with similar numbers. The 100K family has the following
major differences from the 10K family:
•  Reduced power-supply voltage,  VEE  =  −4.5 V.
•  Different logic levels, as a consequence of the different supply voltage.
DO NOT COPY
•  Shorter propagation delays, typically 0.75 ns.
•  Shorter transition times, typically 0.70 ns.
•  Higher power consumption, typically 40 mW per gate.
DO NOT COPY*3.14.4 Positive ECL (PECL)
We described the advantage of noise immunity provided by ECL’s negative
power supply (VEE  =  −5.2 V or  −4.5 V), but there’s also a big disadvantage—
today’s most popular CMOS and TTL logic families, ASICs, and microproces-
sors all use a positive power-supply voltage, typically +5.0 V but trending to
DO NOT COPY
+3.3 V. Systems incorporating both ECL and CMOS/TTL devices therefore
require two power supplies. In addition, interfacing between standard, negative
ECL 10K or 100K logic levels and positive CMOS/TTL levels requires special
level-translation components that connect to both supplies.
positive ECL (PECL) Positive ECL  (PECL, pronounced “peckle”) uses a standard +5.0-V power
DO NOT COPY
supply. Note that there’s nothing in the ECL 10K circuit design of Figure 3-92
that requires  VCC  to be grounded and  VEE  to be connected to a  −5.2-V supply.
The circuit will function exactly the same with  VEE  connected to ground, and
VCC  to a +5.2-V supply.
DO NOT COPYThus, PECL components are nothing more than standard ECL components
with  VEE  connected to ground and  VCC  to a +5.0-V supply. The voltage between
VEE  and  VCC  is a little less than with standard 10K ECL and more than with stan-
dard 100K ECL, but the 10H-series and 100K parts are voltage compensated,
designed to still work well with the supply voltage being a little high or low.
DO NOT COPYLike ECL logic levels, PECL levels are referenced to  V , so the PECL
CC
HIGH  level is about  VCC  −  0.9 V, and  LOW  is about  VCC  −  1.7 V, or about 4.1 V
and 3.3 V with a nominal 5-V  VCC . Since these levels are referenced to  VCC, they
move up and down with any variations in  VCC . Thus, PECL designs require
particularly close attention to power distribution issues, to prevent noise on  VCC
DO NOT COPY
from corrupting the logic levels transmitted and received by PECL devices.
Recall that CML/ECL devices produce differential outputs and can have
differential inputs. A differential input is relatively insensitive to the absolute
voltage levels of an input-signal pair, and only to their difference. Therefore,
differential signals can be used quite effectively in PECL applications to ease the
DO NOT COPY
noise concerns raised in the preceding paragraph.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

References  179
It is also quite common to provide differential PECL-compatible inputs
and outputs on CMOS devices, allowing a direct interface between the CMOS
device and a device such as a fiber-optic transceiver that expects ECL or PECL
DO NOT COPY
levels. In fact, as CMOS circuits have migrated to 3.3-V power supplies, it has
even been possible to build PECL-like differential inputs and outputs that are
simple referenced to the 3.3-V supply instead of a 5-V supply.
DO NOT COPY
References
Students who need to study the basics may wish to consult “Electrical Circuits
Review” by Bruce M. Fleischer. This 20-page tutorial covers all of the basic cir-
cuit concepts that are used in this chapter. It appears both as an appendix in this
DO NOT COPY
book’s first edition and as a  PDF  file on its web page,  www.ddpp.com.
If you’re interested in history, a nice introduction to all of the early bipolar
logic families can be found in  Logic Design with Integrated Circuits  by William
E. Wickes (Wiley-Interscience, 1968). The classic introduction to TTL electrical
characteristics appeared inDO NOT COPY  The TTL Applications Handbook,  edited by Peter
Alfke and Ib Larsen (Fairchild Semiconductor, 1973). Early logic designers also
enjoyed  The TTL Cookbook  by Don Lancaster.
For another perspective on the electronics material in this chapter, you can
consult almost any modern electronics text. Many contain a much more analyti-
cal discussion of digital circuit operation; for example, seeDO NOT COPY  Microelectronics  by
J. Millman and A. Grabel (McGraw-Hill, 1987, 2nd ed.). Another good intro-
duction to ICs and important logic families can be found in  VLSI System Design
by Saburo Muroga (Wiley, 1982). For NMOS and CMOS circuits in particular,
two good books are  Introduction to VLSI Systems  by Carver Mead and Lynn
DO NOT COPY
Conway (Addison-Wesley, 1980) and  Principles of CMOS VLSI Design  by Neil
H. E. Weste and Kamran Eshraghian (Addison-Wesley, 1993).
Characteristics of today’s logic families can be found in the data books
published by the device manufacturers. Both Texas Instruments and Motorola
publish comprehensive data books for TTL and CMOS devices, as listed in
DO NOT COPY
Table 3-13. Both manufacturers keep up-to-date versions of their data books on
the web, at  www.ti.com  and  www.mot.com. Motorola also provides a nice intro-
duction to ECL design in their  MECL System Design Handbook  (publ. HB205,
rev. 1, 1988).
DO NOT COPYHowie Johnson?
BeeBop?
The JEDEC standards for digital logic levels can be found on JEDEC’s
web site, www.jedec.org. (Joint Electron Device Engineering Council). The
JEDEC standards for 3.3-V, 2.5-V, and 1.8-V logic were published in 1994,
1995, and 1997, respectively.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

180  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Ta b l e 3 - 1 3  Manufacturers’ logic data books.
Manufacturer  Order number Topics Title Year
DO NOT COPY
Texas Instrument  SDLD001  74, 74S, 74LS TTL  TTL Logic Data Book  1988
Texas Instrument  SDAD001C  74AS, 74ALS TTL  ALS/AS Logic Data Book  1995
Texas Instrument  SDFD001B  74F TTL  F Logic Data Book  1994
DO NOT COPYTexas Instrument  SCLD001D  74HC, 74HCT CMOS  HC/HCT Logic Data Book  1997
Texas Instrument  SCAD001D  74AC, 74ACT CMOS  AC/ACT Logic Data Book  1997
Texas Instrument  SCLD003A  74AHC, 74AHCT CMOS  AHC/AHCT Logic Data Book  1997
Motorola  DL121/D  74F, 74LSTTL  Fast and LSTTL Data  1989
DO NOT COPYMotorola  DL129/D  74HC, 74HCT  High-Speed CMOS Data  1988
Motorola  DL138/D  74AC, 74ACT  FACT Data  1988
Motorola  DL122/D  10K ECL  MECL Device Data  1989
DO NOT COPY
After seeing the results of last few decades’ amazing pace of development
in digital electronics, it’s easy to forget that logic circuits had an important place
in technologies that came before the transistor. In Chapter 5 of  Introduction to
the Methodology of Switching Circuits  (Van Nostrand, 1972), George J. Klir
shows how logic can be (and has been) performed by a variety of physical
DO NOT COPY
devices, including relays, vacuum tubes, and pneumatic systems.
Drill Problems
3.1  A particular logic family defines a  LOW  signal to be in the range 0.0–0.8 V, and
DO NOT COPY
a  HIGH  signal to be in the range 2.0–3.3 V. Under a positive-logic convention,
indicate the logic value associated with each of the following signal levels:
(a)  0.0 V  (b)  3.0 V  (c)  0.8 V  (d)  1.9 V
(e)  2.0 V  (f)  5.0 V  (g)  −0.7 V  (h)  −3.0 V
DO NOT COPY
3.2  Repeat Drill 3.1 using a negative-logic convention.
3.3  Discuss how a logic buffer amplifier is different from an audio amplifier.
3.4  Is a buffer amplifier equivalent to a 1-input  AND  gate or a 1-input  OR  gate?
3.5  True or false: For a given set of input values, a  NAND gate produces the opposite
DO NOT COPYoutput as a  NOR  gate.
3.6  True or false: The Simpsons are a bipolar logic family.
3.7  Write two completely different definitions of “gate” used in this chapter.
3.8  What kind of transistors are used in CMOS gates?
3.9  (Electrical engineers only.) Draw an equivalent circuit for a CMOS inverter using
DO NOT COPY
a single-pole, double-throw relay.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Drill Problems  181
VCC VCC
DO NOT COPYQ8 A
Q2
A
Q6
Q6
B Q4 Q8
Z
B DO NOT COPYQ4 Q2
Q3  Q1
Z
C Q1
C Q5
DO NOT COPY
D  Q5  Q7  Q3
D Q7
Figure X3.18
(a)  (b)
3.10DO NOT COPY  For a given silicon area, which is likely to be faster, a CMOS  NAND  gate or a
CMOS  NOR?
3.11  Define “fan-in” and “fanout.” Which one are you likely to have to calculate?
3.12  Draw the circuit diagram, function table, and logic symbol for a 3-input CMOS
NOR  gate in the style of Figure 3-16.
DO NOT COPY
3.13  Draw switch models in the style of Figure 3-14 for a 2-input CMOS NOR gate for
all four input combinations.
3.14  Draw a circuit diagram, function table, and logic symbol for a CMOS OR  gate in
the style of Figure 3-19.
3.15  Which has fewer transistors, a CMOS inverting gate or a noninverting gate?
DO NOT COPY
3.16  Name and draw the logic symbols of four different 4-input CMOS gates that each
use 8 transistors.
3.17  The circuit in Figure X3.18(a) is a type of  CMOS AND-OR-INVERT gate. Write a
function table for this circuit in the style of Figure 3-15(b), and a corresponding
DO NOT COPYlogic diagram using  AND  and  OR  gates and inverters.
3.18  The circuit in Figure X3.18(b) is a type of CMOS  OR-AND-INVERT  gate. Write
function table for this circuit in the style of Figure 3-15(b), and a corresponding
logic diagram using  AND  and  OR  gates and inverters.
3.19  How is it that perfume can be bad for digital designers?
3.20DO NOT COPY  How much high-state DC noise margin is available in a CMOS inverter whose
transfer characteristic under worst-case conditions looks like Figure 3-25? How
much low-state DC noise margin is available? (Assume standard 1.5-V and 3.5-V
thresholds for  LOW  and  HIGH.)
3.21  Using the data sheet in Table 3-3, determine the worst-case LOW-state and  HIGH-
DO NOT COPYstate DC noise margins of the 74HC00. State any assumptions required by your
answer.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

182  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
3.22  Section 3.5 defines seven different electrical parameters for CMOS circuits.
Using the data sheet in Table 3-3, determine the worst-case value of each of these
for the 74HC00. State any assumptions required by your answer.
DO NOT COPY
3.23  Based on the conventions and definitions in Section 3.4, if the current at a device
output is specified as a negative number, is the output sourcing current or sinking
current?
3.24  For each of the following resistive loads, determine whether the output drive
specifications of the 74HC00 over the commercial operating range are exceeded.
DO NOT COPY
(Refer to Table 3-3, and use  VOHmin  =  2.4 V and  VCC  =  5.0 V.)
(a)  120  Ω  to  VCC  (b)  270  Ω  to  VCC  and 330  Ω  to GND
(c)  1 KΩ to GND  (d)  150  Ω  to  VCC  and 150  Ω  to GND
(e)  100  Ω  to  VCC  (f)  75  Ω  to  VCC  and 150  Ω  to GND
DO NOT COPY
(g)  75  Ω  to  VCC  (h)  270  Ω  to  VCC  and 150  Ω  to GND
3.25  Across the range of valid  HIGH input levels, 2.0–5.0 V, at what input level would
you expect the 74FCT257T (Table 3-3) to consume the most power?
3.26  Determine the  LOW-state and  HIGH-state DC fanout of the 74FCT257T when it
DO NOT COPYdrives 74LS00-like inputs. (Refer to Tables 3-3 and 3-12.)
3.27  Estimate the “on” resistances of the p-channel and  n-channel output transistors of
the 74FCT257T using information in Table 3-3.
3.28  Under what circumstances is it safe to allow an unused CMOS input to float?
3.29  Explain “latch up” and the circumstances under which it occurs.
DO NOT COPY
3.30  Explain why putting all the decoupling capacitors in one corner of a printed-cir-
cuit board is not a good idea.
3.31  When is it important to hold hands with a friend?
3.32  Name the two components of CMOS logic gate’s delay. Which one is most affect-
DO NOT COPYed by load capacitance?
3.33  Determine the  RC  time constant for each of the following resistor-capacitor
combinations:
(a)  R  =  100  Ω,  C  =  50 pF  (b)  R  =  330  Ω,  C  =  150 pF
(c)  R  =  1 KΩ,  C  =  30 pF  (d)  R  =  4.7 KΩ,  C  =  100 pF
DO NOT COPY
3.34  Besides delay, what other characteristic(s) of a CMOS circuit are affected by load
capacitance?
3.35  Explain the  IC  formula in footnote 5 in Table 3-3 in terms of concepts presented
in Sections 3.5 and 3.6.
DO NOT COPY
3.36  It is possible to operate 74AC CMOS devices with a 3.3-volt power supply. How
much power does this typically save, compared to 5-volt operation?
3.37  A particular Schmitt-trigger inverter has  VILmax  = 0.8 V,  VIHmin  = 2.0 V,  VT+  =
1.6 V, and  VT−  =  1.3 V. How much hysteresis does it have?
3.38  Why are three-state outputs usually designed to “turn off” faster than they “turn
DO NOT COPY
on”?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Drill Problems  183
3.39  Discuss the pros and cons of larger versus smaller pull-up resistors for open-drain
CMOS outputs or open-collector TTL outputs.
3.40  A particular LED has a voltage drop of about 2.0 V in the “on” state, and requires
DO NOT COPY
about 5 mA of current for normal brightness. Determine an appropriate value for
the pull-up resistor when the LED is connected as shown in Figure 3-52.
3.41  How does the answer for Drill 3.39 change if the LED is connected as shown in
Figure 3-53(a)?
3.42  A wired-AND  function is obtained simply by tying two open-drain or open-col-
DO NOT COPY
lector outputs together, without going through another level of transistor circuitry.
How is it, then, that a wired-AND  function can actually be slower than a discrete
AND  gate? (Hint:  Recall the title of a Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles movie.)
3.43  Which CMOS or TTL logic family in this chapter has the strongest output driving
capability?
DO NOT COPY
3.44  Concisely summarize the difference between HC and HCT logic families. The
same concise statement should apply to AC versus ACT.
3.45  Why don’t the specifications for FCT devices include parameters like  VOLmaxC
that apply to CMOS loads, as HCT and ACT specifications do?
3.46DO NOT COPY  How does FCT-T devices reduce power consumption compared to FCT devices?
3.47  How many diodes are required for an  n-input diode  AND  gate?
3.48  True or false: A TTL  NOR  gate uses diode logic.
3.49  Are TTL outputs more capable of sinking current or sourcing current?
3.50  Compute the maximum fanout for each of the following cases of a TTL output
DO NOT COPY
driving multiple TTL inputs. Also indicate how much “excess” driving capability
is available in the  LOW  or  HIGH  state for each case.
(a)  74LS driving 74LS  (b)  74LS driving 74S
(c)  74S driving 74AS  (d)  74F driving 74S
DO NOT COPY
(e)  74AS driving 74AS  (f)  74AS driving 74F
(g)  74ALS driving 74F  (h)  74AS driving 74ALS
3.51  Which resistor dissipates more power, the pull-down for an unused LS-TTL
NOR-gate input, or the pull-up for an unused LS-TTL  NAND-gate input? Use the
DO NOT COPYminimum allowable resistor value in each case.
3.52  Which would you expect to be faster, a TTL AND gate or a TTL AND-OR-INVERT
gate? Why?
3.53  Describe the main benefit and the main drawback of TTL gates that use Schottky
transistors.
DO NOT COPY
3.54  Using the data sheet in Table 3-12, determine the worst-case  LOW-state and
HIGH-state DC noise margins of the 74LS00.
3.55  Section 3.10 defines eight different electrical parameters for TTL circuits. Using
the data sheet in Table 3-12, determine the worst-case value of each of these for
the 74LS00.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

184  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
3.56  For each of the following resistive loads, determine whether the output drive
specifications of the 74LS00 over the commercial operating range are exceeded.
(Refer to Table 3-12, and use  VOLmax  =  0.5 V and  VCC  =  5.0 V.)
DO NOT COPY
(a)  470  Ω  to  VCC  (b)  330  Ω  to  VCC  and 470  Ω  to GND
(c)  10 KΩ  to GND  (d)  390  Ω  to  VCC  and 390  Ω  to GND
(e)  600  Ω  to  VCC  (f)  510  Ω  to  VCC  and 510  Ω  to GND
(g)  4.7 KΩ  to GND  (h)  220  Ω  to  VCC  and 330  Ω  to GND
DO NOT COPY
3.57  Compute the LOW-state and  HIGH-state DC noise margins for each of the follow-
ing cases of a TTL output driving a TTL-compatible CMOS input, or vice versa.
(a)  74HCT driving 74LS  (b)  74VHCT driving 74AS
(c)  74LS driving 74HCT  (d)  74S driving 74VHCT
DO NOT COPY
3.58  Compute the maximum fanout for each of the following cases of a TTL-compat-
ible CMOS output driving multiple inputs in a TTL logic family. Also indicate
how much “excess” driving capability is available in the  LOW  or  HIGH  state for
each case.
DO NOT COPY
(a)  74HCT driving 74LS  (b)  74HCT driving 74S
(c)  74VHCT driving 74AS  (d)  74VHCT driving 74LS
3.59  For a given load capacitance and transition rate, which logic family in this chapter
has the lowest dynamic power dissipation?
DO NOT COPY
Exercises
3.60  Design a CMOS circuit that has the functional behavior shown in Figure X3.60.
(Hint:  Only six transistors are required.)
DO NOT COPY
Figure X3.60 A
Z
B
C
3.61  Design a CMOS circuit that has the functional behavior shown in Figure X3.61.
DO NOT COPY
(Hint:  Only six transistors are required.)
Figure X3.61 A
Z
B
C
DO NOT COPY
3.62  Draw a circuit diagram, function table, and logic symbol in the style of
Figure 3-19 for a CMOS gate with two inputs  A  and  B  and an output  Z, where Z
= 1 if  A  = 0 and  B  = 1, and  Z  = 0 otherwise. (Hint:  Only six transistors are
required.)
DO NOT COPY3.63  Draw a circuit diagram, function table, and logic symbol in the style of
Figure 3-19 for a CMOS gate with two inputs  A  and  B  and an output  Z, where
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  185
Z = 0 if  A  = 1 and  B  = 0, and  Z  = 1 otherwise. (Hint:  Only six transistors are
needed.)
3.64  Draw a figure showing the logical structure of an 8-input CMOS  NOR  gate,
DO NOT COPY
assuming that at most 4-input gate circuits are practical. Using your general
knowledge of CMOS electrical characteristics, select a circuit structure that min-
imizes the  NOR  gate’s propagation delay for a given area of silicon, and explain
why this is so.
3.65  The circuit designers of TTL-compatible CMOS families presumably could have
DO NOT COPY
made the voltage drop across the “on” transistor under load in the  HIGH  state as
little as it is in the  LOW  state, simply by making the  p-channel transistors bigger.
Why do you suppose they didn’t bother to do this?
3.66  How much current and power are “wasted” in Figure 3-32(b)?
3.67  Perform a detailed calculation of  VOUT  in Figures 3-34 and 3-33. (Hint:  Create a
DO NOT COPY
Thévenin equivalent for the CMOS inverter in each figure.)
3.68  Consider the dynamic behavior of a CMOS output driving a given capacitive
load. If the resistance of the charging path is double the resistance of the discharg-
ing path, is the rise time exactly twice the fall time? If not, what other factors
affect the transition times?
DO NOT COPY
3.69  Analyze the fall time of the CMOS inverter output of Figure 3-37, assuming that
RL  =  1 kΩ  and  VL =  2.5 V. Compare your answer with the results of Section 3.6.1
and explain.
3.70  Repeat Exercise 3.68 for rise time.
3.71DO NOT COPY  Assuming that the transistors in an FCT CMOS three-state buffer are perfect,
zero-delay on-off devices that switch at an input threshold of 1.5 V, determine the
value of  tPLZ  for the test circuit and waveforms in Figure 3-24. (Hint:  You have
to determine the time using an  RC  time constant.) Explain the difference between
your result and the specifications in Table 3-3.
3.72DO NOT COPY  Repeat Exercise 3.70 for  tPHZ .
3.73  Using the specifications in Table 3-6, estimate the “on” resistances of the p-chan-
nel and  n-channel transistors in 74AC-series CMOS logic.
3.74  Create a 4×4×2×2 matrix of worst-case DC noise margins for the following
CMOS interfacing situations: an (HC, HCT, VHC, or VHCT) output driving an
DO NOT COPY(HC, HCT, VHC, or VHCT) input with a (CMOS, TTL) load in the (LOW, HIGH)
state; Figure X3.74 illustrates. (Hints:  There are 64 different combinations to
examine, but many give identical results. Some combinations yield negative
margins.)
3.75  In the LED example in Section 3.7.5, a designer chose a resistor value of 300  Ω,
DO NOT COPYand found that the open-drain gate was able to maintain its output at 0.1 V while
driving the LED. How much current flows through the LED, and how much
power is dissipated by the pull-up resistor in this case?
3.76  Consider a CMOS 8-bit binary counter (Section 8.4) clocked at 16 MHz. For the
purposes of computing dynamic power dissipation, what is the transition frequen-
DO NOT COPYcy of least significant bit? Of the most significant bit? For the purposes of
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

186  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
Input
HC  HCT  VHC  VHCT
Output
Figure X3.74 CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL
DO NOT COPYHC
CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH
CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL
HCT
CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH
Key:
CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL
CL = CMOS load, LOW VHC
CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH
CH = CMOS load, HIGH
DO NOT COPYTL = TTL load, LOW CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL CL  TL
VHCT
TH = TTL load, HIGH CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH CH  TH
determining the dynamic power dissipation of the eight output bits, what frequen-
cy should be used?
DO NOT COPY3.77  Using only  AND  and  NOR gates, draw a logic diagram for the logic function per-
formed by the circuit in Figure 3-55.
3.78  Calculate the approximate output voltage at  Z  in Figure 3-56, assuming that the
gates are HCT-series CMOS.
3.79  Redraw the circuit diagram of a CMOS 3-state buffer in Figure 3-48 using actual
DO NOT COPYtransistors instead of  NAND,  NOR, and inverter symbols. Can you find a circuit
for the same function that requires a smaller total number of transistors? If so,
draw it.
3.80  Modify the CMOS 3-state buffer circuit in Figure 3-48 so that the output is in the
High-Z state when the enable input is  HIGH. The modified circuit should require
DO NOT COPYno more transistors than the original.
3.81  Using information in Table 3-3, estimate how much current can flow through
each output pin when the outputs of two different 74FCT257Ts are fighting.
3.82  A computer system made by the Green PC Company had ten LED “status OK”
indicators, each of which was turned on by an open-collector output in the style
DO NOT COPY
of Figure 3-52. However, in order to save a few cents, the logic designer connect-
ed the anodes of all ten LEDs together and replaced the ten, now parallel, 300-Ω
pull-up resistors with a single 30-Ω  resistor. This worked fine in the lab, but a big
problem was found after volume shipments began. Explain.
3.83  Show that at a given power-supply voltage, an FCT-type  ICCD  specification can
DO NOT COPY
be derived from an HCT/ACT-type  CPD  specification, and vice versa.
3.84  If both  VZ  and  V_B  in Figure 3-65(b) are 4.6 V, can we get  VC  =  5.2 V? Explain.
3.85  Modify the program in Table 3-10 to account for leakage current in the OFF state.
3.86  Assuming “ideal” conditions, what is the minimum voltage that will be recog-
nized as a  HIGH  in the TTL  NAND  gate in Figure 3-75 with one input  LOW  and
DO NOT COPY
the other  HIGH?
3.87  Assuming “ideal” conditions, what is the maximum voltage that will be recog-
nized as a  LOW  in the TTL  NAND  gate in Figure 3-75 with both inputs  HIGH?
3.88  Find a commercial TTL part that can source 40 mA in the  HIGH  state. What is its
DO NOT COPYapplication?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  187
+ 5.0 V
R1  R2
DO NOT COPY
74LS01
74LS01
W G
Figure X3.92
X F
74LS01
DO NOT COPY
Y
Z
3.89  What happens if you try to drive an LED with its cathode grounded and its anode
connected to a TTL totem-pole output, analogous to Figure 3-53 for CMOS?
DO NOT COPY
3.90  What happens if you try to drive a 12-volt relay with a TTL totem-pole output?
3.91  Suppose that a single pull-up resistor to +5 V is used to provide a constant-1 logic
source to 15 different 74LS00 inputs. What is the maximum value of this resistor?
How much  HIGH-state DC noise margin are you providing in this case?
3.92  The circuit in Figure X3.92 uses open-collector  NAND  gates to perform “wired
DO NOT COPY
logic.” Write a truth table for output signal  F  and, if you’ve read Section 4.2, a
logic expression for  F  as a function of the circuit inputs.
3.93  What is the maximum allowable value for  R1  in Figure X3.92? Assume that a 0.7
V  HIGH-state noise margin is required. The 74LS01 has the specs shown in the
74LS column of Table 3-11, except that  IOHmax  is 100 μA, a leakage current that
DO NOT COPY
flows  into  the output in the  HIGH  state.
3.94  A logic designer found a problem in a certain circuit’s function after the circuit
had been released to production and 1000 copies of it built. A portion of the cir-
cuit is shown in Figure X3.94 in black; all of the gates are 74LS00  NAND  gates.
The logic designer fixed the problem by adding the two diodes shown in color.
DO NOT COPY
What do the diodes do? Describe both the logical effects of this change on the cir-
cuit’s function and the electrical effects on the circuit’s noise margins.
+5V
DO NOT COPYFigure X3.94
X
P
DO NOT COPY
Q
R Y
S
T
DO NOT COPYU Z
V
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

188  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
+5V Thevenin
Thevenin
equivalent of
termination
termination
R1
DO NOT COPY
R
R2
Figure X3.95 bus bus V
(a) (b)
DO NOT COPY
3.95  A  Thévenin termination  for an open-collector or three-state bus has the structure
shown in Figure X3.95(a). The idea is that, by selecting appropriate values of  R1
and  R2, a designer can obtain a circuit equivalent to the termination in (b) for any
DO NOT COPY
desired values of  V and  R. The value of  V determines the voltage on the bus when
no device is driving it, and the value of  R  is selected to match the characteristic
impedance of the bus for transmission-line purposes (Section 12.4). For each of
the following pairs of  V  and  R, determine the required values of  R1  and  R2.
DO NOT COPY(a)  V  =  2.75,  R  =  148.5  (b)  V  =  2.7,  R  =  180
(c)  V  =  3.0,  R  =  130  (d)  V  =  2.5,  R  =  75
3.96  For each of the  R1  and  R2  pairs in Exercise 3.95, determine whether the termina-
tion can be properly driven by a three-state output in each of the following logic
families: 74LS, 74S, 74ACT. For proper operation, the family’s IOL and IOH specs
DO NOT COPY
must not be exceeded when  VOL  =  VOLmax  and  VOH  =  V OHmin, respectively.
3.97  Suppose that the output signal  F  in Figure 3.92 drives the inputs of two 74S04
inverters. Compute the minimum and maximum allowable values of  R2, assum-
ing that a 0.7 V  HIGH-state noise margin is required.
3.98  A 74LS125 is a buffer with a three-state output. When enabled, the output can
DO NOT COPY
sink 24 mA in the  LOW  state and source 2.6 mA in the  HIGH  state. When dis-
abled, the output has a leakage current of  ±20 μA (the sign depends on the output
voltage—plus if the output is pulled  HIGH  by other devices, minus if it’s  LOW).
Suppose a system is designed with multiple modules connected to a bus, where
each module has a single 74LS125 to drive the bus, and one 74LS04 to receive
DO NOT COPY
information on the bus. What is the maximum number of modules that can be
connected to the bus without exceeding the 74LS125’s specs?
3.99  Repeat Exercise 3.97, this time assuming that a single pull-up resistor is connect-
ed from the bus to +5 V to guarantee that the bus is  HIGH  when no device is
driving it. Calculate the maximum possible value of the pull-up resistor, and the
DO NOT COPY
number of modules that can be connected to the bus.
3.100 Find the circuit design in a TTL data book for an actual three-state gate, and
explain how it works.
3.101 Using the graphs in a TTL data book, develop some rules of thumb for derating
the maximum propagation delay specification of LS-TTL under nonoptimal con-
DO NOT COPY
ditions of power-supply voltage, temperature, and loading.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  189
C
X
DO NOT COPY
Y
Figure X3.102
Z
DO NOT COPY
3.102 Determine the total power dissipation of the circuit in Figure 3.102 as function of
transition frequency  f  for two realizations: (a) using 74LS gates; (b) using 74HC
gates. Assume that input capacitance is 3 pF for a TTL gate and 7 pF for a CMOS
gate, that a 74LS gate has an internal power dissipation capacitance of 20 pF, and
DO NOT COPYthat there is an additional 20 pF of stray wiring capacitance in the circuit. Also
assume that the X, Y, and Z  inputs are always HIGH, and that input C is driven with
a CMOS-level square wave with frequency  f. Other information that you need for
this problem can be found in Tables 3-5 and 3-11. State any other assumptions
that you make. At what frequency does the TTL circuit dissipate less power than
the CMOS circuit?
DO NOT COPY
3.103 It is possible to drive one or more 74AC or 74HC inputs reliably with a 74LS TTL
output by providing an external resistor to pull the TTL output all the way up to
VCC in the HIGH state. What are the design issues in choosing a value for this pull-
up resistor?
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

190  Chapter 3  Digital Circuits
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

c h a p t e r
DO NOT
4
COPY
DO NOT
Combinational
Logic Design PrinciplesCOPY
ogic circuits are classified into two types, “combinational” and
“sequential.” A  combinational logic circuit  is one whose outputs
DO NOT
depend only on its current inputs. The rotary channel selector knob
L
on an old-fashioned television is like a combinational circuit—its
“output” selects a channel based only on the current position of the
knob (“input”).
The outputs of aCOPY  sequential logic circuit  depend not only on the current
inputs, but also on the past sequence of inputs, possibly arbitrarily far back
in time. The channel selector controlled by the up and down pushbuttons on
a TV or VCR is a sequential circuit—the channel selection depends on the
past sequence of up/down pushes, at least since when you started viewing 10
hours before, and perhaps as far back as when you first powered-up theDO NOT
device. Sequential circuits are discussed in Chapters xx through yy.
A combinational circuit may contain an arbitrary number of logic
gates and inverters but no feedback loops. A  feedback loop  is a signal path of
a circuit that allows the output of a gate to propagate back to the input of that
COPY
same gate; such a loop generally creates sequential circuit behavior.
In combinational circuit  analysis  we start with a logic diagram, and
proceed to a formal description of the function performed by that circuit,
such as a truth table or a logic expression. In  synthesis, we do the reverse,
starting with a formal description and proceeding to a logic diagram.
DO NOT
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 191
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

192  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
SYNTHESIS VS. Logic circuit design is a superset of synthesis, since in a real design problem we usu-
DESIGN ally start out with an informal (word or thought) description of the circuit. Often the
DO NOT COPY
most challenging and creative part of design is to formalize the circuit description,
defining the circuit’s input and output signals and specifying its functional behavior
by means of truth tables and equations. Once we’ve created the formal circuit
description, we can usually follow a “turn-the-crank” synthesis procedure to obtain
a logic diagram for a circuit with the required functional behavior. The material in
DO NOT COPY
the first four sections of this chapter is the basis for “turn-the-crank” procedures,
whether the crank is turned by hand or by a computer. The last two sections describe
actual design languages, ABEL and VHDL. When we create a design using one of
these languages, a computer program can perform the synthesis steps for us. In later
chapters we’ll encounter many examples of the real design process.
DO NOT COPY
Combinational circuits may have one or more outputs. Most analysis and
synthesis techniques can be extended in an obvious way from single-output to
DO NOT COPYmultiple-output circuits (e.g., “Repeat these steps for each output”). We’ll also
point out how some techniques can be extended in a not-so-obvious way for
improved effectiveness in the multiple-output case.
The purpose of this chapter is to give you a solid theoretical foundation for
the analysis and synthesis of combinational logic circuits, a foundation that will
DO NOT COPY
be doubly important later when we move on to sequential circuits. Although
most of the analysis and synthesis procedures in this chapter are automated now-
adays by computer-aided design tools, you need a basic understanding of the
fundamentals to use the tools and to figure out what’s wrong when you get unex-
pected or undesirable results.
DO NOT COPY
With the fundamentals well in hand, it is appropriate next to understand
how combinational functions can be expressed and analyzed using hardware
description languages (HDLs). So, the last two sections of this chapter introduce
basic features of ABEL and VHDL, which we’ll use to design for all kinds of
logic circuits throughout the balance of the text.
DO NOT COPY
Before launching into a discussion of combinational logic circuits, we
must introduce switching algebra, the fundamental mathematical tool for ana-
lyzing and synthesizing logic circuits of all types.
DO NOT COPY
4.1 Switching Algebra
Formal analysis techniques for digital circuits have their roots in the work of an
English mathematician, George Boole. In 1854, he invented a two-valued alge-
Boolean algebra braic system, now called  Boolean algebra, to “give expression . . . to the
DO NOT COPYfundamental laws of reasoning in the symbolic language of a Calculus.” Using
this system, a philosopher, logician, or inhabitant of the planet Vulcan can for-
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  193
mulate  propositions  that  are  true  or  false,  combine  them  to  make  new
propositions, and determine the truth or falsehood of the new propositions. For
example, if we agree that “People who haven’t studied this material are either
DO NOT COPY
failures or not nerds,” and “No computer designer is a failure,” then we can
answer questions like “If you’re a nerdy computer designer, then have you
already studied this?”
Long after Boole, in 1938, Bell Labs researcher Claude E. Shannon
showed how to adapt Boolean algebra to analyze and describe the behavior of
DO NOT COPY
circuits built from relays, the most commonly used digital logic elements of that
time. In Shannon’s  switching algebra, the condition of a relay contact, open or switching algebra
closed, is represented by a variable  X  that can have one of two possible values,
0 or 1. In today’s logic technologies, these values correspond to a wide variety of
physical conditions—voltageDO NOT COPY HIGH  or LOW, light off or on, capacitor discharged
or charged, fuse blown or intact, and so on—as we detailed in Table 3-1 on
page 77.
In the remainder of this section, we develop the switching algebra directly,
using “first principles” and what we already know about the behavior of logic
elements (gates and inverters). For more historical and/or mathematical treat-DO NOT COPY
ments of this material, consult the References.
4.1.1 Axioms
In switching algebra we use a symbolic variable, such as  X, to represent the con-
DO NOT COPY
dition of a logic signal. A logic signal is in one of two possible conditions—low
or high, off or on, and so on, depending on the technology. We say that  X  has the
value “0” for one of these conditions and “1” for the other.
For example, with the CMOS and TTL logic circuits in Chapter 3, the
positive-logic convention  dictates that we associate the value “0” with a  LOW positive-logic
DO NOT COPY
voltage and “1” with a  HIGH  voltage. The  negative-logic convention  makes the convention
opposite association: 0  =  HIGH  and 1  =  LOW. However, the choice of positive negative-logic
or negative logic has no effect on our ability to develop a consistent algebraic convention
description of circuit behavior; it only affects details of the physical-to-algebraic
abstraction, as we’ll explain later in our discussion of “duality.” For the moment,
DO NOT COPY
we may ignore the physical realities of logic circuits and pretend that they
operate directly on the logic symbols 0 and 1.
The  axioms  (or  postulates) of a mathematical system are a minimal set of axiom
basic definitions that we assume to be true, from which all other information postulate
about the system can be derived. The first two axioms of switching algebraDO NOT COPY
embody the “digital abstraction” by formally stating that a variable X can take on
only one of two values:
(A1)  X  =  0  if  X  ≠  1  (A1′)  X  =  1  if  X  ≠  0
Notice that we stated these axioms as a pair, with the only difference betweenDO NOT COPY
A1 and A1′ being the interchange of the symbols 0 and 1. This is a characteristic
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

194  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
of all the axioms of switching algebra, and is the basis of the “duality” principle
that we’ll study later.
In Section 3.3.3 we showed the design of an inverter, a logic circuit whose
DO NOT COPY
complement output signal level is the opposite (or  complement) of its input signal level. We
prime (′) use a  prime (′) to denote an inverter’s function. That is, if a variable  X  denotes an
inverter’s input signal, then  X′  denotes the value of a signal on the inverter’s out-
put. This notation is formally specified in the second pair of axioms:
DO NOT COPY(A2)  If  X  =  0, then  X′  =  1  (A2’)  If  X  =  1, then  X′  =  0
As shown in Figure 4-1, the output of an inverter with input signal  X  may
have an arbitrary signal name, say  Y. However, algebraically, we write  Y  =  X′  to
say “signal  Y  always has the opposite value as signal  X.” The prime (′) is an
algebraic operator algebraic operator, and  X′  is an  expression, which you can read as “X  prime” or
DO NOT COPY
expression “NOT  X.” This usage is analogous to what you’ve learned in programming
NOT  operation languages, where if J  is an integer variable, then −J  is an expression whose value
is 0  −  J. Although this may seem like a small point, you’ll learn that the distinc-
tion between signal names (X, Y), expressions (X′), and equations (Y  = X′) is very
DO NOT COPYimportant when we study documentation standards and software tools for logic
design. In the logic diagrams in this book, we maintain this distinction by writ-
ing signal names in black and expressions in color.
Figure 4-1
DO NOT COPY
Signal naming and algebraic X  Y = X′
notation for an inverter.
In Section 3.3.6 we showed how to build a 2-input CMOS  AND  gate, a
DO NOT COPYcircuit whose output is 1 if both of its inputs are 1. The function of a 2-input  AND
logical multiplication gate is sometimes called  logical multiplication  and is symbolized algebraically
multiplication dot (⋅) by a multiplication dot (⋅). That is, an  AND  gate with inputs X and  Y has an output
signal whose value is  X  ⋅  Y, as shown in Figure 4-2(a). Some authors, especially
mathematicians and logicians, denote logical multiplication with a wedge
DO NOT COPY
X  ∨  Y). We follow standard engineering practice by using the dot (X  ⋅Y). When
NOTE ON The notations X, ~X, and ¬X are also used by some authors to denote the complement
DO NOT COPYNOTATION of  X. The overbar notation is probably the most widely used and the best looking
typographically. However, we use the prime notation to get you used to writing logic
expressions on a single text line without the more graphical overbar, and to force you
to parenthesize complex complemented subexpressions—because this is what you’ll
have to do when you use HDLs and other tools.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  195
Figure 4-2
Signal naming and
X X
Z = X • Y  Z = X + Y algebraic notation:
DO NOT COPYY  Y 
(a)  AND  gate;
(a)  (b) (b)  OR  gate.
we study hardware design languages (HDLs), we’ll encounter several other
DO NOT COPY
symbols that are used to denote the same thing.
We also described in Section 3.3.6 how to build a 2-input CMOS  OR  gate,
a circuit whose output is 1 if either of its inputs is 1. The function of a 2-input  OR
gate is sometimes called  logical addition  and is symbolized algebraically by a logical addition
plus sign (+). An  OR  gate with inputs  X  and  Y  has an output signal whose value
DO NOT COPY
is  X  +  Y, as shown in Figure 4-2(b). Some authors denote logical addition with a
vee (X  ∧  Y), but we follow the standard engineering practice of using the plus
sign (X  +  Y). Once again, other symbols may be used in HDLs. By convention,
in a logic expression involving both multiplication and addition, multiplication
has  precedence, just as in integer expressions in conventional programming lan-
DO NOT COPYprecedence
guages. That is, the expression  W  ⋅  X  +  Y  ⋅  Z  is equivalent to (W  ⋅  X)  +  (Y  ⋅  Z).
The last three pairs of axioms state the formal definitions of the  AND  and AND  operation
OR  operations by listing the output produced by each gate for each possible OR  operation
input combination:
DO NOT COPY
(A3)  0  ⋅  0  =  0  (A3′)  1  +  1  =  1
(A4)  1  ⋅  1  =  1  (A4′)  0  +  0  =  0
(A5)  0  ⋅  1  =  1  ⋅  0  =  0  (A5′)  1  +  0  =  0  +  1  =  1
The five pairs of axioms, A1–A5 and A1′–A5′, completely define switching
DO NOT COPY
algebra. All other facts about the system can be proved using these axioms as a
starting point.
DO NOT COPY
JUXT A MINUTE…  Older texts use simple  juxtaposition  (XY) to denote logical multiplication, but we
don’t. In general, juxtaposition is a clear notation only when signal names are limited
to a single character. Otherwise, is  XY  a logical product or a two-character signal
name? One-character variable names are common in algebra, but in real digital
DO NOT COPYdesign problems, we prefer to use multicharacter signal names that mean something.
Thus, we need a separator between names, and the separator might just as well be a
multiplication dot rather than a space. The HDL equivalent of the multiplication dot
(often * or &) is absolutely required when logic formulas are written in a hardware
design language.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

196  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 4 - 1
(T1)  X  +  0  =  X  (T1′ )  X  ⋅  1  =  X  (Identities)
Switching-algebra
(T2)  X  +  1  =  1  (T2′ )  X  ⋅  0  =  0  (Null elements)
theorems with one
DO NOT COPYvariable. (T3)  X  +  X  =  X  (T3′ )  X  ⋅  X  =  X  (Idempotency)
(T4)  (X′)′  =  X  (Involution)
(T5)  X  +  X′  =  1  (T5′ )  X  ⋅  X′  =  0  (Complements)
DO NOT COPY
4.1.2 Single-Variable Theorems
During the analysis or synthesis of logic circuits, we often write algebraic
expressions that characterize a circuit’s actual or desired behavior. Switching-
theorem algebra  theorems  are statements, known to be always true, that allow us to
DO NOT COPYmanipulate algebraic expressions to allow simpler analysis or more efficient
synthesis of the corresponding circuits. For example, the theorem  X  +  0  =  X
allows us to substitute every occurrence of  X  +  0 in an expression with X.
Table 4-1 lists switching-algebra theorems involving a single variable  X.
How do we know that these theorems are true? We can either prove them our-
DO NOT COPYselves or take the word of someone who has. OK, we’re in college now, let’s
learn how to prove them.
Most theorems in switching algebra are exceedingly simple to prove using
perfect induction a technique called  perfect induction. Axiom A1 is the key to this technique—
since a switching variable can take on only two different values, 0 and 1, we can
DO NOT COPY
prove a theorem involving a single variable  X  by proving that it is true for both
X  =  0 and  X  =  1. For example, to prove theorem T1, we make two substitutions:
[X  =  0]  0  +  0  =  0  true, according to axiom A4′
[X  =  1]  1  +  0  =  1  true, according to axiom A5′
DO NOT COPY
All of the theorems in Table 4-1 can be proved using perfect induction, as you’re
asked to do in the Drills 4.2 and 4.3.
4.1.3 Two- and Three-Variable Theorems
DO NOT COPYSwitching-algebra theorems with two or three variables are listed in Table 4-2.
Each of these theorems is easily proved by perfect induction, by evaluating the
theorem statement for the four possible combinations of  X  and  Y, or the eight
possible combinations of  X,  Y, and  Z.
The first two theorem pairs concern commutativity and associativity of
DO NOT COPYlogical addition and multiplication and are identical to the commutative and
associative laws for addition and multiplication of integers and reals. Taken
together, they indicate that the parenthesization or order of terms in a logical
sum or logical product is irrelevant. For example, from a strictly algebraic point
of view, an expression such as  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  is ambiguous; it should be written as
DO NOT COPY
(W  ⋅  (X  ⋅  (Y  ⋅  Z))) or (((W  ⋅  X)  ⋅  Y)  ⋅  Z) or (W  ⋅  X)  ⋅  (Y  ⋅  Z) (see Exercise 4.29).
But the theorems tell us that the ambiguous form of the expression is OK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  197
Ta b l e 4 - 2  Switching-algebra theorems with two or three variables.
(T6)  X  +  Y  =  Y  +  X  (T6′)  X  ⋅  Y  =  Y  ⋅  X  (Commutativity)
DO NOT COPY
(T7)  (X  +  Y)  +  Z  =  X  +  (Y  +  Z)  (T7′)  (X  ⋅  Y)  ⋅  Z  =  X  ⋅  (Y  ⋅  Z)  (Associativity)
(T8)  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Z  =  X  ⋅  (Y  +  Z)  (T8′)  (X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X  +  Z)  =  X  +  Y  ⋅  Z  (Distributivity)
(T9)  X  +  X  ⋅  Y  =  X  (T9′)  X  ⋅  (X  +  Y)=X  (Covering)
(T10)DO NOT COPY  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Y′  =  X  (T10′)  (X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X  +  Y’)=X  (Combining)
(T11)  X  ⋅  Y  +  X′  ⋅  Z  +  Y  ⋅  Z  =  X  ⋅  Y  +  X′  ⋅  Z  (Consensus)
(T11′)  (X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X′  +  Z)  ⋅  (Y  +  Z)  =  (X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X′ +  Z)
DO NOT COPY
because we get the same results in any case. We even could have rearranged the
order of the variables (e.g.,  X  ⋅  Z  ⋅  Y  ⋅  W) and gotten the same results.
As trivial as this discussion may seem, it is very important because it forms
the theoretical basis for using logic gates with more than two inputs. We defined
⋅  andDO NOT COPY  +  as  binary operators—operators that combine  two  variables. Yet we use binary operator
3-input, 4-input, and larger  AND  and  OR  gates in practice. The theorems tell us
we can connect gate inputs in any order; in fact, many printed-circuit-board and
ASIC layout programs take advantage of this. We can use either one  n-input gate
or (n −1) 2-input gates interchangeably, though propagation delay and cost are
DO NOT COPY
likely to be higher with multiple 2-input gates.
Theorem T8 is identical to the distributive law for integers and reals—that
is, logical multiplication distributes over logical addition. Hence, we can “multi-
ply out” an expression to obtain a sum-of-products form, as in the example
below:
DO NOT COPY
V  ⋅  (W  +  X)  ⋅  (Y  +  Z)  =  V  ⋅  W  ⋅  Y  +  V  ⋅  W  ⋅  Z  +  V  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  V  ⋅  X  ⋅  Z
However, switching algebra also has the unfamiliar property that the reverse is
true—logical addition distributes over logical multiplication—as demonstrated
by theorem T8′. Thus, we can also “add out” an expression to obtain a product-
DO NOT COPY
of-sums form:
(V  ⋅  W  ⋅  X)  +  (Y  ⋅  Z)  =  (V  +  Y)  ⋅  (V  +  Z)  ⋅  (W  +  Y)  ⋅  (W  +  Z)  ⋅  (X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X  +  Z)
Theorems T9 and T10 are used extensively in the minimization of logic
functions. For example, if the subexpression  X  +  X  ⋅  Y  appears in a logic expres-
sion, theDO NOT COPY  covering theorem  T9 says that we need only include  X  in the covering theorem
expression;  X  is said to  cover  X  ⋅  Y. The  combining theorem  T10 says that if the cover
subexpression  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Y′  appears in an expression, we can replace it with  X. combining theorem
Since  Y  must be 0 or 1, either way the original subexpression is 1 if and only if  X
is 1.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

198  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Although we could easily prove T9 by perfect induction, the truth of T9 is
more obvious if we prove it using the other theorems that we’ve proved so far:
1  (according to T1 )
DO NOT COPYX  +  X  ⋅  Y  =  X  ⋅  +  X  ⋅  Y  ′
=  X  ⋅  (1  +  Y)  (according to T8)
=  X  ⋅  1  (according to T2)
=  X  (according to T1′)
DO NOT COPYLikewise, the other theorems can be used to prove T10, where the key step is to
use T8 to rewrite the left-hand side as  X  ⋅  (Y  +  Y′).
consensus theorem Theorem T11 is known as the  consensus theorem. The  Y  ⋅  Z  term is called
consensus the  consensus  of  X  ⋅  Y  and  X′ ⋅  Z. The idea is that if  Y  ⋅  Z  is 1, then either  X  ⋅  Y  or
X′ ⋅  Z  must also be 1, since  Y  and  Z  are both 1 and either X  or  X’ must be 1. Thus.
DO NOT COPY
the  Y  ⋅  Z  term is redundant and may be dropped from the right-hand side of T11.
The consensus theorem has two important applications. It can be used to elimi-
nate certain timing hazards in combinational logic circuits, as we’ll see in
Section 4.5. And it also forms the basis of the iterative-consensus method of
finding prime implicants (see References).
DO NOT COPY
In all of the theorems, it is possible to replace each variable with an arbi-
trary logic expression. A simple replacement is to complement one or more
variables:
(X  +  Y′)  +  Z′  =  X  +  (Y′  +  Z′)  (based on T7)
DO NOT COPY
But more complex expressions may be substituted as well:
(V′ +  X)  ⋅  (W  ⋅  (Y′ +  Z))  +  (V′ +  X)  ⋅  (W  ⋅  (Y′ +  Z))′  =  V′  +  X  (based on T10)
4.1.4 n-Variable Theorems
DO NOT COPY
Several important theorems, listed in Table 4-3, are true for an arbitrary number
of variables,  n. Most of these theorems can be proved using a two-step method
finite induction called  finite induction—first proving that the theorem is true for  n  =  2 (the  basis
basis step step) and then proving that if the theorem is true for  n  =  i, then it is also true for
induction stepDO NOT COPYn  =  i  +  1 (the  induction step). For example, consider the generalized idempoten-
cy theorem T12. For  n  =  2, T12 is equivalent to T3 and is therefore true. If it is
true for a logical sum of  i  X’s, then it is also true for a sum of  i  +  1  X’s, according
to the following reasoning:
…  … 
X  +  X  +  X  +  +  X  =  X  +  (X  +  X  +  +  X)  (i  +  1 X’s on either side)
DO NOT COPY
=  X  +  (X)  (if T12 is true for  n  =  i)
=  X  (according to T3)
Thus, the theorem is true for all finite values of  n.
DeMorgan’s theoremsDO NOT COPYDeMorgan’s theorems  (T13 and T13′) are probably the most commonly
used of all the theorems of switching algebra. Theorem T13 says that an  n-input
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  199
Ta b l e 4 - 3  Switching-algebra theorems with n variables.
(T12) X  +  X  + … +  X  =  X (Generalized idempotency)
(T12DO NOT COPY′) … 
X  ⋅  X  ⋅  ⋅  X  =  X
(T13) (X1  ⋅  X2  ⋅  … ⋅  Xn)′  =  X1′  +  X2′+ … +  Xn′ (DeMorgan’s theorems)
(T13′) (X +  X + … +  X )′  =  X ′ ⋅  X  ′ ⋅  … ⋅  X ′
1  2  n 1 2 n
(T14)  [F(X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn,+,  ⋅  )]’  =  F(X1′,X2′,…,  Xn′,  ⋅  ,  +)  (Generalized DeMorgan’s theorem)
DO NOT COPY
(T15) F(X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn)  =  X1  ⋅  F(1X2,…,Xn)  +  X1′ ⋅  F(0,X2 ,…,Xn) (Shannon’s expansion theorems)
(T15′) F(X ,X ,…,X )  =  [X +  F(0,X ,  …,X )]  ⋅  [X ′ +  F(1,X ,…,X )]
1  2  n 1  2 n 1 2 n
AND  gate whose output is complemented is equivalent to an  n-input  OR  gate
whose inputs are complemented. That is, the circuits of Figure 4-3(a) and (b) areDO NOT COPY
equivalent.
In Section 3.3.4 we showed how to build a CMOS  NAND  gate. The output
of a  NAND  gate for any set of inputs is the complement of an  AND  gate’s output
for the same inputs, so a  NAND  gate can have the logic symbol in Figure 4-3(c).
DO NOT COPY
However, the CMOS  NAND  circuit is not designed as an AND  gate followed by a
transistor inverter (NOT  gate); it’s just a collection of transistors that happens to
perform the  AND-NOT  function. In fact, theorem T13 tells us that the logic sym-
bol in (d) denotes the same logic function (bubbles on the  OR-gate inputs
indicate logical inversion). That is, a  NAND  gate may be viewed as performing a
DO NOT COPY
NOT-OR  function.
By observing the inputs and output of a  NAND  gate, it is impossible to
determine whether it has been built internally as an  AND  gate followed by an
inverter, as inverters followed by an  OR  gate, or as a direct CMOS realization,
because allDO NOT COPYNAND  circuits perform precisely the same logic function.  Although
the choice of symbol has no bearing on the functionality of a circuit, we’ll show
in Section 5.1 that the proper choice can make the circuit’s function much easier
to understand.
Figure 4-3  Equivalent circuits according to DeMorgan’s theorem T13:
DO NOT COPY
(a)  AND-NOT ; (b)  NOT-OR ; (c) logic symbol for a  NAND  gate;
(d) equivalent symbol for a  NAND  gate.
• 
X X  Y X
(a)  Z = (X • Y)′  (c) Z = (X • Y)′
Y Y
DO NOT COPY
X′
X
X
(b)  Z = X′ + Y′ (d) Z = X′ + Y′
DO NOT COPYY′
Y
Y
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

200  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
X X + Y X
(a)  Z = (X + Y)′  (c) Z = (X + Y)′
Y Y
DO NOT COPY
X′
X
X
(b)  Z = X′ • Y′ (d) Z = X′ • Y′
Y′ Y
Y
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-4  Equivalent circuits according to DeMorgan’s theorem T13′:
(a)  OR-NOT; (b)  NOT-AND; (c) logic symbol for a  NOR  gate;
(d) equivalent symbol for a  NOR  gate.
DO NOT COPY
A similar symbolic equivalence can be inferred from theorem T13′. As
shown in Figure 4-4, a  NOR  gate may be realized as an  OR  gate followed by an
inverter, or as inverters followed by an  AND  gate.
generalized Theorems T13 and T13′ are just special cases of a generalized DeMorgan’s
DO NOT COPY
DeMorgan’s theorem theorem, T14, that applies to an arbitrary logic expression  F. By definition, the
complement of a logic complement of a logic expression, denoted (F)′, is an expression whose value is
expression the opposite of  F’s for every possible input combination. Theorem T14 is very
important because it gives us a way to manipulate and simplify the complement
DO NOT COPYof an expression.
Theorem T14 states that, given any n-variable logic expression, its comple-
ment can be obtained by swapping  + and  ⋅  and complementing all variables. For
example, suppose that we have
F(W,X,Y,Z)  =  (W′ ⋅  X)  +  (X  ⋅  Y)  +  (W  ⋅  (X′  +  Z′))
DO NOT COPY
=  ((W)′ ⋅  X)  +  (X  ⋅  Y)  +  (W  ⋅  ((X)′  +  (Z)′))
In the second line we have enclosed complemented variables in parentheses to
remind you that the  ′  is an operator, not part of the variable name. Applying the-
orem T14, we obtain
DO NOT COPY
[F(W,X,Y,Z)]′  =  ((W′)′  +  X′)  ⋅  (X′  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W′  +  ((X′)′ ⋅  (Z′)′))
Using theorem T4, this can be simplified to
[F(W,X,Y,Z)]′  =  (W)  +  X′)  ⋅  (X′  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W′  +  (X  ⋅  (Z))
DO NOT COPY
In general, we can use theorem T14 to complement a parenthesized expression
by swapping  +  and  ⋅  , complementing all uncomplemented variables, and
uncomplementing all complemented ones.
The generalized DeMorgan’s theorem T14 can be proved by showing that
all logic functions can be written as either a sum or a product of subfunctions,
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  201
and then applying T13 and T13′  recursively. However, a much more enlighten-
ing and satisfying proof can be based on the principle of duality, explained next.
4.1.5 DualityDO NOT COPY
We stated all of the axioms of switching algebra in pairs. The primed version of
each axiom (e.g., A5′) is obtained from the unprimed version (e.g., A5) by sim-
ply swapping 0 and 1 and, if present,  ⋅  and  +. As a result, we can state the
following  metatheorem, a theorem about theorems: metatheorem
DO NOT COPY
Principle of Duality  Any theorem or identity in switching algebra remains true
if 0 and 1 are swapped and ⋅ and + are swapped throughout.
The metatheorem is true because the duals of all the axioms are true, so duals of
all switching-algebra theorems can be proved using duals of the axioms.
DO NOT COPY
After all, what’s in a name, or in a symbol for that matter? If the software
that was used to typeset this book had a bug, one that swapped 0  ↔  1 and  ⋅  ↔  +
throughout this chapter, you still would have learned exactly the same switching
algebra; only the nomenclature would have been a little weird, using words like
“product” to describe an operation that uses the symbol “DO NOT COPY+”.
Duality is important because it doubles the usefulness of everything that
you learn about switching algebra and manipulation of switching functions.
Stated more practically, from a student’s point of view, it halves the amount that
you have to learn! For example, once you learn how to synthesize two-stage
ANDDO NOT COPY-OR  logic circuits from sum-of-products expressions, you automatically
know a dual technique to synthesize  OR-AND  circuits from product-of-sums
expressions.
There is just one convention in switching algebra where we did not treat  ⋅
and  +  identically, so duality does not necessarily hold true—can you figure out
DO NOT COPY
what it is before reading the answer below? Consider the following statement of
theorem T9 and its clearly absurd “dual”:
X  +  X  ⋅  Y  =  X  (theorem T9)
X  ⋅  X  +  Y  =  X  (after applying the principle of duality)
DO NOT COPY
X  +  Y  =  X  (after applying theorem T3′)
Obviously the last line above is false—where did we go wrong? The problem is
in operator precedence. We were able to write the left-hand side of the first line
without parentheses because of our convention that  ⋅  has precedence. However,
once we applied the principle of duality, we should have given precedence toDO NOT COPY  +
instead, or written the second line as  X  ⋅  (X  +  Y)  =  X. The best way to avoid prob-
lems like this is to parenthesize an expression fully before taking its dual.
Let us formally define the  dual of a logic expression. If F(X1,X2,…,Xn,+,⋅ ,′) dual of a logic
is a fully parenthesized logic expression involving the variables  X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn  and expression
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

202  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
(a)  (b)  (c)
X X •  X
type 1  Z type 1  Z = X  Y type 1 Z  = X + Y
Y  Y Y
DO NOT COPY
X  Y  Z X  Y  Z X  Y  Z
LOW  LOW  LOW  0  0  0  1  1  1
LOW  HIGH  LOW  0  1  0  1  0  1
HIGH  LOW  LOW  1  0  0  0  1  1
DO NOT COPYHIGH HIGH HIGH 1  1  1 0  0 0
Figure 4-5  A “type-1”logic gate: (a) electrical function table; (b) logic function
table and symbol with positive logic; (c) logic function table and
symbol with negative logic.
DO NOT COPY
D
the operators  +,  ⋅  , and  ′, then the dual of  F, written  F , is the same expression
with  +  and  ⋅  swapped:
D
F (X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn,+,  ⋅  ,′)  =  F(X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn,  ⋅  ,+,′)
DO NOT COPYYou already knew this, of course, but we wrote the definition in this way just to
highlight the similarity between duality and the generalized DeMorgan’s theo-
rem T14, which may now be restated as follows:
D
[F(X1,X2 ,…,Xn)]′  =  F (X1′,X2′,…,Xn′)
DO NOT COPYLet’s examine this statement in terms of a physical network.
Figure 4-5(a) shows the electrical function table for a logic element that
we’ll simply call a “type-1” gate. Under the positive-logic convention (LOW  =  0
and  HIGH  =  1), this is an  AND  gate, but under the negative-logic convention
(LOW  =  1 and  HIGH  =  0), it is an  OR  gate, as shown in (b) and (c). We can also
DO NOT COPYimagine a “type-2” gate, shown in Figure 4-6, that is a positive-logic  OR  or a
negative-logic  AND. Similar tables can be developed for gates with more than
two inputs.
Figure 4-6  A “type-2” logic gate: (a) electrical function table; (b) logic function
DO NOT COPY
table and symbol with positive logic; (c) logic function table and
symbol with negative logic.
(a) X (b) X (c) X
type 2  Z type 2  Z  = X + Y type 2 Z = X • Z′
Y  Y  Y
DO NOT COPY
X  Y  Z X  Y  Z X  Y  Z
LOW  LOW  LOW  0  0  0  1  1  1
LOW  HIGH  HIGH  0  1  1  1  0  0
DO NOT COPYHIGH  LOW  HIGH  1  0  1  0  1  0
HIGH HIGH HIGH 1  1  1 0  0 0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  203
X1
X2 type 2
type 1
X3
DO NOT COPY
type 2
type 1
X4
type 2
X
5 DO NOT COPYtype 1 F(X1, X2, ... , Xn)
type 1
type 2
type 1
Xn
Figure 4-7DO NOT COPY  Circuit for a logic function using inverters and type-1 and type-2
gates under a positive-logic convention.
Suppose that we are given an arbitrary logic expression,  F(X1 ,X2 ,…,Xn).
Following the positive-logic convention, we can build a circuit corresponding to
DO NOT COPY
this expression using inverters for  NOT  operations, type-1 gates for  AND, and
type-2 gates for  OR, as shown in Figure 4-7. Now suppose that, without chang-
ing this circuit, we simply change the logic convention from positive to negative.
Then we should redraw the circuit as shown in Figure 4-8. Clearly, for every
possible combination of input voltages (HIGH  and  LOW), the circuit still produc-
DO NOT COPY
es the same output voltage. However, from the point of view of switching
algebra, the output value—0 or 1—is the opposite of what it was under the posi-
tive-logic convention. Likewise, each input value is the opposite of what it was.
Therefore, for each possible input combination to the circuit in Figure 4-7, the
output is the opposite of that produced by the opposite input combinationDO NOT COPY
applied to the circuit in Figure 4-8:
D
F(X1,X2,…,Xn)  =  [F (X1′,X2′,…,Xn′)]′
X ′
1 DO NOT COPYFigure 4-8
X2′ type 2
Negative-logic
type 1
X3′
interpretation of the
previous circuit.
type 2
type 1
X4′ DO NOT COPY
type 2
X5′
type 1  FD(X ′, X ′, ... , X ′)
type 1 1 2 n
DO NOT COPYtype 2
type 1
Xn′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

204  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
By complementing both sides, we get the generalized DeMorgan’s theorem:
D
[F(X1 ,X2,…,Xn)]′  =  F  (X1′,X2′,…,Xn′)
DO NOT COPY
Amazing!
So, we have seen that duality is the basis for the generalized DeMorgan’s
theorem. Going forward, duality will halve the number of methods you must
learn to manipulate and simplify logic functions.
DO NOT COPY
4.1.6 Standard Representations of Logic Functions
Before moving on to analysis and synthesis of combinational logic functions
we’ll introduce some necessary nomenclature and notation.
truth table The most basic representation of a logic function is the  truth table. Similar
DO NOT COPY
in philosophy to the perfect-induction proof method, this brute-force representa-
tion simply lists the output of the circuit for every possible input combination.
Traditionally, the input combinations are arranged in rows in ascending binary
counting order, and the corresponding output values are written in a column next
to the rows. The general structure of a 3-variable truth table is shown below in
DO NOT COPY
Table 4-4.
Ta b l e 4 - 4 t
Row  X  Y  Z  F
General truth table
DO NOT COPY0  0  0  0  F(0,0,0)
structure for a
3-variable logic 1  0  0  1  F(0,0,1)
function,  F(X,Y,Z).
2  0  1  0  F(0,1,0)
3  0  1  1  F(0,1,1)
DO NOT COPY4  1  0  0  F(1,0,0)
5  1  0  1  F(1,0,1)
6  1  1  0  F(1,1,0)
7  1  1  1  F(1,1,1)
DO NOT COPY
The rows are numbered 0–7 corresponding to the binary input combina-
tions, but this numbering is not an essential part of the truth table. The truth table
for a particular 3-variable logic function is shown in Table 4-5. Each distinct pat-
tern of 0s and 1s in the output column yields a different logic function; there are
DO NOT COPY8  8 
2  such patterns. Thus, the logic function in Table 4-5 is one of 2 different logic
functions of three variables.
n 
The truth table for an  n-variable logic function has 2 rows. Obviously,
truth tables are practical to write only for logic functions with a small number of
DO NOT COPYvariables, say, 10 for students and about 4–5 for everyone else.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.1  Switching Algebra  205
Ta b l e 4 - 5
Row  X  Y  Z  F 
Truth table for a
0  0  0  0  1 particular 3-variable
DO NOT COPYlogic function,  F(X,Y,Z).
1  0  0  1  0
2  0  1  0  0
3  0  1  1  1
4  1  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY5  1  0  1  0
6  1  1  0  1
7  1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPYThe information contained in a truth table can also be conveyed algebra-
ically. To do so, we first need some definitions:
•  A  literal  is a variable or the complement of a variable. Examples:  X,  Y,  X′, literal
Y′.
•DO NOT COPY  A  product term  is a single literal or a logical product of two or more product term
literals. Examples:  Z′,  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y,  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z,  W′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z.
•  A  sum-of-products expression  is a logical sum of product terms. Example: sum-of-products
Z′  +  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  W′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z. expression
•  A  sum term  is a single literal or a logical sum of two or more literals. sum term
DO NOT COPY
Examples:  Z′,  W  +  X  +  Y,  X  +  Y′ +  Z,  W′ +  Y′ +  Z.
•  A  product-of-sums expression  is a logical product of sum terms. Example: product-of-sums
Z′  ⋅  (W  +  X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Z)  ⋅  (W′ +  Y′ +  Z). expression
•  A  normal term  is a product or sum term in which no variable appears more normal term
DO NOT COPY
than once. A nonnormal term can always be simplified to a constant or a
normal term using one of theorems T3, T3′, T5, or T5′. Examples of non-
normal terms:  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′,  W  +  W  +  X′  +  Y,  X  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y. Examples of
normal terms:  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′,  W  +  X′ +  Y.
•DO NOT COPY  An  n-variable  minterm  is a normal product term with  n  literals. There are minterm
n 
2 such  product  terms.  Examples  of  4-variable  minterms:
W′ ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′,  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z,  W′ ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′.
n
•  An  n-variable  maxterm  is a normal sum term with n literals. There are 2 maxterm
such sum terms. Examples of 4-variable maxterms:  W′  +  X′  +  Y′  +  Z′,
DO NOT COPY
W  +  X′  +  Y′  +  Z,  W′  +  X′  +  Y  +  Z′.
There is a close correspondence between the truth table and minterms and
maxterms. A minterm can be defined as a product term that is 1 in exactly one
row of the truth table. Similarly, a maxterm can be defined as a sum term that is
DO NOT COPY
0 in exactly one row of the truth table. Table 4-6 shows this correspondence for a
3-variable truth table.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

206  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 4 - 6
Row  X  Y  Z  F Minterm  Maxterm
Minterms and maxterms
for a 3-variable logic 0  0  0  0  F(0,0,0)  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  X  +  Y  +  Z
DO NOT COPYfunction,  F(X,Y,Z) .
1  0  0  1  F(0,0,1)  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  X  +  Y  +  Z′
2  0  1  0  F(0,1,0)  X′ ⋅  Y ⋅  Z′  X  +  Y′ +  Z
3  0  1  1  F(0,1,1)  X′ ⋅  Y ⋅  Z  X  +  Y′ +  Z′
4  1  0  0  F(1,0,0)  X ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  X′ +  Y  +  Z
DO NOT COPY5  1  0  1  F(1,0,1)  X ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  X′ +  Y  +  Z′
6  1  1  0  F(1,1,0)  X ⋅  Y ⋅  Z′  X′ +  Y′ +  Z
7  1  1  1  F(1,1,1)  X ⋅  Y ⋅  Z  X′ +  Y′ +  Z′
minterm numberDO NOT COPYAn  n-variable minterm can be represented by an  n-bit integer, the  minterm
minterm i number. We’ll use the name  minterm i  to denote the minterm corresponding to
row  i of the truth table. In minterm  i, a particular variable appears complemented
if the corresponding bit in the binary representation of  i  is 0; otherwise, it is
uncomplemented. For example, row 5 has binary representation 101 and the cor-
DO NOT COPY
responding minterm is  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z. As you might expect, the correspondence for
maxterm i maxterms is just the opposite: in  maxterm i, a variable appears complemented if
the corresponding bit in the binary representation of  i  is 1. Thus, maxterm 5
(101) is  X′ +  Y  +  Z′.
Based on the correspondence between the truth table and minterms, we can
DO NOT COPY
easily create an algebraic representation of a logic function from its truth table.
canonical sum The  canonical sum  of a logic function is a sum of the minterms corresponding to
truth-table rows (input combinations) for which the function produces a 1 out-
put. For example, the canonical sum for the logic function in Table 4-5 on
DO NOT COPYpage 205 is
F  =  Σ (0,3,4,6,7)
X,Y,Z
=  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  +  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z
minterm list Here, the notation  ΣX,Y,Z(0,3,4,6,7) is a  minterm list and means “the sum of min-
DO NOT COPYterms 0, 3, 4, 6, and 7 with variables  X,  Y, and  Z.” The minterm list is also known
on-set as the  on-set  for the logic function. You can visualize that each minterm “turns
on” the output for exactly one input combination. Any logic function can be
written as a canonical sum.
canonical product The  canonical product of a logic function is a product of the maxterms cor-
DO NOT COPY
responding to input combinations for which the function produces a 0 output.
For example, the canonical product for the logic function in Table 4-5 is
F  =  ∏ (1,2,5)
X,Y,Z
=  (X  +  Y  +  Z′)  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Z)  ⋅  (X′ +  Y  +  Z′)
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.2  Combinational Circuit Analysis  207
Here, the notation  ∏X,Y,Z(1,2,5) is a  maxterm list  and means “the product of maxterm list
maxterms 1, 2, and 5 with variables  X,  Y, and Z.” The maxterm list is also known
as the  off-set  for the logic function. You can visualize that each maxterm “turns off-set
DO NOT COPY
off” the output for exactly one input combination. Any logic function can be
written as a canonical product.
It’s easy to convert between a minterm list and a maxterm list. For a func-
tion of  n  variables, the possible minterm and maxterm numbers are in the set
n 
{0, 1,  …  , 2 − 1}; a minterm or maxterm list contains a subset of these numbers.
DO NOT COPY
To switch between list types, take the set complement, for example,
ΣA,B,C(0,1,2,3)  =  ∏A,B,C(4,5,6,7)
ΣX,Y(1)  =  ∏X,Y(0,2,3)
Σ (0,1,2,3,5,7,11,13)  =  ∏ (4,6,8,9,10,12,14,15)
DO NOT COPYW,X,Y,Z W,X,Y,Z
We have now learned five possible representations for a combinational
logic function:
1.  A truth table.
2.DO NOT COPY  An algebraic sum of minterms, the canonical sum.
3.  A minterm list using the  Σ  notation.
4.  An algebraic product of maxterms, the canonical product.
5.  A maxterm list using the  Π  notation.
DO NOT COPY
Each one of these representations specifies exactly the same information; given
any one of them, we can derive the other four using a simple mechanical process.
4.2 Combinational Circuit Analysis
DO NOT COPY
We analyze a combinational logic circuit by obtaining a formal description of its
logic function. Once we have a description of the logic function, a number of
other operations are possible:
•  We  can  determine  the  behavior  of  the  circuit  for  various  input
DO NOT COPY
combinations.
•  We can manipulate an algebraic description to suggest different circuit
structures for the logic function.
•  We can transform an algebraic description into a standard form corre-
DO NOT COPYsponding to an available circuit structure. For example, a sum-of-products
expression corresponds directly to the circuit structure used in PLDs
(programmable logic devices).
•  We can use an algebraic description of the circuit’s functional behavior in
the analysis of a larger system that includes the circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

208  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
X
Y
DO NOT COPYZ
F
Figure 4-9
A three-input, one-
output logic circuit.DO NOT COPY
Given a logic diagram for a combinational circuit, such as Figure 4-9, there
are a number of ways to obtain a formal description of the circuit’s function. The
DO NOT COPYmost primitive functional description is the truth table.
Using only the basic axioms of switching algebra, we can obtain the truth
n 
table of an  n-input circuit by working our way through all 2 input combinations.
For each input combination, we determine all of the gate outputs produced by
that input, propagating information from the circuit inputs to the circuit outputs.
DO NOT COPYFigure 4-10 applies this “exhaustive” technique to our example circuit. Written
on each signal line in the circuit is a sequence of eight logic values, the values
present on that line when the circuit inputs  XYZ  are 000, 001,  …, 111. The truth
table can be written by transcribing the output sequence of the final  OR  gate, as
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-10  Gate outputs created by all input combinations.
00001111 
X 00001111
11001111
00110011  11001100
Y
01000101
DO NOT COPY01010101 01010101
Z
01100101
11110000
F
00110011 00100000
DO NOT COPY10101010
A LESS You can easily obtain the results in Figure 4-10 with typical logic design tools that
DO NOT COPYinclude a logic simulator. First, you draw the schematic. Then, you apply the outputs
EXHAUSTING
WAY TO GO of a 3-bit binary counter to the X, Y, and Z inputs. (Most simulators have such
counter outputs built-in for just this sort of exercise.) The counter repeatedly cycles
through the eight possible input combinations, in the same order that we’ve shown
in the figure. The simulator allows you to graph the resulting signal values at any
DO NOT COPYpoint in the schematic, including the intermediate points as well as the output.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.2  Combinational Circuit Analysis  209
Ta b l e 4 - 7
Row  X  Y  Z  F 
Truth table for the
0  0  0  0  0 logic circuit of
DO NOT COPYFigure 4-9.
1  0  0  1  1
2  0  1  0  1
3  0  1  1  0
4  1  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY5  1  0  1  1
6  1  1  0  0
7  1  1  1  1
shown in Table 4-7. Once we have the truth table for the circuit, we can alsoDO NOT COPY
directly write a logic expression—the canonical sum or product—if we wish.
The number of input combinations of a logic circuit grows exponentially
with the number of inputs, so the exhaustive approach can quickly become
exhausting. Instead, we normally use an algebraic approach whose complexity is
DO NOT COPY
more linearly proportional to the size of the circuit. The method is simple—we
build up a parenthesized logic expression corresponding to the logic operators
and structure of the circuit. We start at the circuit inputs and propagate expres-
sions through gates toward the output. Using the theorems of switching algebra,
we may simplify the expressions as we go, or we may defer all algebraic manip-
DO NOT COPY
ulations until an output expression is obtained.
Figure 4-11 applies the algebraic technique to our example circuit. The
output function is given on the output of the final  OR  gate:
F  =  ((X+Y′)  ⋅  Z)  +  (X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′)
DO NOT COPY
No switching-algebra theorems were used in obtaining this expression. How-
ever, we can use theorems to transform this expression into another form. For
example, a sum of products can be obtained by “multiplying out”:
F  =  X  ⋅  Z  +  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-11
X
X + Y′ Logic expressions
Y′ 
Y  for signal lines.
• 
DO NOT COPY(X + Y′ )  Z
Z
•  •  • 
F = ((X + Y′)  Z)  + (X′  Y′  Z′)
X′
X′ • Y • Z′
DO NOT COPYZ′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

210  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
X X • Z
Y′
DO NOT COPYY •  •  •  •  • 
Y′  Z F = X  Z + Y′  Z  +  X′  Y  Z′
X′
X′ • Y • Z′
DO NOT COPYZ′
Z
Figure 4-12  Two-level  AND-OR  circuit.
DO NOT COPY
The new expression corresponds to a different circuit for the same logic func-
tion, as shown in Figure 4-12.
Similarly, we can “add out” the original expression to obtain a product of
sums:
DO NOT COPY
F  =  ((X  +  Y′)  ⋅  Z)  +  (X′  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′)
=  (X  +  Y′ +  X′)  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Y)  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Z′)  ⋅  (Z  +  X′)  ⋅  (Z  +  Y)  ⋅  (Z  +  Z′)
=  1  ⋅  1  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Z′)  ⋅  (X′ +  Z)  ⋅  (Y  +  Z)  ⋅  1
=  (X  +  Y′ +  Z′)  ⋅  (X′ +  Z)  ⋅  (Y  +  Z)
DO NOT COPY
The corresponding logic circuit is shown in Figure 4-13.
Our next example of algebraic analysis uses a circuit with  NAND  and  NOR
gates, shown in Figure 4-14. This analysis is a little messier than the previous
example, because each gate produces a complemented subexpression, not just a
DO NOT COPYsimple sum or product. However, the output expression can be simplified by
repeated application of the generalized DeMorgan’s theorem:
Figure 4-13  Two-level  OR-AND  circuit.
DO NOT COPY
X
Y′
X + Y′ +  Z′
Z′
DO NOT COPY
X′ +  Z F = (X + Y′ +  Z′) • (X′ + Z) • (Y + Z)
X′
Y +  Z
DO NOT COPYY
Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.2  Combinational Circuit Analysis  211
W
W′ + X
X′ 
X
((W′ • X) • Y)′
Y DO NOT COPYF
= ((W + X) • Y) • (W′ +  X + Y′)
W′ • (W + Z)
(W′ + X + Y′)′
Y′  Figure 4-14
DO NOT COPY
Algebraic analysis of
(W + Z)′ a logic circuit with
Z NAND  and NOR  gates.
DO NOT COPYF  =  [((W  ⋅  X′)′ ⋅  Y)′  +  (W′ +  X  +  Y′)′  +  (W  +  Z)′]′
=  ((W′ +  X)′ +  Y′)′ ⋅  (W  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y)′ ⋅  (W′ ⋅  Z′)′
=  ((W  ⋅  X′)′ ⋅  Y)  ⋅  (W′ +  X  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W  +  Z)
=  ((W′ +  X)  ⋅  Y)  ⋅  (W′ +  X  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W  +  Z)
DO NOT COPY
Quite often, DeMorgan’s theorem can be applied  graphically  to simplify
algebraic analysis. Recall from Figures 4-3 and 4-4 that  NAND  and  NOR  gates
each have two equivalent symbols. By judiciously redrawing Figure 4-14, we
make it possible to cancel out some of the inversions during the analysis by using
theorem T4 [(X′)′ =  X], as shown in Figure 4-15. This manipulation leads us to a
DO NOT COPY
simplified output expression directly:
F  =  ((W′ +  X)  ⋅  Y)  ⋅  (W′ +  X  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W  +  Z)
Figures 4-14 and 4-15 were just two different ways of drawing the same
physical logic circuit. However, when we simplify a logic expression using the
DO NOT COPY
theorems of switching algebra, we get an expression corresponding to a different
physical circuit. For example, the simplified expression above corresponds to
the circuit of Figure 4-16, which is physically different from the one in the pre-
vious two figures. Furthermore, we could multiply out and add  out the
DO NOT COPY
W
W′ + X Figure 4-15
X′ 
X Algebraic analysis of
(W′ • X) • Y
the previous circuit
Y
after substituting
DO NOT COPY
W′ some  NAND  and
NOR  symbols.
W′ + X + Y′
Y′
F
DO NOT COPY= ((W′ + X) • Y) • (W′ +  X + Y′)
W + Z
• 
Z (W + Z)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

212  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
W
W′ + X
X′ 
X
(W′ + X) • Y
Y DO NOT COPY
W′
W′ + X + Y′ F
= ((W′ + X) • Y) • (W′ +  X + Y′)
Y′
DO NOT COPY• (W + Z)
W + Z
Z
Figure 4-16  A different circuit for same logic function.
DO NOT COPY
expression to obtain sum-of-products and product-of-sums expressions corre-
sponding to two more physically different circuits for the same logic function.
Although we used logic expressions above to convey information about the
physical structure of a circuit, we don’t always do this. For example, we might
DO NOT COPY
use the expression  G(W, X,  Y, Z)  =  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  Y  ⋅  Z  to describe any one of the cir-
cuits in Figure 4-17. Normally, the only sure way to determine a circuit’s
structure is to look at its schematic drawing. However, for certain restricted
classes of circuits, structural information can be inferred from logic expressions.
For example, the circuit in (a) could be described without reference to the draw-
DO NOT COPY
ing as “a two-level  AND-OR  circuit for  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  Y  ⋅  Z,” while the circuit in (b)
could be described as “a two-level  NAND-NAND  circuit for  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  Y  ⋅  Z.”
Figure 4-17  Three circuits for  G(W, X, Y, Z) = W  ⋅  X  ⋅Y  +  Y  ⋅  Z : (a) two-level
DO NOT COPYAND-OR; (b) two-level  NAND-NAND ; (c) ad hoc.
(a) W W • X • Y (b) W (W • X • Y)′
X X
G G
DO NOT COPY
•  • 
Y Y  Z Y (Y  Z)′
Z Z
DO NOT COPY• 
(c) W (W  X)′
W • X • Y
X G
Y′
DO NOT COPYY • Z
Y
Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  213
4.3 Combinational Circuit Synthesis
4.3.1 Circuit Descriptions and Designs
What is the starting point for designing combinational logic circuits? Usually,DO NOT COPY
we are given a word description of a problem or we develop one ourselves.
Occasionally, the description is a list of input combinations for which a signal
should be on or off, the verbal equivalent of a truth table or the  Σ  or  ∏  notation
introduced previously. For example, the description of a 4-bit prime-number
DO NOT COPY
detector might be, “Given a 4-bit input combination  N  =  N3N2N1N0, this function
produces a 1 output for  N  =  1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, and 0 otherwise.” A logic func-
tion described in this way can be designed directly from the canonical sum or
product expression. For the prime-number detector, we have
DO NOT COPYF  =  ΣN ,N ,N ,N (1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13)
3 2 1  0
=  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1′⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1 ⋅N0′  +  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1 ⋅N0+  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1′⋅N0
+  N3′⋅N2 ⋅ N1 ⋅N0  +  N3 ⋅ N2′⋅N1 ⋅N0  +  N3 ⋅N2 ⋅N1′ ⋅N0
The corresponding circuit is shown in Figure 4-18.
DO NOT COPYMore often, we describe a logic function using the English-language con-
nectives “and,” “or,” and “not.” For example, we might describe an alarm circuit
by saying, “The  ALARM  output is 1 if the  PANIC  input is 1, or if the  ENABLE
input is 1, the EXITING input is 0, and the house is not secure; the house is secure
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-18  Canonical-sum design for 4-bit prime-number detector.
N3
N 3
N 3′ • N2′ • N1′ • N0
DO NOT COPYN3′
N3′ • N2′ • N1 • N0′
N2
N 2
N3′ • N2′ • N1 • N0
DO NOT COPYN2′
N3′ • N2 • N1′ • N0 F
N1
N 1
N3′ • N2 • N1 • N0
DO NOT COPYN1′
N3 • N2′ • N1 • N0
N0
N 0
N3 • N2 • N1′ • N0
DO NOT COPYN0′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

214  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
PANIC 
ALARM
ENABLE
DO NOT COPYEXITING
WINDOW
SECURE
DOOR
GARAGE
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-19  Alarm circuit derived from logic expression.
if the  WINDOW,  DOOR, and  GARAGE  inputs are all 1.” Such a description can
be translated directly into algebraic expressions:
DO NOT COPY
ALARM  =  PANIC  +  ENABLE  ⋅  EXITING′  ⋅  SECURE′
SECURE  =  WINDOW  ⋅  DOOR  ⋅  GARAGE
ALARM  =  PANIC  +  ENABLE  ⋅  EXITING′  ⋅  (WINDOW  ⋅  DOOR  ⋅  GARAGE)′
Notice that we used the same method in switching algebra as in ordinary algebra
DO NOT COPY
to formulate a  complicated expression—we defined an auxiliary variable
SECURE  to simplify the first equation, developed an expression for  SECURE,
and used substitution to get the final expression. We can easily draw a circuit
using  AND,  OR, and  NOT  gates that realizes the final expression, as shown in
realize Figure 4-19. A circuit realizes  [“makes real”] an expression if its output function
DO NOT COPY
realization equals that expression, and the circuit is called a  realization  of the function.
Once we have an expression, any expression, for a logic function, we can
do other things besides building a circuit directly from the expression. We can
manipulate the expression to get different circuits. For example, the  ALARM
DO NOT COPYexpression above can be multiplied out to get the sum-of-products circuit in
Figure 4-20. Or, if the number of variables is not too large, we can construct the
truth table for the expression and use any of the synthesis methods that apply to
truth tables, including the canonical sum or product method described earlier
and the minimization methods described later.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-20  Sum-of-products version of alarm circuit.
PANIC
ENABLE
DO NOT COPYEXITING
ALARM = PANIC
WINDOW •  • 
+ ENABLE  EXITING′  WINDOW′
+ ENABLE • EXITING′ • DOOR′
DOOR •  • 
+ ENABLE  EXITING′  GARAGE′
DO NOT COPY
GARAGE
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  215
DO NOT COPY
(b) (a)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-21
Alternative sum-of-
products realizations:
DO NOT COPY
(a)  AND-OR ;
(b) AND-OR with extra
inverter pairs;
(c)  NAND-NAND.
(c)
DO NOT COPY
In general, it’s easier to describe a circuit in words using logical connec-
tives and to write the corresponding logic expressions than it is to write a
complete truth table, especially if the number of variables is large. However,
sometimes we have to work with imprecise word descriptions of logic functions,
DO NOT COPY
for example, “The  ERROR  output should be 1 if the  GEARUP,  GEARDOWN,
and  GEARCHECK  inputs are inconsistent.” In this situation, the truth-table
approach is best because it allows us to determine the output required for every
input combination, based on our knowledge and understanding of the problem
environment (e.g., the brakes cannot be applied unless the gear is down).
DO NOT COPY
4.3.2 Circuit Manipulations
The design methods that we’ve described so far use  AND,  OR, and  NOT  gates.
We might like to use  NAND  and  NOR  gates, too—they’re faster than  ANDs and
ORDO NOT COPYs in most technologies. However, most people don’t develop logical proposi-
tions in terms of  NAND  and  NOR  connectives. That is, you probably wouldn’t
say, “I won’t date you if you’re not clean or not wealthy and also you’re not
smart or not friendly.” It would be more natural for you to say, “I’ll date you if
you’re clean and wealthy, or if you’re smart and friendly.” So, given a “natural”
logic expression, we need ways to translate it into other forms.DO NOT COPY
We can translate any logic expression into an equivalent sum-of-products
expression, simply by multiplying it out. As shown in Figure 4-21(a), such an
expression may be realized directly with  AND  and  OR  gates. The inverters
required for complemented inputs are not shown.
DO NOT COPY
As shown in Figure 4-21(b), we may insert a pair of inverters between each
AND-gate output and the corresponding  OR-gate input in a two-level  AND-OR
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

216  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
(a)  (b) 
W W
DO NOT COPY
X X
Y Y
Z Z
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-22 (c)  W
Another two-level
sum-of-products X
circuit: (a)  AND-OR ; Y
(b) DO NOT COPYAND-OR with extra
inverter pairs;
Z
(c)  NAND-NAND.
circuit. According to theorem T4, these inverters have no effect on the output
DO NOT COPYfunction of the circuit. In fact, we’ve drawn the second inverter of each pair
with its inversion bubble on its input to provide a graphical reminder that the
inverters cancel. However, if these inverters are absorbed into the  AND  and  OR
gates, we wind up with  AND-NOT  gates at the first level and a  NOT-OR  gate
at the second level. These are just two different symbols for the same type of
DO NOT COPY
AND-OR  circuit gate—a  NAND  gate. Thus, a two-level  AND-OR  circuit  may be converted to a
NAND-NAND  circuit two-level  NAND-NAND  circuit  simply by substituting gates.
(c)
Figure 4-23DO NOT COPY
Realizations of a
product-of-sums
expression:
(a)  OR-AND ;
(b) OR-AND  with extra
DO NOT COPY
inverter pairs;
(c)  NOR-NOR.
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  217
If any product terms in the sum-of-products expression contain just a sin-
gle literal, then we may gain or lose inverters in the transformation from  AND-
OR  to  NAND-NAND. For example, Figure 4-22 is an example where an inverter
DO NOT COPY
on the  W  input is no longer needed, but an inverter must be added to the  Z  input.
We have shown that any sum-of-products expression can be realized in
either of two ways—as an  AND-OR  circuit or as a  NAND-NAND  circuit. The
dual of this statement is also true: any product-of-sums expression can be real-
ized as an  OR-AND  circuit  or as a  NOR-NOR  circuit. Figure 4-23 shows an OR-AND  circuit
DO NOT COPY
example. Any logic expression can be translated into an equivalent product-of- NOR-NOR circuit
sums expression by adding it out, and hence has both  OR-AND  and  NOR-NOR
circuit realizations.
The same kind of manipulations can be applied to arbitrary logic circuits.
For example, Figure 4-24(a) shows a circuit built fromDO NOT COPY  AND  and  OR  gates. After
adding pairs of inverters, we obtain the circuit in (b). However, one of the gates,
a 2-input  AND  gate with a single inverted input, is not a standard type. We can
use a discrete inverter as shown in (c) to obtain a circuit that uses only standard
gate types—NAND, AND, and inverters. Actually, a better way to use the inverter
is shown in (d); one level of gate delay is eliminated, and the bottom gateDO NOT COPY
becomes a  NOR  instead of  AND. In most logic technologies, inverting gates like
NAND  and  NOR  are faster than noninverting gates like  AND  and  OR.
Figure 4-24  Logic-symbol manipulations: (a) original circuit;
DO NOT COPY(b) transformation with a nonstandard gate; (c) inverter used to
eliminate nonstandard gate; (d) preferred inverter placement.
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
(c) (d)
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

218  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
WHY MINIMIZE?  Minimization is an important step in both ASIC design and in design PLDs. Extra
gates and gate inputs require more area in an ASIC chip, and thereby increase cost.
DO NOT COPY
The number of gates in a PLD is fixed, so you might think that extra gates are free—
and they are, until you run out of them and have to upgrade to a bigger, slower, more
expensive PLD. Fortunately, most software tools for both ASIC and PLD design
have a minimization program built in. The purpose of Sections 4.3.3 through 4.3.8 is
to give you a feel for how minimization works.
DO NOT COPY
4.3.3 Combinational Circuit Minimization
It’s often uneconomical to realize a logic circuit directly from the first logic
expression that pops into your head. Canonical sum and product expressions are
DO NOT COPY
especially expensive because the number of possible minterms or maxterms
minimize (and hence gates) grows exponentially with the number of variables. We
minimize  a combinational circuit by reducing the number and size of gates that
are needed to build it.
DO NOT COPYThe traditional combinational circuit minimization methods that we’ll
study have as their starting point a truth table or, equivalently, a minterm list or
maxterm list. If we are given a logic function that is not expressed in this form,
then we must convert it to an appropriate form before using these methods. For
example, if we are given an arbitrary logic expression, then we can evaluate it for
DO NOT COPYevery input combination to construct the truth table. The minimization methods
reduce the cost of a two-level  AND-OR,  OR-AND,  NAND-NAND, or  NOR-NOR
circuit in three ways:
1.  By minimizing the number of first-level gates.
DO NOT COPY2.  By minimizing the number of inputs on each first-level gate.
3.  By minimizing the number of inputs on the second-level gate. This is
actually a side effect of the first reduction.
However, the minimization methods do not consider the cost of input inverters;
DO NOT COPYthey assume that both true and complemented versions of all input variables are
available. While this is not always the case in gate-level or ASIC design, it’s
very appropriate for PLD-based design; PLDs have both true and complemented
versions of all input variables available “for free.”
Most minimization methods are based on a generalization of the combin-
DO NOT COPYing theorems, T10 and T10′:
given product term  ⋅  Y  +  given product term  ⋅  Y′  =  given product term
given sum term  +  Y)  ⋅  given sum term  +  Y′)  =  given sum term
That is, if two product or sum terms differ only in the complementing or not of
DO NOT COPY
one variable, we can combine them into a single term with one less variable. So
we save one gate and the remaining gate has one fewer input.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  219
N3 N3′ N2 N2′ N1 N1′ N0 N0′
N3
N 3′ • N0
DO NOT COPY
N2
N3′ • N2′ • N1 • N0′
F
N1
N3 • N2′ • N1 • N0
DO NOT COPY
N3 • N2 • N1′ • N0
N0 Figure 4-25
Simplified sum-of-
products realization
DO NOT COPY
for 4-bit prime-
number detector.
We can apply this algebraic method repeatedly to combine minterms 1, 3,
5, and 7 of the prime-number detector shown in Figure 4-18 on page 213:
DO NOT COPY
F  =  Σ , , , (1, 3, 5, 7, 2, 11, 13)
N N N N
3 2 1 0
=  N3′⋅N2′N1′N0  +  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1 ⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2 ⋅N1′⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2 ⋅N1 ⋅N0  +  …
=  (N3′⋅N2′⋅N1′⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2′⋅N1 ⋅N0)  +  (⋅N3′⋅N2 ⋅N1′⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2 ⋅N1 ⋅N0 )  +  …
=  N3′N2′⋅N0  +  N3′⋅N2 ⋅N0  +  …
DO NOT COPY
=  N3′⋅N0  +  …
The resulting circuit is shown in Figure 4-25; it has three fewer gates and one of
the remaining gates has two fewer inputs.
If we had worked a little harder on the preceding expression, we could have
DO NOT COPY
saved a couple more first-level gate inputs, though not any gates. It’s difficult to
find terms that can be combined in a jumble of algebraic symbols. In the next
subsection, we’ll begin to explore a minimization method that is more fit for
human consumption. Our starting point will be the graphical equivalent of a
truth table.
DO NOT COPY
4.3.4 Karnaugh Maps
A  Karnaugh map  is a graphical representation of a logic function’s truth table. Karnaugh map
Figure 4-26 shows Karnaugh maps for logic functions of 2, 3, and 4 variables.
n 
The map for anDO NOT COPY  n-input logic function is an array with 2 cells, one for each pos-
sible input combination or minterm.
The rows and columns of a Karnaugh map are labeled so that the input
combination for any cell is easily determined from the row and column headings
for that cell. The small number inside each cell is the corresponding minterm
number in the truth table, assuming that the truth table inputs are labeled alpha-DO NOT COPY
betically from left to right (e.g.,  X,  Y,  Z) and the rows are numbered in binary
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

220  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
W
W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10
0 4 12 8
DO NOT COPYX X 00
X X Y
1 5 13 9
0  1 00  01  11  10 01
Y Z
Z
0 2 0 2 6 4 3 7 15 11
0 0 11
Y
1 3 1 3 7 5 2 6 14 10
1 Y 1 Z 10
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)  Y (c) X
Figure 4-26  Karnaugh maps: (a) 2-variable; (b) 3-variable; (c) 4-variable.
DO NOT COPY
counting order, like all the examples in this text. For example, cell 13 in the 4-
variable map corresponds to the truth-table row in which  W  X  Y  Z  =  1101.
When we draw the Karnaugh map for a given function, each cell of the map
contains the information from the like-numbered row of the function’s truth
DO NOT COPYtable—a 0 if the function is 0 for that input combination, a 1 otherwise.
In this text, we use two redundant labelings for map rows and columns. For
example, consider the 4-variable map in Figure 4-26(c). The columns are
labeled with the four possible combinations of  W  and  X,  W X  =  00, 01, 11, and
10. Similarly, the rows are labeled with the  Y Z  combinations. These labels give
DO NOT COPYus all the information we need. However, we also use brackets to associate four
regions of the map with the four variables. Each bracketed region is the part of
the map in which the indicated variable is 1. Obviously, the brackets convey the
same information that is given by the row and column labels.
When we draw a map by hand, it is much easier to draw the brackets than
DO NOT COPY
to write out all of the labels. However, we retain the labels in the text’s Karnaugh
maps as an additional aid to understanding. In any case, you must be sure to label
the rows and columns in the proper order to preserve the correspondence
between map cells and truth table row numbers shown in Figure 4-26.
To represent a logic function on a Karnaugh map, we simply copy 1s and
DO NOT COPY
0s from the truth table or equivalent to the corresponding cells of the map.
Figures 4-27(a) and (b) show the truth table and Karnaugh map for a logic func-
tion that we analyzed (beat to death?) in Section 4.2. From now on, we’ll reduce
the clutter in maps by copying only the 1s or the 0s, not both.
DO NOT COPY
4.3.5 Minimizing Sums of Products
By now you must be wondering about the “strange” ordering of the row and
column numbers in a Karnaugh map. There is a very important reason for this
ordering—each cell corresponds to an input combination that differs from each
DO NOT COPYof its immediately adjacent neighbors in only one variable. For example, cells
5 and 13 in the 4-variable map differ only in the value of  W. In the 3- and
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  221
•  • 
X  Y  Z  F X  Y  Z′
X X
0  0  0  0 X Y X Y
DO NOT COPY0  0  1 1 00  01  11  10 Z 00  01  11  10 • 
Z X  Z
0  1  0  1 0 2 6 4
0 0  1  0  0 0 1
0  1  1 0
1  0  0  0 1 3 7 5
1 1  0  1  1 Z 1 1  1  1 Z
1  0  1 1
1  1  0  0
Y • Z
(a) DO NOT COPY1  1  1 1 (b) Y (c) Y
Figure 4-27  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z (1,2,5,7): (a) truth table; (b) Karnaugh map;
(c) combining adjacent 1-cells.
DO NOT COPY
4-variable maps, corresponding cells on the left/right or top/bottom borders are
less obvious neighbors; for example, cells 12 and 14 in the 4-variable map are
adjacent because they differ only in the value of  Y.
Each input combination with a “1” in the truth table corresponds to a
minterm in the logic function’s canonical sum. Since pairs of adjacent “1” cells
DO NOT COPY
in the Karnaugh map have minterms that differ in only one variable, the minterm
pairs can be combined into a single product term using the generalization of
theorem T10, term  ⋅  Y  +  term  ⋅  Y′  =  term. Thus, we can use a Karnaugh map to
simplify the canonical sum of a logic function.
DO NOT COPYFor example, consider cells 5 and 7 in Figure 4-27(b), and their contribu-
tion to the canonical sum for this function:
F  =  …  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z
=  …  +  (X  ⋅  Z)  ⋅  Y′+(X  ⋅  Z)  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPY=  …  +  X  ⋅  Z
Remembering wraparound, we see that cells 1 and 5 in Figure 4-27(b) are also
adjacent and can be combined:
F  =  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  …
DO NOT COPY
=  X′ ⋅  (Y′ ⋅  Z)  +  X  ⋅  (Y′ ⋅  Z)  +  …
=  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  …
In general, we can simplify a logic function by combining pairs of adjacent
1-cells (minterms) whenever possible, and writing a sum of product terms that
DO NOT COPY
cover all of the 1-cells. Figure 4-27(c) shows the result for our example logic
function. We circle a pair of 1s to indicate that the corresponding minterms are
combined into a single product term. The corresponding  AND-OR  circuit is
shown in Figure 4-28.
In many logic functions, the cell-combining procedure can be extended to
DO NOT COPY
combine more than two 1-cells into a single product term. For example, consider
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

222  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
X X • Z
Y′
DO NOT COPYY
Y • Z F
X′
X • Y • Z′
Figure 4-28DO NOT COPYZ′
Minimized AND-OR circuit. Z
the canonical sum for the logic function  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(0, 1, 4, 5, 6). We can use the
algebraic manipulations of the previous examples iteratively to combine four of
DO NOT COPY
the five minterms:
F  =  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  +  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
=  [(X′ ⋅  Y′)  ⋅  Z′  +  (X′ ⋅  Y′)  ⋅  Z]  +  [(X  ⋅  Y′)  ⋅  Z′  +  (X  ⋅  Y′)  ⋅  Z]  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
=  X′ ⋅  Y′  +  X  ⋅  Y′  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
DO NOT COPY
=  [X’  ⋅  (Y′)  +  X  ⋅  (Y′)]  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
=  Y′  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′
i 
In general, 2 1-cells may be combined to form a product term containing  n  −  i
DO NOT COPYliterals, where  n  is the number of variables in the function.
A precise mathematical rule determines how 1-cells may be combined and
the form of the corresponding product term:
i 
•  A set of 2 1-cells may be combined if there are  i  variables of the logic
i 
function that take on all 2 possible combinations within that set, while the
DO NOT COPY
remaining  n  −  i  variables have the same value throughout that set. The cor-
responding product term has  n  −  i literals, where a variable is complemented
if it appears as 0 in all of the 1-cells, and uncomplemented if it appears as 1.
n 
rectangular sets of 1s Graphically, this rule means that we can circle  rectangular  sets of 2 1s, literally
DO NOT COPYas well as figuratively stretching the definition of rectangular to account for
wraparound at the edges of the map. We can determine the literals of the corre-
sponding product terms directly from the map; for each variable we make the
following determination:
DO NOT COPY•  If a circle covers only areas of the map where the variable is 0, then the
variable is complemented in the product term.
•  If a circle covers only areas of the map where the variable is 1, then the
variable is uncomplemented in the product term.
•  If a circle covers both areas of the map where the variable is 0 and areas
DO NOT COPY
where it is 1, then the variable does not appear in the product term.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  223
X X
X Y X Y
Z 00  01  11  10 Z 00  01  11  10
• 
0 2 6 4 X  Z′
DO NOT COPY0 0 1 1  1
1 1  1
(a) (b)
1 3 7 5
1 Z 1 1  1 Z
1  1
Y Y Y′
Figure 4-29
DO NOT COPYF  =  ΣX,Y,Z (0,1,4,5,6):
X (a) initial Karnaugh
X • Y′ map; (b) Karnaugh
Z′
(c) Z F = X • Z′ + Y′ map with circled
product terms;
Y′
Y  (c)  AND/OR  circuit.
DO NOT COPY
A sum-of-products expression for a function must contain product terms (circled
sets of 1-cells) that cover all of the 1s and none of the 0s on the map.
The Karnaugh map for our most recent example,  F  =  Σ  X,Y,Z (0, 1, 4, 5, 6),
DO NOT COPY
is shown in Figure 4-29(a) and (b). We have circled one set of four 1s, corre-
sponding to the product term  Y′, and a set of two 1s corresponding to the product
term  X  ⋅  Z′. Notice that the second product term has one less literal than the
corresponding product term in our algebraic solution (X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′). By circling the
largest possible set of 1s containing cell 6, we have found a less expensive
DO NOT COPY
realization of the logic function, since a 2-input  AND  gate should cost less than a
3-input one. The fact that two different product terms now cover the same
1-cell (4) does not affect the logic function, since for logical addition 1  +  1  =  1,
not 2! The corresponding two-level  AND/OR  circuit is shown in (c).
DO NOT COPYAs another example, the prime-number detector circuit that we introduced
in Figure 4-18 on page 213 can be minimized as shown in Figure 4-30.
At this point, we need some more definitions to clarify what we’re doing:
•  A  minimal sum  of a logic function  F(X1,…,Xn) is a sum-of-products expres- minimal sum
sion for  F  such that no sum-of-products expression for  F  has fewer product
DO NOT COPY
terms, and any sum-of-products expression with the same number of product
terms has at least as many literals.
That is, the minimal sum has the fewest possible product terms (first-level gates
and second-level gate inputs) and, within that constraint, the fewest possible lit-
erals (first-level gate inputs). Thus, among our three prime-number detectorDO NOT COPY
circuits, only the one in Figure 4-30 on the next page realizes a minimal sum.
The next definition says precisely what the word “imply” means when we
talk about logic functions:
•DO NOT COPY  A logic function  P(X1,…,Xn) implies  a logic function  F(X1 ,…,Xn) if for every imply
input combination such that  P  =  1, then  F  =  1 also.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

224  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
N3 (b) N3
(a)
N3 N2 N3 N2
N N 00  01  11  10 N N 00  01  11  10 •  • 
1  0 1  0 N2  N1′  N0
DO NOT COPY00 0 4 12 8 00
N3′ • N0
1 5 13 9
01 01 1  1  1
1  1  1
N N
3 7 15 11 0 0
11 11 1  1 1
1 1 1
N N
1 2 6 14 10 1
10 10 1 N2′ • N1 • N0
DO NOT COPY1  
N3′ • N2′ • N1
N2 N2
F = ΣN3,N2,N1,N0(1,2,3,5,7,11,13)  F = N 3′ • N0  + N3′ • N2′ • N1  + N2′ • N1 • N0  + N2 • N1′ • N 0
DO NOT COPY(c)
N3′
• 
N3 N3′  N0
N2
N2
N2′ N3′ • N2′ • N1
DO NOT COPYN1 F
N1
N2′ • N1 • N0
N1′
N2 • N1′ • N0
N
DO NOT COPYN 0
0
Figure 4-30  Prime-number detector: (a) initial Karnaugh map; (b) circled
product terms; (c) minimized circuit.
DO NOT COPY
That is, if  P  implies  F, then  F  is 1 for every input combination that  P  is 1, and
maybe some more. We may write the shorthand  P  ⇒  F. We may also say that “F
includes includes  P,” or that “F  covers  P.”
covers
•  A  prime implicant  of a logic function  F(X1,…,Xn) is a normal product term
prime implicant
DO NOT COPYP(X ,…,X ) that implies  F, such that if any variable is removed from  P, then
1 n
the resulting product term does not imply  F.
In terms of a Karnaugh map, a prime implicant of  F  is a circled set of 1-cells
satisfying our combining rule, such that if we try to make it larger (covering
DO NOT COPYtwice as many cells), it covers one or more 0s.
Now comes the most important part, a theorem that limits how much work
we must do to find a minimal sum for a logic function:
Prime Implicant Theorem  A minimal sum is a sum of prime implicants.
DO NOT COPYThat is, to find a minimal sum, we need not consider any product terms that are
not prime implicants. This theorem is easily proved by contradiction. Suppose
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  225
W W
(a) W X (b) W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
W • X
0 4 12 8
DO NOT COPY00  00  1
1 • 
X  Z
1 5 13 9
01 01 1  1
1  1
Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1  1
1  1
Y Y
2 6 14 10
10 10 1
1
DO NOT COPY
X X
F = ΣW,X,Y,Z(5,7,12,13,14,15)  F = X • Z + W • X
Figure 4-31  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z (5,7,12,13,14,15): (a) Karnaugh map;
DO NOT COPY(b) prime implicants.
that a product term  P  in a “minimal” sum is  not  a prime implicant. Then
according to the definition of prime implicant, if  P  is not one, it is possible to
remove some literal from  P  to obtain a new product term  P* that still implies  F.
If we replaceDO NOT COPY  P  with  P* in the presumed “minimal” sum, the resulting sum still
equals  F  but has one fewer literal. Therefore, the presumed “minimal” sum was
not minimal after all.
Another minimization example, this time a 4-variable function, is shown in
Figure 4-31. There are just two prime implicants, and it’s quite obvious that both
of them must be included in the minimal sum in order to cover all of the 1-cellsDO NOT COPY
on the map. We didn’t draw the logic diagram for this example because you
should know how to do that yourself by now.
The sum of all the prime implicants of a logic function is called the  com- complete sum
plete sum. Although the complete sum is always a legitimate way to realize a
DO NOT COPY
logic function, it’s not always minimal. For example, consider the logic function
shown in Figure 4-32. It has five prime implicants, but the minimal sum includes
Figure 4-32  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(1,3,4,5,9,11,12,13,14,15): (a) Karnaugh map;
(b) prime implicants and distinguished 1-cells.
DO NOT COPY
W W
W X W X
(a)  (b)
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10 • 
X  Y′
0 4 12 8
00 00  1  1 W • Z
1  1
1 5 13 9
DO NOT COPY01 01 1 1  1  1
1  1  1 1 • 
Z Y′  Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1 1  1
1 1  1
Y Y
2 6 14 10
10 10 1
1 X′ • Z
• 
DO NOT COPYX XX W  X
F = ΣW,X,Y,Z(1,3,4,5,9,11,12,13,14,15)  F = X • Y′  + X′ • Z + W • X
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

226  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
W W
W X W X
(a)  (b)
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10 • 
W′  X
0 4 12 8
DO NOT COPY00  00  1
1 X • Z
1 5 13 9
01 01 1  1
1  1
Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1 1 1  1
1 1 1  1
Y Y
2 6 14 10
10 10 1 1
1 1 Y • Z
DO NOT COPY
W′ • Y
X XX
F = ΣW,X,Y,Z(2,3,4,5,6,7,11,13,15)  F = W′ • Y + W′ • X + X • Z + Y • Z
Figure 4-33  F  = ΣW,X,Y,Z (2,3,4,5,6,7,11,13,15): (a) Karnaugh map; (b) prime
DO NOT COPY
implicants and distinguished 1-cells.
only three of them. So, how can we systematically determine which prime impli-
cants to include and which to leave out? Two more definitions are needed:
distinguished 1-cell •  A  distinguished 1-cell  of a logic function is an input combination that is
DO NOT COPY
covered by only one prime implicant.
essential prime •  An  essential prime implicant  of a logic function is a prime implicant that
implicant covers one or more distinguished 1-cells.
Since an essential prime implicant is the  only  prime implicant that covers some
DO NOT COPY
1-cell, it  must  be included in every minimal sum for the logic function. So, the
first step in the prime implicant selection process is simple—we identify distin-
guished 1-cells and the  corresponding prime  implicants, and include the
essential prime implicants in the minimal sum. Then we need only determine
how to cover the 1-cells, if any, that are not covered by the essential prime impli-
DO NOT COPY
cants. In the example of Figure 4-32, the three distinguished 1-cells are shaded,
and the corresponding essential prime implicants are circled with heavier lines.
All of the 1-cells in this example are covered by essential prime implicants, so
we need go no further. Likewise, Figure 4-33 shows an example where all of the
DO NOT COPYprime implicants are essential, and so all are included in the minimal sum.
A logic function in which not all the 1-cells are covered by essential prime
implicants is shown in Figure 4-34. By removing the essential prime implicants
and the 1-cells they cover, we obtain a reduced map with only a single 1-cell and
two prime implicants that cover it. The choice in this case is simple—we use the
DO NOT COPYW′ ⋅  Z  product term because it has fewer inputs and therefore lower cost.
For more complex cases, we need yet another definition:
eclipse •  Given two prime implicants P and Q in a reduced map, P is said to eclipse Q
(written P … Q) if P covers at least all the 1-cells covered by Q.
DO NOT COPY
If P costs no more than Q and eclipses Q, then removing Q from consideration
cannot prevent us from finding a minimal sum; that is, P is at least as good as Q.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  227
W W W
(a) W X (b) W X (c) W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
0 4 12 8 W′ • Z
DO NOT COPY00  00  1  1 00
1 1
• 
1 5 13 9 W  Y′
01 01 1  1 01
1  1
Z Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1 1 1 11 1
1 1 1
Y Y Y
2 6 14 10
10 10 1 1 10
1 1 •  • 
DO NOT COPYX  Y  Z
W′ • X′
•  • 
X W  X  Y XX XX
F = ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,3,4,5,7,14,15) F = W′ • Y′  + W′ • X′  + W • X • Y + W′ • Z
Figure 4-34  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,3,4,5,7,14,15): (a) Karnaugh map; (b) prime
DO NOT COPY
implicants and distinguished 1-cells; (c) reduced map after
removal of essential prime implicants and covered 1-cells.
An example of eclipsing is shown in Figure 4-35. After removing essential
prime implicants, we are left with two 1-cells, each of which is covered by two
DO NOT COPY
prime implicants. However,  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  eclipses the other two prime implicants,
which therefore may be removed from consideration. The two 1-cells are then
covered only by  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z, which is a  secondary  essential prime implicant  that secondary essential
must be included in the minimal sum. prime implicant
DO NOT COPYFigure 4-36 shows a more difficult case—a logic function with no essential
prime implicants. By trial and error we can find two different minimal sums for
this function.
We can also approach the problem systematically using the  branching branching method
method. Starting with any 1-cell, we arbitrarily select one of the prime impli-
cants that covers it, and include it as if it were essential. This simplifies theDO NOT COPY
Figure 4-35  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(2,6,7,9,13,15): (a) Karnaugh map; (b) prime
implicants and distinguished 1-cells; (c) reduced map after
removal of essential prime implicants and covered 1-cells.
DO NOT COPY
W W W
(a) W X (b) W X (c) W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
•  • 
0 4 12 8 W  X  Z
00 00 00
W • Y′ • Z
1 5 13 9
DO NOT COPY01 01 1  1 01
1 1
Z Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1 1 11 1  1
1 1
Y Y Y
2 6 14 10 •  • 
10 10 1 1 10 X  Y  Z
1 1
W′ • Y • Z′ W′ • X • Y
DO NOT COPYX XX  X
F = ΣW,X,Y,Z(2,6,7,9,13,15) F = W • Y′ • Z + W′ • Y • Z′  +  X • Y • Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

228  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY(a) 0 4 12 8 (b)
00 00
1 5 13 9
01 01 1  1 1
1  1 1
Z Z
3 7 15 11
11 11 1 1  1
1 1  1
Y Y
2 6 14 10
10 10
DO NOT COPY
X X
W W
DO NOT COPYW X W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
(c)  X′ • Y′ • Z (d) W′ • Y′ • Z
00 00
01 1  1 1 01 1  1 1
Z Z
DO NOT COPY11 1 1  1 11 1 1  1
Y Y
10 W • Y • Z 10 W • X′ • Z
W′ • X • Z •  • 
X  Y  Z
X X
•  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  •  • 
DO NOT COPYF = W′  X  Z  + W  Y  Z + X′  Y′  Z  F = X  Y  Z  + W  X′  + W′  Y′  Z
Figure 4-36  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(1,5,7,9,11,15): (a) Karnaugh map; (b) prime
implicants; (c) a minimal sum; (d) another minimal sum.
remaining problem, which we can complete in the usual way to find a tentative
DO NOT COPY
minimal sum. We repeat this process starting with all other prime implicants that
cover the starting 1-cell, generating a different tentative minimal sum from each
starting point. We may get stuck along the way and have to apply the branching
method recursively. Finally, we examine all of the tentative minimal sums gener-
DO NOT COPYated in this way and select one that is truly minimal.
4.3.6 Simplifying Products of Sums
Using the principle of duality, we can minimize product-of-sums expressions by
looking at the 0s on a Karnaugh map. Each 0 on the map corresponds to a max-
DO NOT COPYterm in the canonical product of the logic function. The entire process in the
preceding subsection can be reformulated in a dual way, including the rules for
minimal product writing sum terms corresponding to circled sets of 0s, in order to find a  minimal
product.
Fortunately, once we know how to find minimal sums, there’s an easier
DO NOT COPY
way to find the minimal product for a given logic function  F. The first step is to
complement  F  to obtain  F′. Assuming that  F  is expressed as a minterm list or a
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  229
truth table, complementing is very easy; the 1s of  F′ are just the 0s of  F. Next, we
find a minimal sum for  F′ using the method of the preceding subsection. Finally,
we complement the result using the generalized DeMorgan’s theorem, which
DO NOT COPY
yields a minimal product for (F′)′  =  F. (Note that if you simply “add out” the
minimal-sum expression for the original function, the resulting product-of-sums
expression is not necessarily minimal; for example, see Exercise 4.56.)
In general, to find the lowest-cost two-level realization of a logic function,
we have to find both a minimal sum and a minimal product, and compare them.
DO NOT COPY
If a minimal sum for a logic function has many terms, then a minimal product for
the same function may have few terms. As a trivial example of this tradeoff,
consider a 4-input  OR  function:
F  =  (W) + (X) + (Y) + (Z) (a sum of four trivial product terms)
DO NOT COPY
=  (W + X + Y + Z) (a product of one sum term)
For a nontrivial example, you’re invited to find the minimal product for the func-
tion that we minimized in Figure 4-33 on page 226; it has just two sum terms.
The opposite situation is also sometimes true, as trivially illustrated by a
4-inputDO NOT COPY  AND:
F  =  (W)  ⋅  (X)  ⋅  (Y)  ⋅  (Z)  (a product of four trivial sum terms)
=  (W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z)  (a sum of one product term)
A nontrivial example with a higher-cost product-of-sums is the function in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-29 on page 223.
For some logic functions, both minimal forms are equally costly. For
example, consider a 3-input “exclusive  OR” function; both minimal expressions
have four terms, and each term has three literals:
DO NOT COPYF  =  Σ (1,2,4,7)
X,Y,Z
=  (X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z)  + (X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′) + (X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′) + (X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z)
=  (X  +  Y  +  Z)  ⋅  (X  +  Y′ +  Z′)  ⋅  (X′ +  Y  +  Z′)  ⋅  (X′  + Y′ +  Z)
Still, in most cases, one form or the other will give better results. Looking at both
forms is especially useful in PLD-based designs.DO NOT COPY
PLD Typical PLDs have an  AND-OR  array corresponding to a sum-of-products form, so
MINIMIZATION you might think that only the minimal sum-of-products is relevant to a PLD-based
DO NOT COPY
design. However, most PLDs also have a programmable inverter/buffer at the output
of the  AND-OR  array, which can either invert or not. Thus, the PLD can utilize the
equivalent of the minimal sum by using the AND-OR  array to realize the complement
of the desired function, and then programming the inverter/buffer to invert. Most
logic minimization programs for PLDs automatically find both the minimal sum and
DO NOT COPYthe minimal product, and select the one that requires fewer terms.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

230  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
N3 N3
N3 N2 N3 N2
(a) (b)
N N 00  01  11  10 N N 00  01  11  10 • 
1  0 1  0 N2  N0
DO NOT COPY00 0 4 12 8 00 d
d N3′ • N0
1 5 13 9
01 01 1  1  d
1  1  d
N N
3 7 15 11 0 0
11 11 1 1 d d
1 1 d d
N N
1 2 6 14 10 1
10 10 1 d d
DO NOT COPY1 d d
N2′ • N1
N2 N2
F = ΣN3,N2,N1,N0(1,2,3,5,7) + d(10,11,12,13,14,15) F = N 3′ • N0 + N2′ • N1
Figure 4-37  Prime BCD-digit detector: (a) initial Karnaugh map;
DO NOT COPY
(b) Karnaugh map with prime implicants and distinguished 1-cells.
*4.3.7 “Don’t-Care” Input Combinations
Sometimes the specification of a combinational circuit is such that its output
don’t-care doesn’t matter for certain input combinations, called  don’t-cares. This may be
DO NOT COPY
true because the outputs really don’t matter when these input combinations
occur, or because these input combinations never occur in normal operation. For
example, suppose we wanted to build a prime-number detector whose 4-bit input
N  =  N3N2N1N0  is always a BCD digit; then minterms 10–15 should never occur.
DO NOT COPYA prime BCD-digit detector function may therefore be written as follows:
F  =  ΣN ,N ,N ,N (1,2,3,5,7)  +  d(10,11,12,13,14,15)
3 2  1 0
The  d(…) list specifies the don’t-care input combinations for the function, also
d-set known as the  d-set. Here  F  must be 1 for input combinations in the on-set
(1,2,3,5,7),  F can have any values for inputs in the d-set (10,11,12,13,14,15), and
DO NOT COPY
F  must be 0 for all other input combinations (in the 0-set).
Figure 4-37 shows how to find a minimal sum-of-products realization for
the prime BCD-digit detector, including don’t-cares. The  d’s in the map denote
the don’t-care input combinations. We modify the procedure for circling sets of
DO NOT COPY1s (prime implicants) as follows:
•  Allow  d’s to be included when circling sets of 1s, to make the sets as large
as possible. This reduces the number of variables in the corresponding
prime implicants. Two such prime implicants (N2  ⋅  N0  and  N2′ ⋅  N1) appear
in the example.
DO NOT COPY
•  Do not circle any sets that contain only  d’s. Including the corresponding
product term in the function would unnecessarily increase its cost. Two
such product terms (N3  ⋅  N2  and  N3  ⋅  N1) are circled in the example.
•  Just a reminder: As usual, do not circle any 0s.
DO NOT COPY
* Throughout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  231
The remainder of the procedure is the same. In particular, we look for distin-
guished  1-cells  and  not  distinguished  d-cells,  and  we  include  only  the
corresponding essential prime implicants and any others that are needed to cover
DO NOT COPY
all the 1s on the map. In Figure 4-37, the two essential prime implicants are suf-
ficient to cover all of the 1s on the map. Two of the d’s also happen to be covered,
so  F  will be 1 for don’t-care input combinations 10 and 11, and 0 for the other
don’t-cares.
Some HDLs, including ABEL, provide a means for the designer to specify
DO NOT COPY
don’t-care inputs, and the logic minimization program takes these into account
when computing a minimal sum.
*4.3.8 Multiple-Output Minimization
Most practical combinational logic circuits require more than one output. WeDO NOT COPY
can always handle a circuit with  n  outputs as  n  independent single-output design
problems. However, in doing so, we may miss some opportunities for optimiza-
tion. For example, consider the following two logic functions:
F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(3,6,7)
DO NOT COPY
G  =  Σ (0,1,3)
X,Y,Z
Figure 4-38 shows the design of  F and  G  as two independent single-output func-
tions. However, as shown in Figure 4-39, we can also find a pair of sum-of-
products expressions that share a product term, such that the resulting circuit has
DO NOT COPY
one fewer gate than our original design.
Figure 4-38  Treating a 2-output design as two independent single-output
designs: (a) Karnaugh maps; (b) ”minimal” circuit.
X
(a) DO NOT COPYX Y
(b)
Z 00  01  11  10 • 
X  Y
X • Y
0 1
X
1 1 1 Z F = X • Y + Y • Z
DO NOT COPY•  Y
Y  Z
Y Y • Z
F = X • Y + Y • Z Z
X
X Y Y′
• 
DO NOT COPYX′  Y′
Z 00  01  11  10
0 1 X′ G = X′ • Y′ + X′ • Z
X′ • Y′
1 1  1 Z
X′ • Z
DO NOT COPYY X
G = X′ • Y′  + X′ • Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

232  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
(a) X
X Y
Z 00  01  11  10 • 
DO NOT COPYX  Y
0 1
1 1 1 Z (b)
X • Y
Y • Z
Y X
DO NOT COPY•  •  • 
F = X  Y + X′  Y  Z F = X • Y + X′ • Y • Z
Y
X
X Y X′ • Y • Z
Z
Z 00  01  11  10
X′
0 1
DO NOT COPY
X′ • Y′
G = X′ • Y′ + X′ • Y • Z
1 1  1 Z X′ • Y 
Y′
•  • 
Y X′  Y  Z
G = X′ • Y′  + X′ • Y • Z
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-39  Multiple-output minimization for a 2-output circuit: (a) minimized
maps including a shared term; (b) minimal multiple-output circuit
When we design multiple-output combinational circuits using discrete
DO NOT COPY
gates, as in an ASIC, product-term sharing obviously reduces circuit size and
cost. In addition, PLDs contain multiple copies the sum-of-products structure
that we’ve been learning how to minimize, one per output, and some PLDs allow
product terms to be shared among multiple outputs. Thus, the ideas introduced
in this subsection are used in many logic minimization programs.
DO NOT COPY
You probably could have “eyeballed” the Karnaugh maps for  F  and  G  in
Figure 4-39, and discovered the minimal solution. However, larger circuits can
be minimized only with a formal multiple-output minimization algorithm. We’ll
outline the ideas in such an algorithm here; details can be found in the
DO NOT COPYReferences.
The key to successful multiple-output minimization of a set of  n  functions
is to consider not only the  n  original single-output functions, but also “product
m-product function functions.” An  m-product function  of a set of  n  functions is the product of  m  of
n 
the functions, where 2  ≤  m  ≤  n. There are 2 −  n  −  1 such functions. Fortunately,
DO NOT COPYn  =  2 in our example and there is only one product function,  F  ⋅  G, to consider.
The Karnaugh maps for  F,  G, and  F  ⋅  G  are shown in Figure 4-40; in general, the
map for an  m-product function is obtained by  ANDing the maps of its  m
components.
multiple-output prime A  multiple-output prime implicant  of a set of  n  functions is a prime
implicantDO NOT COPY
implicant of one of the  n  functions or of one of the product functions. The
first step in multiple-output minimization is to find all of the multiple-output
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.3  Combinational Circuit Synthesis  233
(a)
X X
X Y (c) X Y
DO NOT COPYZ 00  01  11  10 X • Y Z 00  01  11  10
0 1 0
1 1 1 Z 1 1 Z
X
(b) X Y
Y • Z  X′ • Y • Z
Y 00  01  11  10 Y
DO NOT COPYZ
F = X • Y + . . . F = X • Y + X′ • Y • Z
0
X 1 1 X
X Y Z X Y
Z 00  01  11  10 X′ • Y • Z Z 00  01  11  10
Y
DO NOT COPY
0 1 •  0
F  G
X′ • Y′
1 1  1 Z 1 1 Z
X′ • Y • Z
• 
Y X′  Z Y
•  •  •  • 
DO NOT COPYG = X′  Y′ + . . . G = X′  Y′ + X′  Y  Z
Figure 4-40  Karnaugh maps for a set of two functions: (a) maps for  F  and  G ;
(b) 2-product map for  F  ⋅  G ; (c) reduced maps for  F  and  G  after
removal of essential prime implicants and covered 1-cells.
DO NOT COPY
prime implicants. Each prime implicant of an  m-product function is a possible
term to include in the corresponding  m  outputs of the circuit. If we were trying to
minimize a set of 8 functions, we would have to find the prime implicants for
8 
2  − 8 − 1 = 247 product functions as well as for the 8 given functions. Obviously,
multiple-output minimization is not for the faint-hearted!
DO NOT COPY
Once we have found the multiple-output prime implicants, we try to
simplify the problem by identifying the essential ones. A  distinguished 1-cell  of distinguished 1-cell
a particular single-output function  F  is a 1-cell that is covered by exactly one essential prime
prime implicant of  F  or of the product functions involving  F. The distinguished implicant
1-cells in Figure 4-39 are shaded. An  essential prime implicant  of a particular
DO NOT COPY
single-output function is one that contains a distinguished 1-cell. As in single-
output minimization, the essential prime implicants must be included in a
minimum-cost solution. Only the 1-cells that are not covered by essential prime
implicants are considered in the remainder of the algorithm.
DO NOT COPYThe final step is to select a minimal set of prime implicants to cover the
remaining 1-cells. In this step we must consider all  n  functions simultaneously,
including the possibility of sharing; details of this procedure are discussed in the
References. In the example of Figure 4-40(c), we see that there exists a single,
shared product term that covers the remaining 1-cell in both  F  and  G.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

234  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
*4.4 Programmed Minimization Methods
Obviously, logic minimization can be a very involved process. In real logic-
DO NOT COPYdesign applications, you are likely to encounter only two kinds of minimization
problems: functions of a few variables that you can “eyeball” using the methods
of the previous section, and more complex, multiple-output functions that are
hopeless without the use of a minimization program.
We know that minimization can be performed visually for functions of a
DO NOT COPY
few variables using the Karnaugh-map method. We’ll show in this section that
the same operations can be performed for functions of an arbitrarily large num-
Quine-McCluskey ber of variables (at least in principle) using a tabular method called the  Quine-
algorithm McCluskey algorithm. Like all algorithms, the Quine-McCluskey algorithm can
be translated into a computer program. And like the map method, the algorithm
DO NOT COPY
has two steps: (a) finding all prime implicants of the function, and (b) selecting a
minimal set of prime implicants that covers the function.
The Quine-McCluskey algorithm is often described in terms of handwrit-
ten tables and manual check-off procedures. However, since no one ever uses
these procedures manually, it’s more appropriate for us to discuss the algorithm
DO NOT COPY
in terms of data structures and functions in a high-level programming language.
The goal of this section is to give you an appreciation for computational
complexity involved in a large minimization problem. We consider only fully
specified, single-output functions; don’t-cares and multiple-output functions
DO NOT COPYcan be handled by fairly straightforward modifications to the single-output
algorithms, as discussed in the References.
*4.4.1 Representation of Product Terms
The starting point for the Quine-McCluskey minimization algorithm is the truth
DO NOT COPYtable or, equivalently, the minterm list of a function. If the function is specified
differently, it must first be converted into this form. For example, an arbitrary
n-variable logic expression can be multiplied out (perhaps using DeMorgan’s
theorem along the way) to obtain a sum-of-products expression. Once we have
n−p
a sum-of-products expression, each  p-variable product term produces 2
DO NOT COPY
minterms in the minterm list.
We showed in Section 4.1.6 that a minterm of an  n-variable logic function
can be represented by an  n-bit integer (the minterm number), where each bit
indicates whether the corresponding variable is complemented or uncomple-
mented. However, a minimization algorithm must also deal with product terms
DO NOT COPY
that are not minterms, where some variables do not appear at all. Thus, we must
represent three possibilities for each variable in a general product term:
1  Uncomplemented.
0  Complemented.
DO NOT COPY
x  Doesn’t appear.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.4  Programmed Minimization Methods  235
These possibilities are represented by a string of  n  of the above digits in the  cube cube representation
representation  of a product term. For example, if we are working with product
terms of up to eight variables,  X7,  X6,  …,  X1,  X0, we can write the following
DO NOT COPY
product terms and their cube representations:
X7′ ⋅  X6  ⋅  X5  ⋅  X4′ ⋅  X3  ⋅  X2  ⋅  X1  ⋅  X0′  ≡  01101110
X3  ⋅  X2  ⋅  X1  ⋅  X0′  ≡  xxxx1110
X7  ⋅  X5′ ⋅  X4  ⋅  X3  ⋅  X2′ ⋅  X1  ≡  1x01101x
DO NOT COPY
X6  ≡  x1xxxxxx
Notice that for convenience, we named the variables just like the bit positions in
n-bit binary integers.
In terms of the  n-cube and  m-subcube nomenclature of Section 2.14, the
DO NOT COPY
string 1x01101x represents a 2-subcube of an 8-cube, and the string 01101110
represents a 0-subcube of an 8-cube. However, in the minimization literature,
the maximum dimension  n  of a cube or subcube is usually implicit, and an
m-subcube is simply called an “m-cube” or a “cube” for short; we’ll follow this
practice in this section.
DO NOT COPY
To represent a product term in a computer program, we can use a data
structure with  n  elements, each of which has three possible values. In C, we
might make the following declarations:
typedef enum {complemented, uncomplemented, doesntappear} TRIT;
typedef TRIT[16] CUBE;DO NOT COPY  /* Represents a single product
term with up to 16 variables */
However, these declarations do not lead to a particularly efficient internal repre-
sentation  of  cubes.  As  we’ll  see,  cubes  are  easier  to  manipulate  using
conventional computer instructions if anDO NOT COPY  n-variable product term is represented
by two n-bit computer words, as suggested by the following declarations:
#define MAX_VARS 16  /* Max # of variables in a product term */
typedef unsigned short WORD;  /* Use 16-bit words */
struct cube {
WORD t;DO NOT COPY  /* Bits 1 for uncomplemented variables. */
WORD f;  /* Bits 1 for complemented variables.  */
};
typedef struct cube CUBE;
CUBE P1, P2, P3;  /* Allocate three cubes for use by program. */
DO NOT COPY
Here, a  WORD is a 16-bit integer, and a 16-variable product term is represented by
a record with two  WORDs, as shown in Figure 4-41(a). The first word in a  CUBE
has a 1 for each variable in the product term that appears uncomplemented (or
“true,”  t), and the second has a 1 for each variable that appears complemented
(or “false,”  f). If a particular bit position has 0s in both  WORDs, then the corre-
DO NOT COPY
sponding variable does not appear, while the case of a particular bit position
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

236  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
15  14 13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0
(a)
CUBE: .t
DO NOT COPY.f
1 0 0
X8  X8′  X8 doesn't appear
DO NOT COPY0 1 0
Figure 4-41
Internal representation
of 16-variable product terms
15  14 13  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0
in a Pascal program: (b)
(a) general format; (b)  P1  = P1: 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 .t
X15DO NOT COPY ⋅X12′⋅X10′⋅ X9⋅X4′⋅X1 ⋅X0
0 0 0 1 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 .f
having 1s in both  WORDs is not used. Thus, the program variable  P1  in (b) repre-
sents the product term  P1  =  X15  ⋅  X12′ ⋅  X10′ ⋅  X9  ⋅  X4′ ⋅  X1  ⋅  X0. If we wished
DO NOT COPYto represent a logic function  F of up to 16 variables, containing up to 100 product
terms, we could declare an array of 100  CUBEs:
CUBE F[100];  /* Storage for a logic function
with up to 100 product terms. */
DO NOT COPYUsing the foregoing cube representation, it is possible to write short,
efficient C functions that manipulate product terms in useful ways. Table 4-8
shows  several  such  functions.  Corresponding  to  two  of  the  functions,
Figure 4-42 depicts how two cubes can be compared and combined if possible
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-42  Cube manipulations: (a) determining whether two cubes are
combinable using theorem T10, term ⋅ X  +  term ⋅ X′  =  term;
(b) combining cubes using theorem T10.
(a)
C1: C1.t
DO NOT COPY⇒ C1.t  XOR  C2.t
C1.f
YES combinable
Equal and contain
a single 1?
NO not combinable
C2: C2.t
⇒ C1.f  XOR  C2.f
C2.f
DO NOT COPY
XOR  ≡  bit-by-bit Exclusive OR operation
(b)
C3: C1.t  AND  C2.t
AND  ≡  bit-by-bit Logical AND operation
DO NOT COPYC1.f  AND  C2.f
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.4  Programmed Minimization Methods  237
Ta b l e 4 - 8  Cube comparing and combining functions used in minimization program.
int EqualCubes(CUBE C1, CUBE C2)  /* Returns true if C1 and C2 are identical.  */
{ DO NOT COPY
return ( (C1.t == C2.t) && (C1.f == C2.f) );
}
int Oneone(WORD w)  /* Returns true if w has exactly one 1 bit.  */
{ DO NOT COPY/* Optimizing the speed of this routine is critical  */
int ones, b;  /*  and is left as an exercise for the hacker.  */
ones = 0;
for (b=0; b<MAX_VARS; b++) {
if (w & 1) ones++;
w = w>>1;
DO NOT COPY
}
return((ones==1));
}
int Combinable(CUBE C1, CUBE C2)
DO NOT COPY
{  /* Returns true if C1 and C2 differ in only one variable, */
WORD twordt, twordf;  /* which appears true in one and false in the other.  */
twordt = C1.t ^ C2.t;
twordf = C1.f ^ C2.f;
return( (twordt==twordf) && Oneone(twordt) );DO NOT COPY
}
void Combine(CUBE C1, CUBE C2, CUBE *C3)
/* Combines C1 and C2 using theorem T10, and stores the  */
{ DO NOT COPY/*  result in C3.  Assumes Combinable(C1,C2) is true.  */
C3->t = C1.t & C2.t;
C3->f = C1.f & C2.f;
}
DO NOT COPY
using theorem T10,  term  ⋅  X  +  term  ⋅  X′  =  term. This theorem says that two prod-
uct terms can be combined if they differ in only one variable that appears
complemented in one term and uncomplemented in the other. Combining two  m-
cubes yields an (m  +  1)-cube. Using cube representation, we can apply the com-
bining theorem to a few examples:DO NOT COPY
010  +  000  =  0x0
00111001  +  00111000  =  0011100x
101xx0x0  +  101xx1x0  =  101xxxx0
DO NOT COPYx111xx00110x000x  +  x111xx00010x000x  =  x111xx00x10x000x
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

238  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
*4.4.2 Finding Prime Implicants by Combining Product Terms
The first step in the Quine-McCluskey algorithm is to determine all of the prime
implicants of the logic function. With a Karnaugh map, we do this visually by
DO NOT COPY
identifying “largest possible rectangular sets of 1s.” In the algorithm, this is done
by systematic, repeated application of theorem T10 to combine minterms, then
1-cubes, 2-cubes, and so on, creating the largest possible cubes (smallest possi-
ble product terms) that cover only 1s of the function.
The C program in Table 4-9 applies the algorithm to functions with up to
DO NOT COPY
16 variables. It uses 2-dimensional arrays,  cubes[m][j]  and  covered[m][j],
to keep track of  MAX_VARS  m-cubes. The 0-cubes (minterms) are supplied by the
user. Starting with the 0-cubes, the program examines every pair of cubes at each
level and combines them when possible into cubes at the next level. Cubes that
DO NOT COPYare combined into a next-level cube are marked as “covered”; cubes that are not
covered are prime implicants.
Even though the program in Table 4-9 is short, an experienced programmer
could become very pessimistic just looking at its structure. The inner  for  loop
is nested four levels deep, and the number of times it might be executed is on
DO NOT COPYthe order of  MAX_VARS  ⋅  MAX_CUBES3. That’s right, that’s an exponent, not a
footnote! We picked the value  maxCubes  =  1000 somewhat arbitrarily (in fact,
too optimistically for many functions), but if you believe this number, then the
inner loop can be executed  billions and billions  of times.
n
The maximum number of minterms of an  n-variable function is 2 , of
DO NOT COPY
course, and so by all rights the program in Table 4-9 should declare maxCubes  to
16 
be 2  , at least to handle the maximum possible number of 0-cubes. Such a dec-
laration would not be overly pessimistic. If an  n-variable function has a product
n−1 
term equal to a single variable, then 2 minterms are in fact needed to cover
that product term.
DO NOT COPY
For larger cubes, the situation is actually worse. The number of possible m-
 n  n – m  n
subcubes of an  n-cube is  × 2 , where the binomial coefficient  is
 m  m
n−m 
the number of ways to choose  m  variables to be x’s, and 2 is the number of
DO NOT COPYways to assign 0s and 1s to the remaining variables. For 16-variable functions,
the worst case occurs with  m  =  5; there are 8,945,664 possible 5-subcubes of a
16-cube. The total number of distinct  m-subcubes of an  n-cube, over all values of
n
m, is 3 . So a general minimization program might require a  lot  more memory
than we’ve allocated in Table 4-9.
DO NOT COPY
There are a few things that we can do to optimize the storage space and
execution time required in Table 4-9 (see Exercises 4.72–4.75), but they are pid-
dling compared to the overwhelming combinatorial complexity of the problem.
Thus, even with today’s fast computers and huge memories, direct application of
DO NOT COPYthe Quine-McCluskey algorithm for generating prime implicants is generally
limited to functions with only a few variables (fewer than 15–20).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.4  Programmed Minimization Methods  239
Ta b l e 4 - 9  A C program that finds prime implicants using the Quine-McCluskey algorithm.
#define TRUE  1
#define FALSEDO NOT COPY  0
#define MAX_CUBES 50
void main()
{
CUBE cubes[MAX_VARS+1][MAX_CUBES];DO NOT COPY
int covered[MAX_VARS+1][MAX_CUBES];
int numCubes[MAX_VARS+1];
int m;  /* Value of m in an m-cube, i.e., ‘‘level m.’’ */
int j, k, p;  /* Indices into the cubes or covered array.  */
CUBE tempCube;
DO NOT COPY
int found;
/* Initialize number of m-cubes at each level m. */
for (m=0; m<MAX_VARS+1; m++) numCubes[m] = 0;
DO NOT COPY
/* Read a list of minterms (0-cubes) supplied by the user, storing them  */
/* in the cubes[0,j] subarray, setting covered[0,j] to false for each  */
/* minterm, and setting numCubes[0] to the total number of minterms read.  */
ReadMinterms;
for (m=0; m<MAX_VARS; m++)DO NOT COPY  /* Do for all levels except the last */
for (j=0; j<numCubes[m]; j++)  /* Do for all cubes at this level  */
for (k=j+1; k<numCubes[m]; k++)  /* Do for other cubes at this level  */
if (Combinable(cubes[m][j], cubes[m][k])) {
/* Mark the cubes as covered. */
DO NOT COPYcovered[m][j] = TRUE;  covered[m][k] = TRUE;
/* Combine into an (m+1)-cube, store in tempCube. */
Combine(cubes[m][j], cubes[m][k], &tempCube);
found = FALSE;  /* See if we’ve generated this one before. */
for (p=0; p<numCubes[m+1]; p++)
if (EqualCubes(cubes[m+1][p],tempCube)) found = TRUE;
DO NOT COPY
if (!found) {  /* Add the new cube to the next level. */
numCubes[m+1] = numCubes[m+1] + 1;
cubes[m+1][numCubes[m+1]-1] = tempCube;
covered[m+1][numCubes[m+1]-1] = FALSE;
}
DO NOT COPY
}
for (m=0; m<MAX_VARS; m++)  /* Do for all levels  */
for (j=0; j<numCubes[m]; j++)  /* Do for all cubes at this level */
/* Print uncovered cubes -- these are the prime implicants. */
if (!covered[m][j]) PrintCube(cubes[m][j]);
} DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

240  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
minterms
2  6  7  9  13  15 2  6  7  9  13  15
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
A  √  √ A  √  √
B √  √ B √  √
prime implicants C √ √ C √ √
D √  √ D √  √
E √  √ E √  √
DO NOT COPY
7  15 7  15 7  15
(c) (d) (e)
B √ B √ C √  √
DO NOT COPY
C √ √ C √ √
D √ D √
Figure 4-43  Prime-implicant tables: (a) original table; (b) showing
distinguished 1-cells and essential prime implicants; (c) after
DO NOT COPY
removal of essential prime implicants; (d) showing eclipsed
rows; (e) after removal of eclipsed rows, showing secondary
essential prime implicant.
DO NOT COPY
*4.4.3 Finding a Minimal Cover Using a Prime-Implicant Table
The second step in minimizing a combinational logic function, once we have a
list of all its prime implicants, is to select a minimal subset of them to cover all
the 1s of the function. The Quine-McCluskey algorithm uses a two-dimensional
prime-implicant table array called a  prime-implicant table  to do this. Figure 4-43(a) shows a small but
DO NOT COPY
representative prime-implicant table, corresponding to the Karnaugh-map min-
imization problem of Figure 4-35. There is one column for each minterm of the
function, and one row for each prime implicant. Each entry is a bit that is 1 if
and only if the prime implicant for that row covers the minterm for that column
DO NOT COPY(shown in the figure as a check).
The steps for selecting prime implicants with the table are analogous to the
steps that we used in Section 4.3.5 with Karnaugh maps:
1.  Identify distinguished 1-cells. These are easily identified in the table as
columns with a single 1, as shown in Figure 4-43(b).
DO NOT COPY
2.  Include all essential prime implicants in the minimal sum. A row that con-
tains a check in one or more distinguished-1-cell columns corresponds to
an essential prime implicant.
3.  Remove from consideration the essential prime implicants and the 1-cells
DO NOT COPY
(minterms) that they cover. In the table, this is done by deleting the corre-
sponding rows and columns, marked in color in Figure 4-43(b). If any rows
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.4  Programmed Minimization Methods  241
have no checks remaining, they are also deleted; the corresponding prime
implicants are  redundant, that is, completely covered by essential prime redundant prime
implicants. This step leaves the reduced table shown in (c). implicant
DO NOT COPY
4.  Remove from consideration any prime implicants that are “eclipsed” by
others with equal or lesser cost. In the table, this is done by deleting any
rows whose checked columns are a proper subset of another row’s, and
deleting all but one of a set of rows with identical checked columns. This
DO NOT COPYis shown in color in (d), and leads to the further reduced table in (e).
When a function is realized in a PLD, all of its prime implicants may be
considered to have equal cost, because all of the  AND  gates in a PLD have
all of the inputs available. Otherwise, the prime implicants must be sorted
and selected according to the number of  AND-gate inputs.
DO NOT COPY
5.  Identify distinguished 1-cells and include all secondary essential prime
implicants in the minimal sum. As before, any row that contains a check in
one or more distinguished-1-cell columns corresponds to a secondary
essential prime implicant.
6.DO NOT COPY  If all remaining columns are covered by the secondary essential prime
implicants, as in (e), we’re done. Otherwise, if any secondary essential
prime implicants were found in the previous step, we go back to step 3 and
iterate. Otherwise, the branching method must be used, as described in
Section 4.3.5. This involves picking rows one at a time, treating them as if
DO NOT COPY
they were essential, and recursing (and cursing) on steps 3–6.
Although a prime-implicant table allows a fairly straightforward prime-
implicant selection algorithm, the data structure required in a corresponding
n 
computer program is huge, since it requires on the order of  p  ⋅  2 bits, where p  is
the number of prime implicants andDO NOT COPY  n  is the number of input bits (assuming that
the given function produces a 1 output for most input combinations). Worse,
executing the steps that we so blithely described in a few sentences above
requires a huge amount of computation.
*4.4.4 Other Minimization MethodsDO NOT COPY
Although the previous subsections form an introduction to logic minimization
algorithms, the methods they describe are by no means the latest and greatest.
Spurred on by the ever increasing density of VLSI chips, many researchers have
discovered more effective ways to minimize combinational logic functions.
DO NOT COPY
Their results fall roughly into three categories:
1.  Computational improvements. Improved algorithms typically use clever
data structures or rearrange the order of the steps to reduce the memory
requirements and execution time of the classical algorithms.
DO NOT COPY
2.  Heuristic methods.  Some minimization problems are just too big to be
solved using an “exact” algorithm. These problems can be attacked using
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

242  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
shortcuts and well-educated guesses to reduce memory size and execution
time to a fraction of what an “exact” algorithm would require. However,
rather than finding a provably minimal expression for a logic function,
DO NOT COPY
heuristic methods attempt to find an “almost minimal” one.
Even for problems that can be solved by an “exact” method, a heuristic
method typically finds a good solution ten times faster. The most success-
ful heuristic program, Espresso-II, does in fact produce minimal or near-
DO NOT COPYminimal results for the majority of problems (within one or two product
terms), including problems with dozens of inputs and hundreds of product
terms.
3.  Looking at things differently.  As we mentioned earlier, multiple-output
minimization can be handled by straightforward, fairly mechanical modi-
DO NOT COPY
fications to single-output minimization methods. However, by looking at
multiple-output minimization as a problem in multivalued (nonbinary)
logic, the designers of the Espresso-MV algorithm were able to make sub-
stantial performance improvements over Espresso-II.
DO NOT COPYMore information on these methods can be found in the References.
*4.5 Timing Hazards
The analysis methods that we developed in Section 4.2 ignore circuit delay and
DO NOT COPY
steady-state behavior predict only the  steady-state behavior  of combinational logic circuits. That is,
they predict a circuit’s output as a function of its inputs under the assumption
that the inputs have been stable for a long time, relative to the delays in the cir-
cuit’s electronics. However, we showed in Section 3.6 that the actual delay from
an input change to the corresponding output change in a real logic circuit is non-
DO NOT COPY
zero and depends on many factors.
transient behavior Because of circuit delays, the  transient behavior  of a logic circuit may
differ from what is predicted by a steady-state analysis. In particular, a circuit’s
glitch output may produce a short pulse, often called a  glitch, at a time when steady-
hazard state analysis predicts that the output should not change. A  hazard  is said to exist
DO NOT COPY
when a circuit has the possibility of producing such a glitch. Whether or not the
glitch actually occurs depends on the exact delays and other electrical character-
istics of the circuit. Since such parameters are difficult to control in production
circuits, a logic designer must be prepared to eliminate hazards (the  possibility
DO NOT COPYof a glitch) even though a glitch may occur only under a worst-case combination
of logical and electrical conditions.
*4.5.1 Static Hazards
static-1 hazard A  static-1 hazard is the possibility of a circuit’s output producing a 0 glitch when
DO NOT COPYwe would expect the output to remain at a nice steady 1 based on a static analysis
of the circuit function. A formal definition is given as follows.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.5  Timing Hazards  243
1
Z
(a)  (b) 0
1
XZP ZP
DO NOT COPYX ZP 0
Z F 1
YZ
0
YZ
1
Y XZP
0
DO NOT COPY1
F
0
Figure 4-44  Circuit with a static-1 hazard: (a) logic diagram; (b) timing diagram.
Definition:  A static-1 hazard is a pair of input combinations that: (a) differ in
DO NOT COPY
only one input variable and (b) both give a 1 output; such that it is
possible for a momentary 0 output to occur during a transition in
the differing input variable.
For example, consider the logic circuit in Figure 4-44(a). Suppose that  X
andDO NOT COPY  Y  are both 1, and  Z  is changing from 1 to 0. Then (b) shows the timing dia-
gram assuming that the propagation delay through each gate or inverter is one
unit time. Even though “static” analysis predicts that the output is 1 for both
input combinations  X,Y,Z  =  111 and  X,Y,Z  =  110, the timing diagram shows that
F  goes to 0 for one unit time during a 1-0 transition on  Z, because of the delay in
DO NOT COPY
the inverter that generates  Z′.
A  static-0 hazard  is the possibility of a 1 glitch when we expect the circuit static-0 hazard
to have a steady 0 output:
Definition:  A static-0 hazard is a pair of input combinations that: (a) differ in
DO NOT COPYonly one input variable and (b) both give a 0 output; such that it is
possible for a momentary 1 output to occur during a transition in
the differing input variable.
Since a static-0 hazard is just the dual of a static-1 hazard, an  OR-AND  circuit
that is the dual of Figure 4-44(a) would have a static-0 hazard.DO NOT COPY
An  OR-AND  circuit with four static-0 hazards is shown in Figure 4-45(a).
One of the hazards occurs when  W,X,Y  =  000 and  Z  is changed, as shown in (b).
You should be able to find the other three hazards and eliminate all of them after
studying the next subsection.
DO NOT COPY
*4.5.2 Finding Static Hazards Using Maps
A Karnaugh map can be used to detect static hazards in a two-level sum-of-
products or product-of-sums circuit. The existence or nonexistence of static
hazards depends on the circuit design for a logic function.
DO NOT COPY
A properly designed two-level sum-of-products (AND-OR) circuit has no
static-0 hazards. A static-0 hazard would exist in such a circuit only if both a
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

244  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
1
(a) 0 (b) Z
W 0 0
0 0 WXZP
X 1
1→0 ZP
DO NOT COPY0→1 ZP 1→0 0
Z
0→1 1
YZ 0→1 F YZ
0  0 0
Y
YP 1 1
WXZP
1 0
XPYP
DO NOT COPY1 1
XP F
0
Figure 4-45  Circuit with static-0 hazards: (a) logic diagram; (b) timing diagra
DO NOT COPYvariable and its complement were connected to the same  AND  gate, which would
be silly. However, the circuit  may  have static-1 hazards. Their existence can be
predicted from a Karnaugh map where the product terms corresponding to the
AND  gates in the circuit are circled.
Figure 4-46(a) shows the Karnaugh map for the circuit of Figure 4-44. It is
DO NOT COPYclear from the map that there is no single product term that covers both input
combinations  X,Y,Z  =  111 and  X,Y,Z =  110. Thus, intuitively, it is possible for the
output to “glitch” momentarily to 0 if the  AND  gate output that covers one of the
combinations goes to 0 before the  AND  gate output covering the other input
combination goes to 1. The way to eliminate the hazard is also quite apparent:
DO NOT COPY
Simply include an extra product term (AND  gate) to cover the hazardous input
pair, as shown in Figure 4-46(b). The extra product term, it turns out, is the
consensus consensus  of the two original terms; in general, we must add consensus terms to
eliminate  hazards.  The  corresponding  hazard-free  circuit  is  shown  in
Figure 4-47.
DO NOT COPY
Another example is shown in Figure 4-48. In this example, three product
terms must be added to eliminate the static-1 hazards.
A properly designed two-level product-of-sums (OR-AND) circuit has no
static-1 hazards. It  may  have static-0 hazards, however. These hazards can be
DO NOT COPYdetected and eliminated by studying the adjacent 0s in the Karnaugh map, in a
manner dual to the foregoing.
(a)  X (b) X
X Y X Y
Figure 4-46 X • Z′  X • Z′
00  01  11  10 00  01  11  10
Karnaugh map for theDO NOT COPYZ Z
circuit of Figure 4-44: 0 1 1 0 1 1
(a) as originally designed;
1 1 1 Z 1 1 1 Z
(b) with static-1 hazard
eliminated. Y • Z  Y • Z  X • Y
Y Y
DO NOT COPY
F = X • Z′  + Y • Z  F = X • Z′  + Y • Z + X • Y
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *4.5  Timing Hazards  245
X XZP
ZP
Z
DO NOT COPY
YZ F
Y
Figure 4-47
XY Circuit with static-1
hazard eliminated.
DO NOT COPY
*4.5.3 Dynamic Hazards
A  dynamic hazard  is the possibility of an output changing more than once as the dynamic hazard
result of a single input transition. Multiple output transitions can occur if there
DO NOT COPY
are multiple paths with different delays from the changing input to the changing
output.
For example, consider the circuit in Figure 4-49; it has three different paths
from input  X  to the output  F. One of the paths goes through a slow  OR  gate, and
another goes through an  OR  gate that is even slower. If the input to the circuit is
DO NOT COPY
W,X,Y,Z  =  0,0,0,1, then the output will be 1, as shown. Now suppose we change
the X  input to 1. Assuming that all of the gates except the two marked “slow” and
“slower” are very fast, the transitions shown in black occur next, and the output
goes to 0. Eventually, the output of the “slow”  OR  gate changes, creating the
transitions shown in nonitalic color, and the output goes to 1. Finally, the outputDO NOT COPY
of the “slower”  OR  gate changes, creating the transitions shown in italic color,
and the output goes to its final state of 0.
Dynamic hazards do not occur in a properly designed two-level  AND-OR
or  OR-AND  circuit, that is, one in which no variable and its complement are con-
DO NOT COPY
Figure 4-48  Karnaugh map for another sum-of-products circuit: (a) as originally
designed; (b) with extra product terms to cover static-1 hazards.
X • Y′ • Z′
DO NOT COPYW W
(a) W X (b) W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11 10
•  00  1 1 •  •  00  1 1
W′  Z W′  X  Y′
01 1  1 01 1  1
DO NOT COPYZ Z
11 1  1  1 1 11 1  1  1 1
Y Y
• 
10 1  1 W • Y 10 1  1 Y  Z
W • X • Z′
X X
DO NOT COPY
F = X • Y′ • Z′  + W′ • Z + W • Y F = X • Y′ • Z′  + W′ • Z + W • Y
+ W′ • X • Y′  +  Y • Z′  + W • X • Z′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

246  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
0
W 0 → 1
0 → 1 slow
X
DO NOT COPY0 0 → 1 →0
Y 1 →0 1 → 0  → 1 →0
slower  1 → 0  F
1 → 0
1 → 0
1
DO NOT COPY1
1
Z
Figure 4-49  Circuit with a dynamic hazard.
DO NOT COPY
nected to the same first-level gate. In multilevel circuits, dynamic hazards can be
discovered using a method described in the References.
*4.5.4 Designing Hazard-Free Circuits
There are only a few situations, such as the design of feedback sequential cir-
DO NOT COPY
cuits, that require hazard-free combinational circuits. Techniques for finding
hazards in arbitrary circuits, described in the References, are rather difficult to
use. So, when you require a hazard-free design, it’s best to use a circuit structure
that is easy to analyze.
In particular, we have indicated that a properly designed two-level  AND-
DO NOT COPY
OR  circuit has no static-0 or dynamic hazards. Static-1 hazards may exist in such
a circuit, but they can be found and eliminated using the map method described
earlier. If cost is not a problem, then a brute-force method of obtaining a hazard-
free realization is to use the complete sum—the sum of all of the prime impli-
DO NOT COPYcants of the logic function (see Exercise 4.79). In a dual manner, a hazard-free
two-level  OR-AND  circuit can be designed for any logic function. Finally, note
that everything we’ve said about  AND-OR  circuits naturally applies to the corre-
sponding  NAND-NAND  designs, and for  OR-AND  applies to  NOR-NOR.
DO NOT COPY
MOST HAZARDS Any combinational circuit can be analyzed for the presence of hazards. However, a
ARE NOT well-designed, synchronous  digital system is structured so that hazard analysis is not
HAZARDOUS! needed for most of its circuits. In a synchronous system, all of the inputs to a com-
DO NOT COPY
binational circuit are changed at a particular time, and the outputs are not “looked at”
until they have had time to settle to a steady-state value. Hazard analysis and elimi-
nation are typically needed only in the design of asynchronous sequential circuits,
such as the feedback sequential circuits discussed in \secref{fdbkseq}. You’ll rarely
have reason to design such a circuit, but if you do, an understanding of hazards will
DO NOT COPYbe absolutely essential for a reliable result.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  247
4.6 The ABEL Hardware Design Language
ABEL is a hardware design language (HDL) that was invented to allow design-
ers to specify logic functions for realization in PLDs. An ABEL program is aDO NOT COPY
text file containing several elements:
•  Documentation, including program name and comments.
•  Declarations that identify the inputs and outputs of the logic functions to
DO NOT COPYbe performed.
•  Statements that specify the logic functions to be performed.
•  Usually, a declaration of the type of PLD or other targeted device in which
the specified logic functions are to be performed.
•DO NOT COPY  Usually, “test vectors” that specify the logic functions’ expected outputs
for certain inputs.
ABEL is supported by an  ABEL language processor, which we’ll simply call an ABEL language
ABEL compiler. The compiler’s job is to translate the ABEL text file into a “fuse processor
pattern” that can be downloaded into a physical PLD. Even though most PLDs ABEL compiler
DO NOT COPY
can be physically programmed only with patterns corresponding to sum-of-
products expressions, ABEL allows PLD functions to be expressed using truth
tables or nested “IF” statements as well as by any algebraic expression format.
The compiler manipulates these formats and minimizes the resulting equations
to fit, if possible, into the available PLD structure.DO NOT COPY
We’ll talk about PLD structures, fuse patterns, and related topics later, in
\secref{PLDs} and show how to target ABEL programs to specific PLDs. In the
meantime, we’ll show how ABEL can be used to specify combinational logic
functions without necessarily having to declare the targeted device type. Later,
in \chapref{seqPLDs}, we’ll do the same for sequential logic functions.DO NOT COPY
4.6.1  ABEL Program Structure
Table 4-10 shows the typical structure of an ABEL program, and Table 4-11
shows an actual program exhibiting the following language features:
DO NOT COPY
•  Identifiers  must begin with a letter or underscore, may contain up to 31 identifier
letters, digits, and underscores, and are case sensitive.
•  A program file begins with a module  statement, which associates an iden- module
tifier (Alarm_Circuit) with the program module. Large programs can
DO NOT COPYhave multiple modules, each with its own local title, declarations, and
equations. Note that keywords such as “module” are not case sensitive.
LEGAL NOTICE  ABEL (Advanced Boolean Equation Language) is a trademark of Data I/O
DO NOT COPY
Corporation (Redmond, WA 98073).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

248  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 4 - 1 0 module module name
Typical structure of an title  string
ABEL program.
deviceID  device deviceType;
DO NOT COPY
pin declarations
other declarations
equations
equations
test_vectors
DO NOT COPY
test vectors
end  module name
title •  The title  statement specifies a title string that will be inserted into the
DO NOT COPY
documentation files that are created by the compiler.
string •  A  string  is a series of characters enclosed by single quotes.
device •  The optional device  declaration includes a device identifier (ALARMCKT)
and a string that denotes the device type (’P16V8C’  for a GAL16V8). The
DO NOT COPYcompiler uses the device identifier in the names of documentation files that
it generates, and it uses the device type to determine whether the device can
really perform the logic functions specified in the program.
comment •  Comments  begin with a double quote and end with another double quote
or the end of the line, whichever comes first.
DO NOT COPY
pin declarations •  Pin declarations  tell the compiler about symbolic names associated with
the device’s external pins. If the signal name is preceded with the  NOT
prefix (!), then the complement of the named signal will appear on the pin.
Pin declarations may or may not include pin numbers; if none are given,
DO NOT COPYthe compiler assigns them based on the capabilities of the targeted device.
istype •  The istype  keyword precedes a list of one or properties, separated by
com commas. This tells the compiler the type of output signal. The “com”
keyword indicates a combinational output. If no  istype  keyword is given,
the compiler generally assumes that the signal is an input unless it appears
DO NOT COPY
on the left-hand side of an equation, in which case it tries to figure out the
output’s properties from the context. For your own protection, it’s best just
to use the  istype  keyword for all outputs!
other declarations •  Other declarations  allow the designer to define constants and expressions
DO NOT COPYto improve program readability and to simplify logic design.
equations •  The equations  statement indicates that logic equations defining output
signals as functions of input signals will follow.
equations •  Equations  are  written  like  assignment  statements  in  a  conventional
programming language. Each equation is terminated by a semicolon.
DO NOT COPY
ABEL uses the following symbols for logical operations:
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  249
Ta b l e 4 - 1 1  An ABEL program for the alarm circuit of Figure 4-11.
module Alarm_Circuit
title ’Alarm Circuit ExampleDO NOT COPY
J. Wakerly, Micro Systems Engineering’
ALARMCKT device ’P16V8C’;
" Input pins
PANIC, ENABLEA, EXITING  pin 1, 2, 3;
WINDOW, DOOR, GARAGEDO NOT COPY  pin 4, 5, 6;
" Output pins
ALARM  pin 11 istype ’com’;
" Constant definition
X = .X.;
DO NOT COPY
" Intermediate equation
SECURE = WINDOW & DOOR & GARAGE;
equations
ALARM = PANIC # ENABLEA & !EXITING & !(WINDOW & DOOR & GARAGE);DO NOT COPY
test_vectors
([PANIC,ENABLEA,EXITING,WINDOW,DOOR,GARAGE] -> [ALARM])
[  1,  .X.,  .X.,  .X., .X.,  .X.] -> [  1];
[  0,  0,  .X.,  .X., .X.,  .X.] -> [  0];
[  DO NOT COPY0,  1,  1,  .X., .X.,  .X.] -> [  0];
[  0,  1,  0,  0, .X.,  .X.] -> [  1];
[  0,  1,  0,  .X.,  0,  .X.] -> [  1];
[  0,  1,  0,  .X., .X.,  0] -> [  1];
[  0,  1,  0,  1,  1,  1] -> [  0];
DO NOT COPY
end Alarm_Circuit
&  AND. &  (AND)
#  OR. #  (OR)
DO NOT COPY!  NOT  (used as a prefix). !  (NOT)
$  XOR. $  (XOR)
!$  XNOR. !$  (XNOR)
As in conventional programming languages,  AND  (&) has precedence over
DO NOT COPY
OR  (#) in expressions. The @ALTERNATE  directive can be used to make the @ALTERNATE
compiler recognize an alternate set of symbols for these operations:  +,  *,  /
,  :+:, and  :*:, respectively. This book uses the default symbols.
•  The optional test_vectors  statement indicates that test vectors follow. test_vectors
•DO NOT COPY  Test vectors  associate input combinations with expected output values; test vectors
they are used for simulation and testing as explained in Section 4.6.7.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

250  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
.X. •  The compiler recognizes several special constants, including .X., a single
bit whose value is “don’t-care.”
end •  The end  statement marks the end of the module.
DO NOT COPY
unclocked assignment Equations for combinational outputs use the  unclocked assignment opera-
operator,  = tor,  =. The left-hand side of an equation normally contains a signal name. The
right-hand side is a logic expression, not necessarily in sum-of-products form.
The signal name on the left-hand side of an equation may be optionally preceded
DO NOT COPY
by the  NOT  operator  !; this is equivalent to complementing the right-hand side.
The compiler’s job is to generate a fuse pattern such that the signal named on the
left-hand side realizes the logic expression on the right-hand side.
4.6.2  ABEL Compiler Operation
DO NOT COPY
The program in Table 4-11 realizes the alarm function that we described on
page 213. The signal named  ENABLE  has been coded as  ENABLEA  because
ENABLE  is a reserved word in ABEL.
Notice that not all of the equations appear under the  equations  statement.
An equation for an intermediate variable,  SECURE, appears earlier. This equation
DO NOT COPY
is merely a definition that associates an expression with the identifier  SECURE.
The ABEL compiler substitutes this expression for the identifier  SECURE  in
every place that  SECURE  appears after its definition.
In Figure 4-19 on page 214 we realized the alarm circuit directly from the
DO NOT COPYSECURE  and  ALARM  expressions, using multiple levels of logic. The ABEL
compiler doesn’t use expressions to interconnect gates in this way. Rather, it
“crunches” the expressions to obtain a minimal two-level sum-of-products result
appropriate for realization in a PLD. Thus, when compiled, Table 4-11 should
yield a result equivalent to the  AND-OR circuit that we showed in Figure 4-20 on
DO NOT COPYpage 214, which happens to be minimal.
In fact, it does. Table 4-12 shows the synthesized equations file created by
the ABEL compiler. Notice that the compiler creates equations only for the
ALARM  signal, the only output. The  SECURE  signal does not appear anywhere.
The compiler finds a minimal sum-of-products expression for both  ALARM
DO NOT COPY
and its complement,  !ALARM. As mentioned previously, many PLDs have the
ability selectively to invert or not to invert their  AND-OR  output. The “reverse
polarity equation” in Table 4-12 is a sum-of-products realization of  !ALARM, and
would be used if output inversion were selected.
In this example, the reverse-polarity equation has one less product term
DO NOT COPY
than the normal-polarity equation for  ALARM, so the compiler would select this
equation if the targeted device has selectable output inversion. A user can also
force the compiler to use either normal or reverse polarity for a signal by includ-
ing the keyword “buffer” or “invert,” respectively, in the signal’s  istype
DO NOT COPYproperty list. (With some ABEL compilers, keywords “pos” and “neg” can be
used for this purpose, but see Section 4.6.6.)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  251
Ta b l e  4 - 1 2  Synthesized equations file produced by ABEL for program
in Table 4-11.
ABEL 6.30
DO NOT COPY
Design alarmckt created Tue Nov 24 1998
Title: Alarm Circuit Example
Title: J. Wakerly, Micro Systems Engineering
DO NOT COPY
P-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name (attributes)
---------  ------  -------  ----  -----------------
4/3  6  1  Pin  ALARM
=========
4/3  Best P-Term Total: 3
DO NOT COPY
Total Pins: 7
Total Nodes: 0
Average P-Term/Output: 3
Equations:DO NOT COPY
ALARM = (ENABLEA & !EXITING & !DOOR
# ENABLEA & !EXITING & !WINDOW
# ENABLEA & !EXITING & !GARAGE
# PANIC);
DO NOT COPY
Reverse-Polarity Equations:
!ALARM = (!PANIC & WINDOW & DOOR & GARAGE
# !PANIC & EXITING
DO NOT COPY
# !PANIC & !ENABLEA);
4.6.3 WHEN Statements and Equation Blocks
In addition to equations, ABEL provides the WHEN  statement  as another means WHEN  statement
DO NOT COPY
to specify combinational logic functions in the  equations  section of an ABEL
program. Table 4-13 shows the general structure of a  WHEN  statement, similar to
an  IF  statement in a conventional programming language. The  ELSE  clause is
optional. Here  LogicExpression  is an expression which results in a value of true
(1) or false (0). Either  TrueEquation  or  FalseEquation  is “executed” depending
DO NOT COPY
WHEN  LogicExpression  THEN Ta b l e  4 - 1 3
TrueEquation; Structure of an ABEL
WHEN  statement.
ELSE
DO NOT COPY
FalseEquation;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

252  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
on the value of  LogicExpression. But we need to be a little more precise about
what we mean by “executed,” as discussed below.
In the simplest case,  TrueEquation  and the optional  FalseEquation  are
DO NOT COPY
assignment statements, as in the first two  WHEN  statements in Table 4-14 (for  X1
and  X2). In this case,  LogicExpression  is logically  ANDed with the right-hand
side of  TrueEquation, and the complement of  LogicExpression  is  ANDed with
the right-hand side of  FalseEquation. Thus, the equations for  X1A  and  X2A  pro-
duce the same results as the corresponding  WHEN statements but do not use  WHEN.
DO NOT COPY
Notice in the first example that  X1  appears in the TrueEquation, but there is
no  FalseEquation. So, what happens to  X1  when  LogicExpression  (!A#B)  is
false? You might think that  X1’s value should be don’t-care for these input
combinations, but it’s not, as explained below.
DO NOT COPYFormally, the unclocked assignment operator,  =, specifies input combina-
tions that should be added to the on-set for the output signal appearing on the
left-hand side of the equation. An output’s on-set starts out empty, and is aug-
mented each time that the output appears on the left-hand side of an equation.
That is, the right-hand sides of all equations for the same (uncomplemented)
DO NOT COPYoutput are  ORed together. (If the output appears complemented on the left-hand
side, the right-hand side is complemented before being  ORed.) Thus, the value
of  X1  is 1 only for the input combinations for which  LogicExpression  (!A#B)  is
true and the right-hand side of  TrueEquation  (C&!D)  is also true.
In the second example,  X2  appears on the left-hand side of two equations,
DO NOT COPY
so the equivalent equation shown for  X2A  is obtained by  ORing two right-hand
sides after  ANDing each with the appropriate condition.
The  TrueEquation  and the optional  FalseEquation  in a  WHEN  statement can
be any equation. In addition,  WHEN  statements can be “nested” by using another
WHEN  statement as the  FalseEquation. When statements are nested, all of the
DO NOT COPY
conditions leading to an “executed” statement are  ANDed. The equation for  X3
and its  WHEN-less counterpart for  X3A  in Table 4-14 illustrate the concept.
The  TrueEquation  can be another  WHEN  statement if it’s enclosed in braces,
as shown in the  X4  example in the table. This is just one instance of the general
use of braces described shortly.
DO NOT COPY
Although each of our WHEN  examples have assigned values to the same out-
put within each part of a given  WHEN  statement, this does not have to be the case.
The second-to-last  WHEN  statement in Table 4-14 is such an example.
It’s often useful to make more than one assignment in  TrueEquation  or
DO NOT COPYFalseEquation  or both. For this purpose, ABEL supports equation blocks any-
equation block where that it supports a single equation. An  equation  block  is just a sequence of
statements enclosed in braces, as shown in the last  WHEN  statement in the table.
The individual statements in the sequence may be simple assignment state-
ments, or they may be  WHEN  statements or nested equation blocks. A semicolon
DO NOT COPY
is not used after a block’s closing brace. Just for fun, Table 4-15 shows the
equations that the ABEL compiler produces for the entire example program.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  253
Ta b l e 4 - 1 4  Examples of  WHEN  statements.
module WhenEx
title ’WHEN Statement Examples’DO NOT COPY
" Input pins
A, B, C, D, E, F  pin;
" Output pins
X1, X1A, X2, X2A, X3, X3A, X4DO NOT COPY  pin istype ’com’;
X5, X6, X7, X8, X9, X10  pin istype ’com’;
equations
WHEN (!A # B) THEN X1 = C & !D;
DO NOT COPY
X1A = (!A # B) & (C & !D);
WHEN (A & B) THEN X2 = C # D;
ELSE X2 = E # F;
DO NOT COPY
X2A = (A & B) & (C # D)
# !(A & B) & (E # F);
WHEN (A) THEN X3 = D;
ELSE WHEN (B) THEN X3 = E;
ELSE WHEN (C) THEN X3 = F;DO NOT COPY
X3A = (A) & (D)
# !(A) & (B) & (E)
# !(A) & !(B) & (C) & (F);
DO NOT COPY
WHEN (A) THEN
{WHEN (B) THEN X4 = D;}
ELSE X4 = E;
WHEN (A & B) THEN X5 = D;
ELSE WHEN (A # !C) THEN X6 = E;DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN (B # C) THEN X7 = F;
WHEN (A) THEN {
X8 = D & E & F;
WHEN (B) THEN X8 = 1; ELSE {X9 = D; X10 = E;}
DO NOT COPY
} ELSE {
X8 = !D # !E;
WHEN (D) THEN X9 = 1;
{X10 = C & D;}
}
DO NOT COPY
end WhenEx
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

254  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 4 - 1 5  Synthesized equations file produced by ABEL for program in Table 4-14.
ABEL 6.30 Equations: Reverse-Polarity Eqns:
DO NOT COPY
Design whenex created Wed Dec 2 1998 X1 = (C & !D & !A !X1 = (A & !B
# C & !D & B); # D
Title: WHEN Statement Examples # !C);
X1A = (C & !D & !A
P-Terms  Fan-in Fan-out Type Name # C & !D & B); !X1A = (A & !B
--------- ------ ------- ---- ----- # D
DO NOT COPY2/3  4  1  Pin  X1 X2 = (D & A & B # !C);
2/3  4  1  Pin  X1A # C & A & B
6/3  6  1  Pin  X2 # !B & E !X2 = (!C & !D & A & B
6/3  6  1  Pin  X2A # !A & E # !B & !E & !F
3/4  6  1  Pin  X3 # !B & F # !A & !E & !F);
3/4  6  1  Pin  X3A # !A & F);
2/3  4  1  Pin  X4 !X2A = (!C & !D & A & B
DO NOT COPY
1/3  3  1  Pin  X5 X2A = (D & A & B # !B & !E & !F
2/3  4  1  Pin  X6 # C & A & B # !A & !E & !F);
1/3  3  1  Pin  X7 # !B & E
4/4  5  1  Pin  X8 # !A & E !X3 = (!C & !A & !B
2/2  3  1  Pin  X9 # !B & F # !A & B & !E
2/4  5  1  Pin  X10 # !A & F); # !D & A
=========DO NOT COPY# !A & !B & !F);
36/42  Best P-Term Total: 30 X3 = (C & !A & !B & F
Total Pins: 19 # !A & B & E !X3A = (!C & !A & !B
Total Nodes: 0 # D & A); # !A & B & !E
Average P-Term/Output: 2 # !D & A
X3A = (C & !A & !B & F # !A & !B & !F);
# !A & B & E
DO NOT COPY
# D & A); !X4 = (A & !B
# !D & A
X4 = (D & A & B # !A & !E);
# !A & E);
!X5 = (!A
X5 = (D & A & B); # !D
DO NOT COPY# !B);
X6 = (A & !B & E !X6 = (A & B
# !C & !A & E); # C & !A
# !E);
X7 = (C & !A & F); !X7 = (A
DO NOT COPY
# !C
# !F);
X8 = (D & A & E & F !X8 = (A & !B & !F
# A & B # D & !A & E
# !A & !E # A & !B & !E
DO NOT COPY# !D & !A); # !D & A & !B);
X9 = (D & !A !X9 = (!D
# D & !B); # A & B);
X10 = (C & D & !A !X10 = (A & B
# A & !B & E); # !D & !A
DO NOT COPY
# !C & !A
# A & !E);
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  255
truth_table (input-list  -> output-list) Ta b l e 4 - 1 6
input-value  -> output-value; Structure of an ABEL
truth table.
...
DO NOT COPY
input-value  -> output-value;
4.6.4  Truth Tables
ABEL provides one more way to specify combinational logic functions—
the DO NOT COPYtruth table, with the general format shown in Table 4-16. The keyword truth table
truth_table  introduces a truth table. The  input-list  and  output-list  give the truth_table
names of the input signals and the outputs that they affect. Each of these lists is input-list
either a single signal name or a  set; sets are described fully in Section 4.6.5. Fol- output-list
lowing the truth-table introduction are a series of statements, each of which
specifies an input value and a required output value using the “DO NOT COPY->” operator. For
unclocked truth-table
example, the truth table for an inverter is shown below: operator, ->
truth_table (X -> NOTX)
0 -> 1;
1 -> 0;
DO NOT COPY
The list of input values does not need to be complete; only the on-set of the
function needs to be specified unless don’t-care processing is enabled (see
Section 4.6.6). Table 4-17 shows how the prime-number detector function
described on page 213 can be specified using an ABEL program. For conve-
DO NOT COPY
nience, the identifier  NUM  is defined as a synonym for the set of four input bits
[N3,N2,N1,N0], allowing a 4-bit input value to be written as a decimal integer.
Ta b l e 4 - 1 7  An ABEL program for the prime number detector.
module PrimeDetDO NOT COPY
title '4-Bit Prime Number Detector'
" Input and output pins
N0, N1, N2, N3  pin;
F  pin istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
" Definition
NUM = [N3,N2,N1,N0];
truth_table (NUM -> F)
DO NOT COPY1 -> 1;
2 -> 1;
3 -> 1;
5 -> 1;
7 -> 1;
11 -> 1;
DO NOT COPY
13 -> 1;
end PrimeDet
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

256  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Both truth tables and equations can be used within the same ABEL
program. The  equations  keyword introduces a sequence of equations, while
the  truth_table  keyword introduces a single truth table.
DO NOT COPY
4.6.5 Ranges, Sets, and Relations
Most digital systems include buses, registers, and other circuits that handle a
group of two or more signals in an identical fashion. ABEL provides several
shortcuts for conveniently defining and using such signals.
DO NOT COPY
The first shortcut is for naming similar, numbered signals. As shown in the
range pin definitions in Table 4-18, a  range  of signal names can be defined by stating
the first and last names in the range, separated by “..”. For example, writing
“N3..N0” is the same as writing “N3,N2,N1,N0.” Notice in the table that the
DO NOT COPYrange can be ascending or descending.
Next, we need a facility for writing equations more compactly when a
group of signals are all handled identically, in order to reduce the chance of
set errors and inconsistencies. An ABEL  set  is simply a defined collection of signals
that is handled as a unit. When a logical operation such as  AND,  OR, or assign-
DO NOT COPYment is applied to a set, it is applied to each element of the set.
Each set is defined at the beginning of the program by associating a
set name with a bracketed list of the set elements (e.g.,  N=[N3,N2,N1,N0]  in
Table 4-18). The set element list may use shortcut notation (YOUT=[Y1..Y4]),
but the element names need not be similar or have any correspondence with the
DO NOT COPY
set name (COMP=[EQ,GE]). Set elements can also be constants (GT=[0,1]). In
any case, the number and order of elements in a set are significant, as we’ll see.
Most of ABEL’s operators, can be applied to sets. When an operation is
applied to two or more sets, all of the sets must have the same number of ele-
ments, and the operation is applied individually to set elements in like positions,
DO NOT COPY
regardless of their names or numbers. Thus, the equation “YOUT  =  N  &  M” is
equivalent to four equations:
Y1 = N3 & M3;
Y2 = N2 & M2;
Y3 = N1 & M1;
DO NOT COPY
Y4 = N0 & M0;
When an operation includes both set and nonset variables, the nonset vari-
ables are combined individually with set elements in each position. Thus, the
equation “ZOUT  =  (SEL  &  N)  #  (!SEL  &  M)” is equivalent to four equations of the
DO NOT COPYform “Zi  =  (SEL  &  Ni)  #  (!SEL  &  Mi)” for  i  equal  0  to  3.
Another important feature is ABEL’s ability to convert “relations” into
relation logic expressions. A  relation  is a pair of operands combined with one of the
relational operator relational operators  listed in Table 4-19. The compiler converts a relation into a
logic expression that is 1 if and only if the relation is true.
DO NOT COPY
The operands in a relation are treated as unsigned integers, and either oper-
and may be an integer or a set. If the operand is a set, it is treated as an unsigned
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  257
Ta b l e 4 - 1 8  Examples of ABEL ranges, sets, and relations.
module SetOps
title 'Set Operation Examples'DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins
N3..N0, M3..M0, SEL  pin;
Y1..Y4, Z0..Z3, EQ, GE, GTR, LTH, UNLUCKY  pin istype 'com';
" DefinitionsDO NOT COPY
N  = [N3,N2,N1,N0];
M  = [M3,M2,M1,M0];
YOUT = [Y1..Y4];
ZOUT = [Z3..Z0];
DO NOT COPY
COMP = [EQ,GE];
GT  = [ 0, 1];
LT  = [ 0, 0];
equations
DO NOT COPY
YOUT = N & M;
ZOUT = (SEL & N) # (!SEL & M);
EQ = (N == M);
GE = (N >= M);
GTR = (COMP == GT);
LTH = (COMP == LT);DO NOT COPY
UNLUCKY = (N == 13) # (M == ^hD) # ((N + M) == ^b1101);
end SetOps
DO NOT COPY
binary integer with the leftmost variable representing the most significant bit. By
default, numbers in ABEL programs are assumed to be base-10. Hexadecimal
and binary numbers are denoted by a prefix of “^h” or “^b,” respectively, as ^h  hexadecimal prefix
shown in the last equation in Table 4-18. ^b  binary prefix
ABEL sets and relations allow a lot of functionality to be expressed in very
DO NOT COPY
few lines of code. For example, the equations in Table 4-18 generate minimized
equations with 69 product terms, as shown in the summary in Table 4-20.
Ta b l e  4 - 1 9
Symbol Relation 
DO NOT COPYRelational operators
==  equal in ABEL.
!=  not equal
<  less than
<=  less than or equal
DO NOT COPY>  greater than
>=  greater than or equal
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

258  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 4 - 2 0  Synthesized equations summary produced
by ABEL for program in Table 4-18.
P-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name (attributes)
DO NOT COPY
---------  ------  -------  ----  -----------------
1/2  2  1  Pin  Y1
1/2  2  1  Pin  Y2
1/2  2  1  Pin  Y3
1/2  2  1  Pin  Y4
DO NOT COPY2/2  3  1  Pin  Z0
2/2  3  1  Pin  Z1
2/2  3  1  Pin  Z2
2/2  3  1  Pin  Z3
16/8  8  1  Pin  EQ
23/15  8  1  Pin  GE
DO NOT COPY
1/2  2  1  Pin  GTR
1/2  2  1  Pin  LTH
16/19  8  1  Pin  UNLUCKY
=========
69/62  Best P-Term Total: 53
DO NOT COPYTotal Pins: 22
Total Nodes: 0
Average P-Term/Output: 4
*4.6.6 Don’t-Care Inputs
DO NOT COPY
Some versions of the ABEL compiler have a limited ability to handle don’t-care
inputs. As mentioned previously, ABEL equations specify input combinations
that belong to the on-set of a logic function; the remaining combinations are
assumed to belong to the off-set. If some input combinations can instead be
assigned to the d-set, then the program may be able to use these don’t-care inputs
DO NOT COPY
to do a better job of minimization.
The ABEL language defines two mechanisms for assigning input combi-
nations to the d-set. In order to use either mechanism, you must include the
@DCSET compiler directive  @DCSET  in your program, or include “dc” in the  istype prop-
dc DO NOT COPYerty list of the outputs for which you want don’t-cares to be considered.
?= don’t-care unclocked The first mechanism is the  don’t-care unclocked assignment operator,  ?=.
assignment operator This operator is used instead of  =  in equations to indicate that input combina-
tions matching the right-hand side should be put into the d-set instead of the
on-set. Although this operator is documented in the ABEL compiler that I use,
DO NOT COPYunfortunately it is broken, so I’m not going to talk about it anymore.
The second mechanism is the truth table. When don’t-care processing is
enabled, any input combinations that are not explicitly listed in the truth table are
put into the d-set. Thus, the prime BCD-digit detector described on page 230 can
be specified in ABEL as shown in Table 4-21. A don’t-care value is implied for
DO NOT COPY
input combinations 10–15 because these combinations do not appear in the truth
table and the  @DCSET  directive is in effect.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  259
module DontCare Ta b l e 4 - 2 1
title 'Dont Care Examples' ABEL program using
@DCSET don’t-cares.
DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins
N3..N0, A, B  pin;
F, Y  pin istype 'com';
NUM = [N3..N0];
X = .X.;DO NOT COPY
truth_table (NUM->F)
0->0;
1->1;
2->1;
DO NOT COPY3->1;
4->0;
5->1;
6->0;
7->1;
8->0;
DO NOT COPY
9->0;
truth_table ([A,B]->Y)
[0,0]->0;
[0,1]->X;
[1,0]->X;
DO NOT COPY
[1,1]->1;
end DontCare
It’s also possible to specify don’t-care combinations explicitly, as shown in
DO NOT COPY
the second truth table. As introduced at the very beginning of this section, ABEL
recognizes  .X.  as a special one-bit constant whose value is “don’t-care.” In
Table 4-21, the identifier “X” has been equated to this constant just to make it
easier to type don’t-cares in the truth table. The minimized equations resulting
from Table 4-21 are shown in Table 4-22. Notice that the two equations forDO NOT COPY  F are
not equal; the compiler has selected different values for the don’t-cares.
Equations: Ta b l e 4 - 2 2
F = (!N2 & N1 Minimized equations
DO NOT COPY# !N3 & N0); derived from
Y = (B); Table 4-21.
Reverse-Polarity Equations:
!F = (N2 & !N0
# N3
DO NOT COPY# !N1 & !N0);
!Y = (!B);
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

260  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
test_vectors (input-list  -> output-list) Ta b l e 4 - 2 3
input-value  -> output-value; Structure of ABEL
test vectors.
...
DO NOT COPY
input-value  -> output-value;
4.6.7 Test Vectors
ABEL programs may contain optional test vectors, as we showed in Table 4-11
DO NOT COPYon page 249. The general format of test vectors is very similar to a truth table
test_vectors and is shown in Table 4-23. The keyword test_vectors  introduces a truth
table. The  input-list  and  output-list  give the names of the input signals and the
input-list outputs that they affect. Each of these lists is either a single signal name or a set.
output-list Following the test-vector introduction are a series of statements, each of which
DO NOT COPY
specifies an input value and an expected output value using the “->” operator.
ABEL test vectors have two main uses and purposes:
1.  After the ABEL compiler translates the program into “fuse pattern” for a
particular device, it simulates the operation of the final programmed device
DO NOT COPYby applying the test-vector inputs to a software model of the device and
comparing its outputs with the corresponding test-vector outputs. The
designer may specify a series of test vectors in order to double-check that
device will behave as expected for some or all input combinations.
2.  After a PLD is physically programmed, the programming unit applies the
DO NOT COPY
test-vector inputs to the physical device and compares the device outputs
with the corresponding test-vector outputs. This is done to check for
correct device programming and operation.
Unfortunately, ABEL test vectors seldom do a very good job at either one of
DO NOT COPYthese tasks, as we’ll explain.
The test vectors from Table 4-11 are repeated in Table 4-24, except that for
readability we’ve assumed that the identifier X has been equated to the don’t-care
constant  .X., and we’ve added comments to number the test vectors.
Table 4-24 actually appears to be a pretty good set of test vectors. From the
DO NOT COPY
designer’s point of view, these vectors fully cover the expected operation of the
alarm circuit, as itemized vector-by-vector below:
1.  If PANIC  is 1, then the alarm output (F) should be on regardless of the other
input values. All of the remaining vectors cover cases where  PANIC  is 0.
DO NOT COPY
2.  If the alarm is not enabled, then the output should be off.
3.  If the alarm is enabled but we’re exiting, then the output should be off.
4-6.  If the alarm is enabled and we’re not exiting, then the output should be on
if any of the sensor signals  WINDOW,  DOOR, or  GARAGE  is 0.
DO NOT COPY
7.  If the alarm is enabled, we’re not exiting, and all of the sensor signals are
1, then the output should be off.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 4.6  The ABEL Hardware Design Language  261
test_vectors Ta b l e 4 - 2 4
([PANIC,ENABLEA,EXITING,WINDOW,DOOR,GARAGE] -> [ALARM]) Test vectors for the
[  1,  X,  X,  X,  X,  X] -> [  1]; “  1 alarm circuit program
[  DO NOT COPY0,  0,  X,  X,  X,  X] -> [  0]; “  2 in Table 4-11.
[  0,  1,  1,  X,  X,  X] -> [  0]; “  3
[  0,  1,  0,  0,  X,  X] -> [  1]; “  4
[  0,  1,  0,  X,  0,  X] -> [  1]; “  5
[  0,  1,  0,  X,  X,  0] -> [  1]; “  6
[  0,  1,  0,  1,  1,  1] -> [  0]; “  7
DO NOT COPY
The problem is that ABEL doesn’t handle don’t-cares in test-vector inputs
the way that it should. For example, by all rights, test vector 1 should test 32 dis-
tinct input combinations corresponding to all 32 possible combinations of don’t-
DO NOT COPY
care inputs  ENABLEA,  EXITING,  WINDOW,  DOOR, and  GARAGE. But it doesn’t. In
this situation, the ABEL compiler interprets “don’t care” as “the user doesn’t
care what input value I use,” and it just assigns 0 to all don’t-care inputs in a test
vector. In this example, you could have erroneously written the output equation
as “F = PANIC & !ENABLEA # ENABLEA & ...”; the test vectors would still
DO NOT COPY
pass even though the panic button would work only when the system is disabled.
The second use of test vectors is in physical device testing. Most physical
defects in logic devices can be detected using the  single stuck-at fault model, single stuck-at fault
which assumes that any physical defect is equivalent to having a single gate model
input or output stuck at a logic 0 or 1 value. Just putting together a set of testDO NOT COPY
vectors that seems to exercise a circuit’s functional specifications, as we did in
Table 4-24, doesn’t guarantee that all single stuck-at faults can be detected. The
test vectors have to be chosen so that every possible stuck-at fault causes an
incorrect value at the circuit output for some test-vector input combination.
DO NOT COPYTable 4-25 shows a complete set of test vectors for the alarm circuit when
it is realized as a two-level sum-of-products circuit. The first four vectors check
for stuck-at-1 faults on the  OR  gate, and the last three check for stuck-at-0 faults
on the  AND  gates; it turns out that this is sufficient to detect all single stuck-at
faults. If you know something about fault testing you can generate test vectors
DO NOT COPY
for small circuits by hand (as I did in this example), but most designers use auto-
mated third-party tools to create high-quality test vectors for their PLD designs.
test_vectors Ta b l e 4 - 2 5
([PANIC,ENABLEA,EXITING,WINDOW,DOOR,GARAGE] -> [ALARM]) Single-stuck-at-fault
DO NOT COPY
[  1,  0,  1,  1,  1,  1] -> [  1]; “  1 test vectors for the
[  0,  1,  0,  0,  1,  1] -> [  1]; “  2 minimal sum-of-
[  0,  1,  0,  1,  0,  1] -> [  1]; “  3 products realization
[  0,  1,  0,  1,  1,  0] -> [  1]; “  4 of the alarm circuit.
[  0,  0,  0,  0,  0,  0] -> [  0]; “  5
[  DO NOT COPY0,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0] -> [  0]; “  6
[  0,  1,  0,  1,  1,  1] -> [  0]; “  7
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

262  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
4.7 VHDL
DO NOT COPYReferences
A historical description of Boole’s development of “the science of Logic”
appears in  The Computer from Pascal to von Neumann  by Herman H. Goldstine
(Princeton University Press, 1972). Claude E. Shannon showed how Boole’s
DO NOT COPYwork could be applied to logic circuits in “A Symbolic Analysis of Relay and
Switching Circuits” (Trans. AIEE,  Vol. 57, 1938, pp. 713–723).
Although the two-valued Boolean algebra is the basis for switching
algebra, a Boolean algebra need not have only two values. Boolean algebras with
n 
2 values exist for every integer  n; for example, see  Discrete Mathematical
DO NOT COPYStructures and Their Applications  by Harold S. Stone (SRA, 1973). Such
Huntington postulates algebras may be formally defined using the so-called  Huntington postulates
devised by E. V. Huntington in 1907; for example, see  Digital Design  by
M. Morris Mano (Prentice Hall, 1984). A mathematician’s development of
Boolean algebra based on a more modern set of postulates appears in  Modern
DO NOT COPYApplied Algebra  by G. Birkhoff and T. C. Bartee (McGraw-Hill, 1970). Our
engineering-style, “direct” development of switching algebra follows that of
Edward J. McCluskey in his  Introduction to the Theory of Switching Circuits
(McGraw-Hill, 1965) and  Logic Design Principles  (Prentice Hall, 1986).
The prime implicant theorem was proved by W. V. Quine in “The Problem
DO NOT COPY
of Simplifying Truth Functions” (Am. Math. Monthly, Vol. 59, No. 8, 1952, pp.
521–531). In fact it is possible to prove a more general prime implicant theorem
showing that there exists at least one minimal sum that is a sum of prime impli-
cants even if we remove the constraint on the number of literals in the definition
of “minimal.”
DO NOT COPY
A graphical method for simplifying Boolean functions was proposed by
E. W. Veitch in “A Chart Method for Simplifying Boolean Functions” (Proc.
ACM, May 1952, pp. 127–133). His  Veitch diagram, shown in Figure 4-50,
actually reinvented a chart proposed by an English archaeologist, A. Marquand
DO NOT COPY(“On Logical Diagrams for  n  Terms,”  Philosophical Magazine  XII, 1881, pp.
266–270). The Veitch diagram or Marquand chart uses “natural” binary count-
W X
00  01  10  11
DO NOT COPYY Z  Figure 4-50
0 4  8 12
00 A 4-variable Veitch diagram
or Marquand chart.
1 5 9 13
01
2 6 10 14
10
DO NOT COPY3 7 11 15
11
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section  References  263
ing order for its rows and columns, with the result that some adjacent rows and
columns differ in more than one value, and product terms do not always cover
adjacent cells. M. Karnaugh showed how to fix the problem in “A Map Method
DO NOT COPY
for Synthesis of Combinational Logic Circuits” (Trans. AIEE, Comm. and
Electron., Vol. 72, Part I, November 1953, pp. 593–599). On the other hand,
George J. Klir, in his book  Introduction to the Methodology of Switching
Circuits, claims that binary counting order is just as good as, perhaps better than
Karnaugh-map order for minimizing logic functions.
DO NOT COPY
At this point, the Karnaugh vs. Veitch argument is of course irrelevant,
because no one draws charts any more to minimize logic circuits. Instead, we
use computer programs running logic minimization algorithms. The first of such
algorithms was described by W. V. Quine in “A Way to Simplify Truth Func-
tions” (DO NOT COPYAm. Math. Monthly, Vol. 62, No. 9, 1955, pp. 627–631) and modified by
E. J. McCluskey in “Minimization of Boolean Functions” (Bell Sys. Tech. J.,
Vol. 35, No. 5, November 1956, pp. 1417–1444). The Quine-McCluskey algo-
rithm is fully described in McCluskey’s books cited earlier.
McCluskey’s 1965 book also covers the iterative consensus algorithm for
finding prime implicants, and proves that it works. The starting point for thisDO NOT COPY
algorithm is a sum-of-products expression, or equivalently, a list of cubes. The
product terms  need not  be minterms or prime implicants, but  may  be either or
anything in between. In other words, the cubes in the list may have any and all
dimensions, from 0 to  n  in an  n-variable function. Starting with the list of cubes,
DO NOT COPY
the algorithm generates a list of all the prime-implicant cubes of the function,
without ever having to generate a full minterm list.
The iterative consensus algorithm was first published by T. H. Mott, Jr., in
“Determination of the Irredundant Normal Forms of a Truth Function by Iterated
Consensus of the Prime Implicants” (IRE Trans. Electron. Computers, Vol.
DO NOT COPY
EC-9, No. 2, 1960, pp. 245–252). A generalized consensus algorithm was pub-
lished by Pierre Tison in “Generalization of Consensus Theory and Application
to the Minimization of Boolean Functions” (IEEE Trans. Electron. Computers,
Vol. EC-16, No. 4, 1967, pp. 446–456). All of these algorithms are described by
Thomas Downs in  Logic Design with Pascal  (Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1988).
DO NOT COPY
As we explained in Section 4.4.4, the huge number of prime implicants in
some logic functions makes it impractical or impossible deterministically to find
them all or select a minimal cover. However, efficient heuristic methods can find
solutions that are close to minimal. The Espresso-II method is described in  Logic
Minimization Algorithms for VLSI SynthesisDO NOT COPY  by R. K. Brayton, C. McMullen,
G. D. Hachtel, and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli (Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1984). The more recent Espresso-MV and Espresso-EXACT algorithms are
described in “Multiple-Valued Minimization for PLA Optimization” by R. L.
Rudell and A. Sangiovanni-Vincentelli (IEEE Trans. CAD, Vol. CAD-6, No. 5,
DO NOT COPY
1987, pp. 727–750).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

264  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
In this chapter we described a map method for finding static hazards in
two-level  AND-OR  and  OR-AND  circuits, but any combinational circuit can be
analyzed for hazards. In both his 1965 and 1986 books, McCluskey defines the
DO NOT COPY
0-set 0-set  and  1-sets  of a circuit and shows how they can be used to find static haz-
1-set ards. He also defines  P-sets  and  S-sets  and shows how they can be used to find
P-set dynamic hazards.
S-set Many deeper and varied aspects of switching theory have been omitted
from this book, but have been beaten to death in other books and literature.
DO NOT COPY
A good starting point for an academic study of classical switching theory is
Zvi Kohavi’s book,  Switching and Finite Automata Theory, 2nd ed. (McGraw-
Hill, 1978),  which includes  material on  set theory,  symmetric  networks,
functional decomposition, threshold logic, fault detection, and path sensitiza-
DO NOT COPYtion. Another area of great academic interest (but little commercial activity) is
multiple-valued logic nonbinary  multiple-valued logic, in which each signal line can take on more than
two values. In his 1986 book, McCluskey gives a good introduction to multiple-
valued logic, explaining its pros and cons and why it has seen little commercial
development.
DO NOT COPYOver the years, I’ve struggled to find a readily accessible and definitive ref-
erence on the ABEL language, and I’ve finally found it—Appendix A of  Digital
Design Using ABEL, by David Pellerin and Michael Holley (Prentice Hall,
1994). It makes sense that this would be the definitive work—Pellerin and
Holley invented the language and wrote the original compiler code!
DO NOT COPY
All of the ABEL and VHDL examples in this chapter and throughout the
text were compiled and in most cases simulated using Foundation 1.5 Student
Edition software from Xilinx, Inc. (San Jose, CA 95124,  www.xilinx.com).
This package integrates a schematic editor, HDL editor, compilers for ABEL,
VHDL and Verilog, and a simulator from Aldec, Inc. (Henderson, NV 89014,
DO NOT COPY
www.aldec.com) along with Xilinx’ own specialized tools for CPLD and FPGA
design and programming. This software package includes an excellent on-line
help system, including reference manuals for both ABEL and VHDL.
We briefly discussed device testing in the context of ABEL test vectors.
There is a large, well-established body of literature on digital device testing, and
DO NOT COPY
a good starting point for study is McCluskey’s 1986 book. Generating a set of
test vectors that completely tests a large circuit such as a PLD is a task best left
to a program. At least one company’s entire business is focused on programs that
automatically create test vectors for PLD testing (ACUGEN Software, Inc.,
DO NOT COPYNashua, NH 03063,  www.acugen.com).
Drill Problems
4.1  Using variables  NERD,  DESIGNER,  FAILURE, and  STUDIED, write a boolean
DO NOT COPYexpression that is 1 for successful designers who never studied and for nerds who
studied all the time.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section  References  265
4.2  Prove theorems T2–T5 using perfect induction.
4.3  Prove theorems T1′–T3′  and T5′  using perfect induction.
4.4  Prove theorems T6–T9 using perfect induction.
DO NOT COPY
4.5  According to DeMorgan’s theorem, the complement of  X  +  Y  ⋅  Z  is X′ ⋅  Y′+Z′. Yet
both functions are 1 for  XYZ =  110. How can both a function and its complement
be 1 for the same input combination? What’s wrong here?
4.6  Use the theorems of switching algebra to simplify each of the following logic
functions:
DO NOT COPY
(a)  F  =  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  ⋅  (W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′  +  W  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  W′ ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z)
(b)  F  =  A  ⋅  B  +  A  ⋅  B  ⋅  C′ ⋅  D  +  A  ⋅  B  ⋅  D  ⋅  E′  +  A  ⋅  B  ⋅  C′ ⋅  E  +  C′ ⋅  D  ⋅  E
(c)  F  =  M  ⋅  N  ⋅  O  +  Q′ ⋅  P′ ⋅  N′  +  P  ⋅  R  ⋅  M  +  Q′ ⋅  O  ⋅  M  ⋅  P′  +  M  ⋅  R
4.7 DO NOT COPYWrite the truth table for each of the following logic functions:
(a)  F  =  X′ ⋅  Y  +  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  (b)  F  =  W′ ⋅  X  +  Y′ ⋅  Z′  +  X′ ⋅  Z
(c)  F  =  W  +  X′ ⋅  (Y′ +  Z)  (d)  F  =  A  ⋅  B  +  B′ ⋅  C  +  C′ ⋅  D  +  D′ ⋅  A
(e)  F  =  V  ⋅  W  +  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  (f)  F  =  (A′  +  B′  +  C  ⋅  D)  ⋅  (B  +  C′ +  D′ ⋅  E′)
DO NOT COPY
(g)  F  =  (W  ⋅  X)′ ⋅  (Y′ +  Z′)′  (h)  F  =  (((A  +  B)′ +  C′)′ +  D)′
(i)  F  =  (A′ +  B  +  C)  ⋅  (A  +  B′ +  D′)  ⋅  (B  +  C′ +  D′)  ⋅  (A  +  B  +  C  +  D)
4.8  Write the truth table for each of the following logic functions:
DO NOT COPY(a)  F  =  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′ +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  (b)  F  =  M′ ⋅  N′ +  M  ⋅  P  +  N′ ⋅  P
(c)  F  =  A  ⋅  B  +  A  ⋅  B′ ⋅  C′ +  A′ ⋅  B  ⋅  C  (d)  F  =  A′ ⋅  B  ⋅  (C  ⋅  B  ⋅  A′  +  B  ⋅  C′)
(e)  F  =  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  (X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z′ +  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z) (f)  F  =  M  ⋅  N  +  M′ ⋅  N′ ⋅  P′
(g)  F  =  (A  +  A′)  ⋅  B  +  B  ⋅  A  ⋅  C′ +  C  ⋅  (A  +  B′)  ⋅  (A′ +  B)  (h)  F  =  X  ⋅  Y′ +  Y  ⋅  Z  +  Z′ ⋅  X
4.9 DO NOT COPYWrite the canonical sum and product for each of the following logic functions:
(a)  F  =  ΣX,Y(1,2)  (b)  F  =  ∏A,B(0,1,2)
(c)  F = ΣA,B,C(2,4,6,7)  (d)  F  =  ∏W,X,Y(0,1,3,4,5)
(e)  F  =  X  +  Y′ ⋅  Z′  (f)  F  =  V′ +  (W′ ⋅  X)′
DO NOT COPY
4.10  Write the canonical sum and product for each of the following logic functions:
(a)  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(0,3)  (b)  F  =  ∏A,B,C(1,2,4)
(c)  F  =  ΣA,B,C,D(1,2,5,6)  (d)  F  =  ∏M,N,P(0,1,3,6,7)
DO NOT COPY(e)  F  =  X′ +  Y  ⋅  Z′ +  Y  ⋅  Z′  (f)  F  =  A′B  +  B′C  +  A
4.11  If the canonical sum for an  n-input logic function is also a minimal sum, how
many literals are in each product term of the sum? Might there be any other min-
imal sums in this case?
4.12  Give two reasons why the cost of inverters is not included in the definition of
DO NOT COPY
“minimal” for logic minimization.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

266  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
4.13  Using Karnaugh maps, find a minimal sum-of-products expression for each of the
following logic functions. Indicate the distinguished 1-cells in each map.
(a)  F  =  Σ (1,3,5,6,7)  (b)  F  =  Σ (1,4,5,6,7,9,14,15)
DO NOT COPYX,Y,Z W,X,Y,Z
(c)  F  =  ∏W,X,Y(0,1,3,4,5)  (d)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,2,5,7,8,10,13,15)
(e)  F  =  ∏A,B,C,D(1,7,9,13,15)  (f)  F  =  ΣA,B,C,D(1,4,5,7,12,14,15)
4.14  Find a minimal product-of-sums expression for each function in Drill 4.13 using
the method of Section 4.3.6.
DO NOT COPY
4.15  Find a minimal product-of-sums expression for the function in each of the follow-
ing figures and compare its cost with the previously found minimal sum-of-
products expression: (a) Figure 4-27; (b) Figure 4-29; (c) Figure 4-33.
4.16  Using Karnaugh maps, find a minimal sum-of-products expression for each of the
DO NOT COPYfollowing logic functions. Indicate the distinguished 1-cells in each map.
(a)  F  =  ΣA,B,C(0,1,2,4)  (b)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(1,4,5,6,11,12,13,14)
(c)  F  =  ∏A,B,C(1,2,6,7)  (d)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,3,7,8,10,11,15)
(e)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,X(1,2,4,7,8,11,13,14)  (f)  F  =  ∏A,B,C,D(1,3,4,5,6,7,9,12,13,14)
DO NOT COPY
4.17  Find a minimal product-of-sums expression for each function in Drill 4.16 using
the method of Section 4.3.6.
4.18  Find the complete sum for the logic functions in Drill 4.16(d) and (e).
4.19  Using Karnaugh maps, find a minimal sum-of-products expression for each of the
following logic functions. Indicate the distinguished 1-cells in each map.
DO NOT COPY
(a)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,3,5,14)  +  d(8,15)  (b)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,8,11)  +  d(3,9,15)
(c)  F  =  ΣA,B,C,D(1,5,9,14,15)  +  d(11)  (d)  F  =  ΣA,B,C,D(1,5,6,7,9,13)  +  d(4,15)
(e)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(3,5,6,7,13)  +  d(1,2,4,12,15)
DO NOT COPY
4.20  Repeat Drill 4.19, finding a minimal product-of-sums expression for each logic
function.
4.21  For each logic function in the two preceding exercises, determine whether the
minimal  sum-of-products  expression  equals  the  minimal  product-of-sums
expression.  Also  compare  the  circuit  cost  for  realizing  each  of  the  two
DO NOT COPY
expressions.
4.22  For each of the following logic expressions, find all of the static hazards in the
corresponding two-level  AND-OR  or  OR-AND  circuit, and design a hazard-free
circuit that realizes the same logic function.
DO NOT COPY(a)  F  =  W  ⋅  X  +  W′Y′  (b)  F  =  W  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y′  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y
(c)  F  =  W′ ⋅  Y  +  X′ ⋅  Y′  +  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Z  (d)  F  =  W′ ⋅  X  +  Y′ ⋅  Z  +  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  W  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅
(e)  F  =  (W  +  X  +  Y)  ⋅  (X′  +  Z′)  (f)  F  =  (W  +  Y′+Z′)  ⋅  (W′ +  X′ +  Z′)  ⋅  (X′+Y+Z)
(g)  F  =  (W  +  Y  +  Z′)  ⋅  (W  +  X′  +  Y  +  Z)  ⋅  (X′  +  Y′)  ⋅  (X  +  Z)
DO NOT COPY
Exercises
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section  References  267
4.23  Design a non-trivial-looking logic circuit that contains a feedback loop but whose
output depends only on its current input.
4.24  Prove the combining theorem T10 without using perfect induction, but assuming
DO NOT COPY
that theorems T1–T9 and T1′–T9′  are true.
4.25  Show that the combining theorem, T10, is just a special case of consensus (T11)
used with covering (T9).
4.26  Prove that (X  +  Y′)  ⋅  Y  =  X  ⋅  Y  without  using perfect induction. You may assume
that theorems T1–T11 and T1′–T11′  are true.
DO NOT COPY
4.27  Prove that (X+Y)  ⋅  (X′+  Z)  =  X  ⋅  Z  +  X′ ⋅  Y  without  using perfect induction. You
may assume that theorems T1–T11 and T1′–T11′  are true.
4.28  Show that an  n-input  AND  gate can be replaced by  n−1 2-input  AND  gates. Can
the same statement be made for  NAND  gates? Justify your answer.
4.29DO NOT COPY  How many physically different ways are there to realize  V  ⋅  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  using
four 2-input  AND  gates (4/4 of a 74LS08)? Justify your answer.
4.30  Use switching algebra to prove that tying together two inputs of an  n  + 1-input
AND  or  OR  gate gives it the functionality of an  n-input gate.
4.31  Prove DeMorgan’s theorems (T13 and T13′) using finite induction.
4.32DO NOT COPY  Which logic symbol more closely approximates the internal realization of a TTL
NOR  gate, Figure 4-4(c) or (d)? Why?
4.33  Use the theorems of switching algebra to rewrite the following expression using
as few inversions as possible (complemented parentheses are allowed):
B′ ⋅  C  +  A  ⋅  C  ⋅  D′  +  A′ ⋅  C  +  E  ⋅  B′  +  E  ⋅  (A  +  C)  ⋅  (A′  +  D′)
DO NOT COPY
4.34  Prove or disprove the following propositions:
(a) Let  A  and  B  be switching-algebra  variables. Then  A  ⋅  B  =  0 and  A  +  B  =  1
implies that  A  =  B′.
(b) Let  X  and  Y  be switching-algebra  expressions. Then  X  ⋅  Y  =  0 and  X  +  Y  =  1
DO NOT COPY
implies that  X  =  Y′.
4.35  Prove Shannon’s expansion theorems. (Hint:  Don’t get carried away; it’s easy.)
4.36  Shannon’s expansion theorems can be generalized to “pull out” not just one but  i generalized Shannon
i 
variables so that a logic function can be expressed as a sum or product of 2  terms. expansion theorems
State the generalized Shannon expansion theorems.
DO NOT COPY
4.37  Show how the generalized Shannon expansion theorems lead to the canonical
sum and canonical product representations of logic functions.
4.38  An Exclusive OR (XOR)  gate  is a 2-input gate whose output is 1 if and only if Exclusive OR (XOR)
exactly one of its inputs is 1. Write a truth table, sum-of-products expression, and gate
DO NOT COPYcorresponding  AND-OR  circuit for the  Exclusive OR  function.
4.39  From the point of view of switching algebra, what is the function of a 2-input
XOR gate whose inputs are tied together? How might the output behavior of a real
XOR  gate differ?
4.40  After completing the design and fabrication of a digital system, a designer finds
DO NOT COPYthat one more inverter is required. However, the only spare gates in the system are
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

268  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
a 3-input OR, a 2-input AND, and a 2-input XOR. How should the designer realize
the inverter function without adding another IC?
complete set 4.41  Any set of logic-gate types that can realize any logic function is called a complete
DO NOT COPY
set  of logic gates. For example, 2-input  AND  gates, 2-input  OR  gates, and invert-
ers are a complete set, because any logic function can be expressed as a sum of
products of variables and their complements, and  AND  and  OR  gates with any
number of inputs can be made from 2-input gates. Do 2-input  NAND  gates form
a complete set of logic gates? Prove your answer.
DO NOT COPY
4.42  Do 2-input  NOR  gates form a complete set of logic gates? Prove your answer.
4.43  Do 2-input  XOR  gates form a complete set of logic gates? Prove your answer.
4.44  Define a two-input gate, other than  NAND,  NOR, or  XOR, that forms a complete
set of logic gates if the constant inputs 0 and 1 are allowed. Prove your answer.
4.45  Some people think that there are  four  basic logic functions,  AND,  OR,  NOT, and
DO NOT COPY
BUT BUT. Figure X4.45 is a possible symbol for a 4-input, 2-output BUT  gate. Invent
BUT gate a useful, nontrivial function for the  BUT  gate to perform. The function should
have something to do with the name (BUT). Keep in mind that, due to the sym-
metry of the symbol, the function should be symmetric with respect to the  A  and
B inputs of each section and with respect to sections 1 and 2. Describe your BUT’s
DO NOT COPY
function and write its truth table.
4.46  Write logic expressions for the  Z1  and  Z2  outputs of the  BUT  gate you designed
in the preceding exercise, and draw a corresponding logic diagram using  AND
gates,  OR  gates, and inverters.
4.47  Most students have no problem using theorem T8 to “multiply out” logic expres-
DO NOT COPY
sions, but many develop a mental block if they try to use theorem T8 ′ to “add out”
a logic expression. How can duality be used to overcome this problem?
4.48  How many different logic functions are there of  n  variables?
4.49  How many different 2-variable logic functions  F(X,Y) are there? Write a simpli-
DO NOT COPYfied algebraic expression for each of them.
D
self-dual logic function 4.50  A  self-dual logic function is a function  F such that F  = F  . Which of the following
⊕ functions are self-dual? (The symbol  ⊕  denotes the  Exclusive  OR  (XOR)
operation.)
(a)  F  =  X  (b)  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(0,3,5,6)
DO NOT COPY
(c)  F  =  X  ⋅  Y′  +  X′ ⋅  Y  (d)  F  =  W  ⋅  (X⊕Y⊕Z) +  W′ ⋅  (X⊕Y⊕Z)′
(e)  A function  F  of 7 variables such (f)  A function  F  of 10 variables such
that  F  =  1 if and only if 4 or more that  F  =  1 if and only if 5 or more
of the variables are 1 of the variables are 1
DO NOT COPY
4.51  How many self-dual logic functions of n input variables are there? (Hint: Consid-
er the structure of the truth table of a self-dual function.)
A1
Z1
B1 Figure X4.45
DO NOT COPYA2
Z2
B2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section  References  269
4.52  Prove that any n-input logic function  F(X1,…,Xn)  that can be written in the form
D
F  =  X1  ⋅  G(X2 ,…,Xn) +  X1′ ⋅  G  (X2,…,Xn) is self-dual.
4.53  Assuming that an inverting gate has a propagation delay of 5 ns, and a noninvert-
DO NOT COPY
ing gate has a propagation delay of 8 ns, compare the speeds of the circuits in
Figure 4-24(a), (c), and (d).
4.54  Find the minimal product-of-sums expressions for the logic functions in Figures
4-27 and 4-29.
4.55  Use switching algebra to show that the logic functions obtained in Exercise 4.54
DO NOT COPY
equal the  AND-OR  functions obtained in Figures 4-27 and 4-29.
4.56  Determine whether the product-of-sums expressions obtained by “adding out”
the minimal sums in Figure 4-27 and 4-29 are minimal.
i 
4.57  Prove that the rule for combining 2 1-cells in a Karnaugh map is true, using the
axioms and theorems of switching algebra.
DO NOT COPY
4.58  An  irredundant sum for a logic function  F  is a sum of prime implicants for F  such irredundant sum
that if any prime implicant is deleted, the sum no longer equals  F. This sounds a
lot like a minimal sum, but an irredundant sum is not necessarily minimal. For
example, the minimal sum of the function in Figure 4-35 has only three product
terms, but there is an irredundant sum with four product terms. Find the irredun-
DO NOT COPY
dant sum and draw a map of the function, circling only the prime implicants in
the irredundant sum.
4.59  Find another logic function in Section 4.3 that has one or more nonminimal irre-
dundant sums, and draw its map, circling only the prime implicants in the
irredundant sum.
DO NOT COPY
4.60  Derive the minimal product-of-sums expression for the prime BCD-digit detector
function of Figure 4-37. Determine whether or not the expression algebraically
equals the minimal sum-of-products expression and explain your result.
4.61  Draw a Karnaugh map and assign variables to the inputs of the  AND-XOR circuit
DO NOT COPYin Figure X4.61 so that its output is  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(6,7,12,13). Note that the output
gate is a 2-input  XOR  rather than an  OR.
Figure X4.61
F
DO NOT COPY
4.62  The text indicates that a truth table or equivalent is the starting point for tradition-
al combinational minimization methods. A Karnaugh map itself contains the
DO NOT COPY
same information as a truth table. Given a sum-of-products expression, it is pos-
sible to write the 1s corresponding to each product term directly on the map
without developing an explicit truth table or minterm list, and then proceed with
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

270  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY00 0 4 12 8 00 16 20 28 24
1 5 13 9 17 21 29 25 Figure X
01 01
Z Z
3 7 15 11 19 23 31 27
11 11
Y Y
2 6 14 10 18 22 30 26
10 10
DO NOT COPY
X X
V=0  V=1
the map minimization procedure. Find a minimal sum-of-products expression for
DO NOT COPY
each of the following logic functions in this way:
(a)  F  =  X′ ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z  (b)  F  =  A′ ⋅  C′ ⋅  D  +  B′ ⋅  C  ⋅  D  +  A  ⋅  C′ ⋅  D  +  B  ⋅  C  ⋅  D
(c)  F  =  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Z′  +  W  ⋅  X′ ⋅  Y  ⋅  Z  +  X  ⋅  Z  (d)  F  =  (X′  +  Y′)  ⋅  (W′  +  X′  +  Y)  ⋅  (W′+  X  +  Z)
(e)  F  =  A  ⋅  B  ⋅  C′ ⋅  D′  +  A′ ⋅  B  ⋅  C′  +  A  ⋅  B  ⋅  D  +  A′ ⋅  C  ⋅  D  +  B  ⋅  C  ⋅  D′
DO NOT COPY
4.63  Repeat Exercise 4-60, finding a minimal product-of-sums expression for each
logic function.
5-variable Karnaugh 4.64  A  Karnaugh  map  for  a  5-variable  function  can  be  drawn  as  shown  in
map Figure X4.64. In such a map, cells that occupy the same relative position in the  V
DO NOT COPY=  0 and  V =  1 submaps are considered to be adjacent. (Many worked examples of
5-variable Karnaugh maps appear in Sections \ref{synD} and~\ref{synJK}.)
Find a minimal sum-of-products expression for each of the following functions
using a 5-variable map:
(a)  F  =  Σ (5,7,13,15,16,20,25,27,29,31)
DO NOT COPYV,W,X,Y,Z
(b)  F  =  ΣV,W,X,Y,Z(0,7,8,9,12,13,15,16,22,23,30,31)
(c)  F  =  ΣV,W,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,3,4,5,10,11,14,20,21,24,25,26,27,28,29,30)
(d)  F  =  ΣV,W,X,Y,Z(0,2,4,6,7,8,10,11,12,13,14,16,18,19,29,30)
(e)  F  =  ∏ (4,5,10,12,13,16,17,21,25,26,27,29)
DO NOT COPYV,W,X,Y,Z
(f)  F  =  ΣV,W,X,Y,Z(4,6,7,9,11,12,13,14,15,20,22,25,27,28,30)+d(1,5,29,31)
4.65  Repeat Exercise 4.64, finding a minimal product-of-sums expression for each
logic function.
6-variable Karnaugh 4.66  A  Karnaugh  map  for  a  6-variable  function  can  be  drawn  as  shown  in
DO NOT COPY
map Figure X4.66. In such a map, cells that occupy the same relative position in adja-
cent submaps are considered to be adjacent. Minimize the following functions
using 6-variable maps:
(a)  F  =  ΣU,V,W,X,Y,Z(1,5,9,13,21,23,29,31,37,45,53,61)
DO NOT COPY(b)  F  =  Σ (0,4,8,16,24,32,34,36,37,39,40,48,50,56)
U,V,W,X,Y,Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section  References  271
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
0 4 12 8 16 20 28 24
00 00
DO NOT COPY
1 5 13 9 17 21 29 25
01 01
3 7 15 11 Z 19 23 31 27 Z
11 11
Y 2 6 14 10 Y 18 22 30 26
10 10
DO NOT COPY
U,V = 0,0  X U,V = 0,1 X
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY00 32 36 44 40 00 48 52 60 56
33 37 45 41 49 53 61 57
01 01
35 39 47 43 Z 51 55 63 59 Z
11 11
Y 34 38 46 42 Y 50 54 62 58
10 10
DO NOT COPYFigure X4.66
U,V = 1,0  X U,V = 1,1 X
(c)  F  =  ΣU,V,W,X,Y,Z(2,4,5,6,12–21,28–31,34,38,50,51,60–63)
4.67  A 3-bit “comparator” circuit receives two 3-bit numbers,  P  =  P 2P 1 P 0  and  Q  =
DO NOT COPYQ 2 Q 1Q 0. Design a minimal sum-of-products circuit that produces a 1 output if
and only if  P  >  Q.
4.68  Find minimal multiple-output sum-of-products expressions for  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(0,1,2),
G  =  ΣX,Y,Z(1,4,6), and  H  =  ΣX,Y,Z(0,1,2,4,6).
4.69  Prove whether or not the following expression is a minimal sum. Do it the easiest
DO NOT COPYway possible (algebraically, not using maps).
F  =  T′ ⋅  U  ⋅  V  ⋅  W  ⋅  X  +  T′ ⋅  U  ⋅  V′ ⋅  X  ⋅  Z  +  T′ ⋅  U  ⋅  W  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z
4.70  There are 2n  m-subcubes of an  n-cube for the value  m  =  n  −  1. Show their text
representations and the corresponding product terms. (You may use ellipses as
DO NOT COPYrequired, e.g., 1, 2,  …,  n.)
4.71  There is just one  m-subcube of an  n-cube for the value  m  =  n; its text representa-
tion is xx…xx. Write the product term corresponding to this cube.
4.72  The C program in Table 4-9 uses memory inefficiently because it allocates mem-
ory for a maximum number of cubes at each level, even if this maximum is never
DO NOT COPYused. Redesign the program so that the  cubes  and  used  arrays are one-dimen-
sional arrays, and each level uses only as many array entries as needed. (Hint:
You can still allocate cubes sequentially, but keep track of the starting point in the
array for each level.)
4.73  As a function of  m, how many times is each distinct  m-cube rediscovered in
DO NOT COPYTable 4-9, only to be found in the inner loop and thrown away? Suggest some
ways to eliminate this inefficiency.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

272  Chapter 4  Combinational Logic Design Principles
4.74  The third  for-loop in Table 4-9 tries to combine all  m-cubes at a given level with
all other m-cubes at that level. In fact, only  m-cubes with x’s in the same positions
can be combined, so it is possible to reduce the number of loop iterations by using
DO NOT COPYa more sophisticated data structure. Design a data structure that segregates the
cubes at a given level according to the position of their x’s, and determine the
maximum size required for various elements of the data structure. Rewrite
Table 4-9 accordingly.
4.75  Estimate whether the savings in inner-loop iterations achieved in Exercise 4.75
DO NOT COPYoutweighs the overhead of maintaining a more complex data structure. Try to
make reasonable assumptions about how cubes are distributed at each level, and
indicate how your results are affected by these assumptions.
4.76  Optimize the  Oneones  function in Table 4-8. An obvious optimization is to drop
out of the loop early, but other optimizations exist that eliminate the  for  loop
DO NOT COPYentirely. One is based on table look-up and another uses a tricky computation
involving complementing,  Exclusive ORing, and addition.
4.77  Extend the C program in Table 4-9 to handle don’t-care conditions. Provide
another data structure,  dc[MAX_VARS+1][MAX_CUBES], that indicates whether a
given cube contains only don’t-cares, and update it as cubes are read and
DO NOT COPYgenerated.
4.78  (Hamlet circuit.) Complete the timing diagram and explain the function of the cir-
cuit in Figure X4.78. Where does the circuit get its name?
2B  2B
F 
DO NOT COPY Figure X
F
4.79  Prove that a two-level  AND-OR  circuit corresponding to the complete sum of a
logic function is always hazard free.
DO NOT COPY4.80  Find a four-variable logic function whose minimal sum-of-products realization is
not hazard free, but where there exists a hazard-free sum-of-products realization
with fewer product terms than the complete sum.
4.81  Starting with the  WHEN  statements in the ABEL program in Table 4-14, work out
the logic equations for variables  X4  through  X10  in the program. Explain any
DO NOT COPYdiscrepancies between your results and the equations in Table 4-15.
4.82  Draw a circuit diagram corresponding to the minimal two-level sum-of-products
equations for the alarm circuit, as given in Table 4-12. On each inverter,  AND
gate, and  OR  gate input and output, write a pair of numbers (t0,t1), where  t0  is
the test number from Table 4-25 that detects a stuck-at-0 fault on that line, and  t1
DO NOT COPYis the test number that detects a stuck-at-1 fault.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

74x138
15
6 Y0  c h a p t e r
G1
Y1  14 DO NOT
4
G2A 13
Y2 
5
G2B 12 5
Y3 
11
1 Y4 
A
10
2 Y5  COPY
B 9
3 Y6 
C 7
Y7
DO NOT
Combinational Logic
Design PracticesCOPY
he preceding chapter described the theoretical principles used in
combinational logic design. In this chapter, we’ll build on that
DO NOT
foundation and describe many of the devices, structures, and
T
methods used  by  engineers  to  solve practical  digital design
problems.
A practical combinational circuit may have dozens of inputs and out-
puts and could require hundreds, thousands, even millions of terms toCOPY
describe as a sum of products, and  billions and billions of rows to describe in
a truth table. Thus, most real combinational logic design problems are too
large to solve by “brute-force” application of theoretical techniques.
But wait, you say, how could any human being conceive of such a com-
plex logic circuit in the first place? The key is structured thinking. ADO NOT
complex circuit or system is conceived as a collection of smaller sub-
systems, each of which has a much simpler description.
In combinational logic design, there are several straightforward struc-
tures—decoders, multiplexers, comparators, and the like—that turn up quite
COPY
regularly as building blocks in larger systems. The most important of these
structures are described in this chapter. We describe each structure generally
and then give examples and applications using 74-series components,
ABEL, and VHDL.
Before launching into these combinational building blocks, we need to
DO NOT
discuss several important topics. The first topic is documentation standards
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 273
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

274  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
THE IMPORTANCE Later in this chapter, we’ll look at commonly used 74-series ICs that perform well-
OF 74-SERIES structured logic functions. These parts are important building blocks in a digital
DO NOT COPY
LOGIC designer’s toolbox because their level of functionality often matches a designer’s
level of thinking when partitioning a large problem into smaller chunks.
Even when you design for PLDs, FPGAs, or ASICs, understanding 74-series
MSI functions is important. In PLD-based design, standard MSI functions can be
used as a starting point for developing logic equations for more specialized func-
DO NOT COPY
tions. And in FPGA and ASIC design, the basic building blocks (or “standard cells”
or “macros”) provided by the FPGA or ASIC manufacturer may actually be defined
as 74-series MSI functions, even to the extent of having similar descriptive numbers.
DO NOT COPY
that are used by digital designers to ensure that their designs are correct, manu-
facturable, and maintainable. Next we discuss circuit timing, a crucial element
for successful digital design. Third, we describe the internal structure of combi-
national PLDs, which we use later as “universal” building blocks.
DO NOT COPY
5.1 Documentation Standards
Good documentation is essential for correct design and efficient maintenance of
digital systems. In addition to being accurate and complete, documentation must
DO NOT COPY
be somewhat instructive, so that a test engineer, maintenance technician, or even
the original design engineer (six months after designing the circuit) can figure
out how the system works just by reading the documentation.
Although the type of documentation depends on system complexity and
the engineering and manufacturing environments, a documentation package
DO NOT COPY
should generally contain at least the following six items:
circuit specification 1.  A  specification  describes exactly what the circuit or system is supposed to
do, including a description of all inputs and outputs (“interfaces”) and the
functions that are to be performed. Note that the “spec” doesn’t have to
DO NOT COPY
specify  how  the system achieves its results, just  what  the results are sup-
posed to be. However, in many companies it is common practice also to
incorporate one or more of the documents below into the spec to describe
how the system works at the same time.
block diagramDO NOT COPY2.  A  block diagram  is an informal pictorial description of the system’s major
functional modules and their basic interconnections.
schematic diagram 3.  A  schematic diagram is a formal specification of the electrical components
of the system, their interconnections, and all of the details needed to con-
struct the system, including IC types, reference designators, and pin
DO NOT COPY
logic diagram numbers. We’ve been using the term  logic diagram  for an informal draw-
ing that does not have quite this level of detail. Most schematic drawing
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  275
DOCUMENTS Professional engineering documentation nowadays is carefully maintained on corpo-
ON-LINE rate intranets, so it’s very useful to include URLs in circuit specifications and
DO NOT COPY
descriptions so that references can be easily located. On-line documentation is
so important and authoritative in one company that the footer on every page of every
specification contains the warning that “A printed version of this document is an
uncontrolled copy.” That is, a printed copy could very well be obsolete.
DO NOT COPY
programs have the ability to generate a  bill of materials (BOM)  from the bill of materials (BOM)
schematic; this tells the purchasing department what electrical components
they have to order to build the system.
4.DO NOT COPY  A  timing diagram  shows the values of various logic signals as a function timing diagram
of time, including the cause-and-effect delays between critical signals.
5.  A  structured logic device description  describes the internal function of a structured logic device
programmable  logic  device  (PLD),  field-programmable  gate  array description
(FPGA), or application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC). It is normally
DO NOT COPY
written in a hardware description language (HDL) such as ABEL or
VHDL, but it may be in the form of logic equations, state tables, or state
diagrams. In some cases, a conventional programming language such as C
may be used to model the operation of a circuit or to specify its behavior.
6.DO NOT COPY  A  circuit description  is a narrative text document that, in conjunction with circuit description
the other documentation, explains how the circuit works internally. The
circuit description should list any assumptions and potential pitfalls in the
circuit’s design and operation, and point out the use of any nonobvious
design “tricks.” A good circuit description also contains definitions of
DO NOT COPYacronyms and other specialized terms, and has references to related
documents.
You’ve probably already seen block diagrams in many contexts. We
present a few rules for drawing them in the next subsection, and then we concen-
trate on schematics for combinational logic circuits in the rest of this section.DO NOT COPY
Section 5.2.1 introduces timing diagrams. Structured logic descriptions in the
form of ABEL and VHDL programs were covered in Sections 4.6 and 4.7. In
Section 11.1.6, we’ll show how a C program can be used to generate the contents
of a read-only memory.
DO NOT COPYThe last area of documentation, the circuit description, is very important in
practice. Just as an experienced programmer creates a program design document
before beginning to write code, an experienced logic designer starts writing the
circuit description before drawing the schematic. Unfortunately, the circuit
description is sometimes the last document to be created, and sometimes it’s
DO NOT COPY
never written at all. A circuit without a description is difficult to debug, manu-
facture, test, maintain, modify, and enhance.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

276  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
DON’T FORGET In order to create great products, logic designers must develop their language and
TO WRITE! writing skills, especially in the area of  logical  outlining and organization. The most
DO NOT COPY
successful logic designers (and later, project leaders, system architects, and entrepre-
neurs)  are  the  ones  who  communicate  their  ideas,  proposals,  and  decisions
effectively to others. Even though it’s a lot of fun to tinker in the digital design lab,
don’t use that as an excuse to shortchange your writing and communications courses
and projects!
DO NOT COPY
5.1.1 Block Diagrams
block diagram A  block diagram  shows the inputs, outputs, functional modules, internal data
DO NOT COPYpaths, and important control signals of a system. In general, it should not be so
detailed that it occupies more than one page, yet it must not be too vague. A
small block diagram may have three to six blocks, while a large one may have
10 to 15, depending on system complexity. In any case, the block diagram must
DO NOT COPY
SHIFT-AND-ADD MULTIPLIER
Figure 5-1
Block diagram for a
IN
digital design project. RESET R/W
4
LOAD 16-word x 32-bit
CONTROL
DO NOT COPYADDR RAM
RUN
DISPLAY BYTE EN
OUT
INBUS
DO NOT COPY32 32  32  32
2
direct  left  right
SEL  MULTIPLEXER
4 to 1
LDA  LDB
DO NOT COPY32
A REGISTER  B REGISTER
32  32
DO NOT COPY
CARRY LOOKAHEAD ADDER
32
DO NOT COPY
OUTBUS
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  277
(a) (b) 32
32
32-BIT REGISTER
DO NOT COPY
32-BIT REGISTER 4 x 74LS377
32 32
DO NOT COPY
(c)
32
8 8 8 8
DO NOT COPY
74LS377  74LS377  74LS377  74LS377  Figure 5-2
A 32-bit register
8 8 8 8
block: (a) realization
unspecified; (b) chips
32
specified; (c) too
DO NOT COPYmuch detail.
show the most important system elements and how they work together. Large
systems may require additional block diagrams of individual subsystems, but
there should always be a “top-level” diagram showing the entire system.DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-1 shows a sample block diagram. Each block is labeled with the
function of the block, not the individual chips that comprise it. As another exam-
ple, Figure 5-2(a) shows the block-diagram symbol for a 32-bit register. If the
register is to be built using four 74x377 8-bit registers, and this information is
DO NOT COPY
important to someone reading the diagram (e.g., for cost reasons), then it can be
conveyed as shown in (b). However, splitting the block to show individual chips
as in (c) is incorrect.
A  bus is a collection of two or more related signal lines. In a block diagram, bus
buses are drawn with a double or heavy line. A slash and a number may indicate
DO NOT COPY
how many individual signal lines are contained in a bus. Alternatively, size
denoted in the bus name (e.g.,  INBUS[31..0]  or  INBUS[31:0]). Active levels
(defined later) and inversion bubbles may or may not appear in block diagrams;
in most cases, they are unimportant at this level of detail. However, important
control signals and buses should have names, usually the same names that
DO NOT COPY
appear in the more detailed schematic.
The flow of control and data in a block diagram should be clearly indicat-
ed. Logic diagrams are generally drawn with signals flowing from left to right,
but in block diagrams this ideal is more difficult to achieve. Inputs and outputs
may be on any side of a block, and the direction of signal flow may be arbitrary.DO NOT COPY
Arrowheads are used on buses and ordinary signal lines to eliminate ambiguity.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

278  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
AND NAND
DO NOT COPY
OR NOR
BUFFER INVERTER
DO NOT COPY(a) (b) (c)
Figure 5-3  Shapes for basic logic gates: (a)  AND,  OR , and buffers;
(b) expansion of inputs; (c) inversion bubbles.
DO NOT COPY5.1.2 Gate Symbols
The  symbol  shapes  for  AND  and  OR  gates  and  buffers  are  shown  in
Figure 5-3(a). (Recall from Chapter 3 that a buffer is a circuit that simply
converts “weak” logic signals into “strong” ones.) To draw logic gates with more
than a few inputs, we expand the  AND  and  OR  symbols as shown in (b). A small
DO NOT COPY
inversion bubble circle, called an  inversion bubble, denotes logical inversion or complementing
and is used in the symbols for  NAND  and  NOR  gates and inverters in (c).
Using the generalized DeMorgan’s theorem, we can manipulate the logic
expressions for gates with complemented outputs. For example, if  X  and  Y  are
the inputs of a  NAND  gate with output  Z, then we can write
DO NOT COPY
Z  = ( X  ⋅ Y)′
= X′ + Y′
This gives rise to two different but equally correct symbols for a  NAND  gate, as
DO NOT COPYwe demonstrated in Figure 4-3 on page 199. In fact, this sort of manipulation
may be applied to gates with uncomplemented inputs as well. For example,
consider the following equations for an  AND  gate:
Z  = X  ⋅ Y
= ( ( X  ⋅ Y)′)′
DO NOT COPY
= ( X′ + Y′)′
IEEE STANDARD Together with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Institute of
DO NOT COPYLOGIC SYMBOLS Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) has developed a standard set of logic
symbols. The most recent revision of the standard is ANSI/IEEE Std 91-1984, IEEE
Standard Graphic Symbols for Logic Functions. The standard allows both rectangu-
lar- and distinctive-shape symbols for logic gates. We have been using and will
continue to use the distinctive-shape symbols throughout this book, but the rectan-
DO NOT COPYgular-shape symbols are described in Appendix A.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  279
OR BUFFER
DO NOT COPY
NOR  INVERTER
DO NOT COPY
AND
Figure 5-4
Equivalent gate symbols
under the generalized
NAND
DeMorgan’s theorem.
DO NOT COPY
Thus, an  AND  gate may be symbolized as an  OR  gate with inversion bubbles on
its inputs and output.
DO NOT COPYEquivalent symbols for standard gates that can be obtained by these
manipulations are summarized in Figure 5-4. Even though both symbols in a
pair represent the same logic function, the choice of one symbol or the other in a
logic diagram is not arbitrary, at least not if we are adhering to good documenta-
tion standards. As we’ll show in the next three subsections, proper choices of
signal names and gate symbols can make logic diagrams much easier to use andDO NOT COPY
understand.
5.1.3 Signal Names and Active Levels
Each input and output signal in a logic circuit should have a descriptive alpha-
numeric label, the signal’s name. Most computer-aided design systems forDO NOT COPY
drawing logic circuits also allow certain special characters, such as  *,  _, and  !,
to be included in signal names. In the analysis and synthesis examples in
Chapter 4, we used mostly single-character signal names (X,  Y, etc.) because the
circuits didn’t do much. However, in a real system, well-chosen signal names
DO NOT COPY
convey information to someone reading the logic diagram the same way that
variable names in a software program do. A signal’s name indicates an action
that is controlled (GO,  PAUSE), a condition that it detects (READY,  ERROR),
or data that it carries (INBUS[31:0]).
Each signal name should have an  active level  associated with it. A signal is active level
DO NOT COPY
active high  if it performs the named action or denotes the named condition when active high
it is  HIGH  or 1. (Under the positive-logic convention, which we use throughout
this book, “HIGH” and “1” are equivalent.) A signal is  active low  if it performs active low
the named action or denotes the named condition when it is  LOW  or 0. A signal assert
is said to beDO NOT COPY  asserted  when it is at its active level. A signal is said to be  negated negate
(or, sometimes,  deasserted) when it is not at its active level. deassert
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

280  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 1 Active Low  Active High
Each line shows a
READY–  READY+
different naming
ERROR.L  ERROR.H
DO NOT COPYconvention for active
ADDR15(L)  ADDR15(H)
levels.
RESET*  RESET
ENABLE~  ENABLE
~GO  GO
DO NOT COPY/RECEIVE  RECEIVE
TRANSMIT_L  TRANSMIT
The active level of each signal in a circuit is normally specified as part of its
active-level namingDO NOT COPYname, according to some convention. Examples of several different  active-level
convention naming conventions  are shown in Table 5-1. The choice of one of these or other
signal naming conventions is sometimes just a matter of personal preference, but
more often it is constrained by the engineering environment. Since the active-
level designation is part of the signal name, the naming convention must be
DO NOT COPYcompatible with the input requirements of any computer-aided design tools that
will process the signal names, such as schematic editors, HDL compilers, and
simulators. In this text, we’ll use the last convention in the table: An active-low
_L  suffix signal name has a suffix of  _L, and an active-high signal has no suffix. The  _L
suffix may be read as if it were a prefix “not.”
DO NOT COPY
It’s extremely important for you to understand the difference between
signal name signal names, expressions, and equations. A  signal name  is just a name—an
logic expression alphanumeric label. A  logic expression  combines signal names using the opera-
tors of switching algebra—AND,  OR, and  NOT—as we explained and used
logic equation throughout Chapter 4. A  logic equation  is an assignment of a logic expression to
DO NOT COPY
a signal name—it describes one signal’s function in terms of other signals.
The distinction between signal names and logic expressions can be related
to a concept used in computer programming languages: The left-hand side of an
assignment statement contains a variable  name, and the right-hand side contains
DO NOT COPYan  expression  whose value will be given to the named variable (e.g.,  Z  =  -(X+Y)
in C). In a programming language, you can’t put an expression on the left-hand
side of an assignment statement. In logic design, you can’t use a logic expression
as a signal name.
Logic signals may have names like  X,  READY, and  GO_L. The “_L” in
DO NOT COPYGO_L  is just part of the signal’s name, like an underscore in a variable name in a
C program. There is  no  signal whose name is  READY′—this is an expression,
since  ′  is an operator. However, there may be two signals named  READY  and
READY_L  such that  READY_L  =  READY′  during normal operation of the
circuit. We are very careful in this book to distinguish between signal names,
DO NOT COPY
which are always printed in black, and logic expressions, which are always
printed in color when they are written near the corresponding signal lines.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  281
DO DO
ENABLE ENABLE
MY MY
. . . . . .
DO NOT COPY. . . THING . . . THING
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
. . . . . .
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-5  Logic symbols: (a) AND, OR, and a larger-scale logic element;
(b) the same elements with active-low inputs and outputs.
5.1.4 Active Levels for Pins
DO NOT COPY
When we draw the outline of an  AND  or  OR  symbol, or a rectangle representing
a larger-scale logic element, we think of the given logic function as occurring
inside  that symbolic outline. In Figure 5-5(a), we show the logic symbols for an
AND  and  OR  gate and for a larger-scale element with an  ENABLE  input. The
AND  and  OR  gates have active-high inputs—they require 1s on the input to
DO NOT COPY
assert their outputs. Likewise, the larger-scale element has an active-high
ENABLE  input, which must be 1 to enable the element to do its thing. In (b), we
show the same logic elements with active-low input and output pins. Exactly the
same logic functions are performed  inside  the symbolic outlines, but the inver-
sion bubbles indicate that 0s must now be applied to the input pins to activate theDO NOT COPY
logic functions, and that the outputs are 0 when they are “doing their thing.”
Thus, active levels may be associated with the input and output pins of
gates and larger-scale logic elements. We use an inversion bubble to indicate an
active-low pin and the absence of a bubble to indicate an active-high pin. For
example, theDO NOT COPY  AND  gate in Figure 5-6(a) performs the logical  AND  of two active-
high inputs and produces an active-high output: if both inputs are asserted (1),
the output is asserted (1). The  NAND  gate in (b) also performs the  AND  function,
but it produces an active-low output. Even a NOR  or OR  gate can be construed to
perform the  AND  function using active-low inputs and outputs, as shown in (c)
DO NOT COPY
and (d). All four gates in the figure can be said to perform the same function: the
output of each gate is asserted if both of its inputs are asserted. Figure 5-7 shows
the same idea for the  OR function: The output of each gate is asserted if either of
its inputs is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-6  Four ways of obtaining an  AND  function: (a)  AND  gate (74x08);
(b)  NAND  gate (74x00); (c) NOR  gate (74x02); (d)  OR  gate (74x32).
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

282  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
DO NOT COPY(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)
Figure 5-7  Four ways of obtaining an  OR  function: (a)  OR  gate (74x32);
(b) NOR  gate (74x02); (c) NAND gate (74x00); (d) AND gate (74x08).
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)
Figure 5-8  Alternate logic symbols: (a, b) inverters; (c, d) noninverting buffers.
DO NOT COPYSometimes a noninverting buffer is used simply to boost the fanout of a
logic signal without changing its function. Figure 5-8 shows the possible logic
symbols for both inverters and noninverting buffers. In terms of active levels, all
of the symbols perform exactly the same function: Each asserts its output signal
if and only if its input is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
5.1.5 Bubble-to-Bubble Logic Design
Experienced logic circuit designers formulate their circuits in terms of the logic
functions performed  inside  the symbolic outlines. Whether you’re designing
with discrete gates or in an HDL like ABEL or VHDL, it’s easiest to think of
DO NOT COPY
logic signals and their interactions using active-high names. However, once
you’re ready to realize your circuit, you may have to deal with active-low signals
due to the requirements of the environment.
When you design with discrete gates, either at board or ASIC level, a key
requirement is often speed. As we showed in Section 3.3.6, inverting gates are
DO NOT COPY
typically faster than noninverting ones, so there’s often a significant perfor-
mance payoff in carrying some signals in active-low form.
When you design with larger-scale elements, many of them may be off-
the-shelf chips or other existing components that already have some inputs and
DO NOT COPYoutputs fixed in active-low form. The reasons that they use active-low signals
may range from performance improvement to years of tradition, but in any case,
you still have to deal with it.
DO NOT COPY
NAME THAT Although it is absolutely necessary to name only a circuit’s main inputs and outputs,
SIGNAL! most logic designers find it useful to name internal signals as well. During circuit
debugging, it’s nice to have a name to use when pointing to an internal signal that’s
behaving strangely. Most computer-aided design systems automatically generate
labels for unnamed signals, but a user-chosen name is preferable to a computer-gen-
DO NOT COPYerated one like  XSIG1057.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  283
READY  READY 
GO GO_L
REQUEST REQUEST
DO NOT COPY(a)  (b)
READY_L  READY_L 
GO GO_L
REQUEST_L REQUEST_L
(c)  (d)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-9  Many ways to  GO : (a) active-high inputs and output;
(b) active-high inputs, active-low output; (c) active-low
inputs, active-high output; (d) active-low inputs and outputs.
DO NOT COPYBubble-to-bubble logic design  is the practice of choosing logic symbols bubble-to-bubble logic
and signal names, including active-level designators, that make the function of a design
logic circuit easier to understand. Usually, this means choosing signal names and
gate types and symbols so that most of the inversion bubbles “cancel out” and
the logic diagram can be analyzed as if all of the signals were active high.
DO NOT COPYFor example, suppose we need to produce a signal that tells a device to
“GO” when we are “READY” and we get a “REQUEST.” Clearly from the prob-
lem statement, an  AND  function is required; in switching algebra, we would
write  GO  =  READY ⋅ REQUEST. However, we can use different gates to perform
the  AND  function, depending on the active level required for the  GO  signal and
the active levels of the available input signals.DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-9(a) shows the simplest case, where  GO  must be active-high and
the available input signals are also active-high; we use an  AND  gate. If, on the
other hand, the device that we’re controlling requires an active-low  GO_L signal,
we can use a  NAND  gate as shown in (b). If the available input signals are active-
DO NOT COPY
low, we can use a  NOR  or  OR  gate as shown in (c) and (d).
The active levels of available signals don’t always match the active levels
of available gates. For example, suppose we are given input signals  READY_L
(active-low) and  REQUEST (active-high). Figure 5-10 shows two different ways
to generate  GO  using an inverter to generate the active level needed for the  AND
DO NOT COPY
function. The second way is generally preferred, since inverting gates like  NOR
are generally faster than noninverting ones like  AND. We drew the inverter
differently in each case to make the output’s active level match its signal name.
Figure 5-10DO NOT COPY  Two more ways to  GO, with mixed input levels: (a) with an  AND
gate; (b) with a  NOR  gate.
READY
READY_L  READY_L 
GO GO
REQUEST_L
REQUESTDO NOT COPYREQUEST
(a)  (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

284  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
(a) A
SEL
DO NOT COPYDATA
B
DO NOT COPY(b) A
ASEL
ADATA_L
DATA
BDATA_L 
= ASEL • A + ASEL′ • B
BSEL
DO NOT COPY
B
Figure 5-11  A 2-input multiplexer (you’re not supposed to know what that is
yet): (a) cryptic logic diagram; (b) proper logic diagram using
active-level designators and alternate logic symbols.
DO NOT COPY
To understand the benefits of bubble-to-bubble logic design, consider the
circuit in Figure 5-11(a). What does it do? In Section 4.2 we showed several
ways to analyze such a circuit, and we could certainly obtain a logic expression
for the  DATA  output using these techniques. However, when the circuit is
DO NOT COPYredrawn in Figure 5-11(b), the output function can be read directly from the
logic diagram, as follows. The DATA  output is asserted when either ADATA_L or
BDATA_L  is asserted. If  ASEL  is asserted, then  ADATA_L  is asserted if and only
if  A  is asserted; that is,  ADATA_L  is a copy of  A. If  ASEL  is negated,  BSEL  is
asserted and  BDATA_L  is a copy of  B. In other words,  DATA  is a copy of  A  if
DO NOT COPYASEL is asserted, and  DATA  is a copy of  B  if ASEL is negated. Even though there
are five inversion bubbles in the logic diagram, we mentally had to perform only
one negation to understand the circuit—that  BSEL  is asserted if  ASEL  is not
asserted.
If we wish, we can write an algebraic expression for the  DATA  output. We
DO NOT COPY
use the technique of Section 4.2, simply propagating expressions through gates
toward the output. In doing so, we can ignore pairs of inversion bubbles that
cancel, and directly write the expression shown in color in the figure.
Figure 5-12  Another properly drawn logic diagram.
DO NOT COPY
READY_L GO = READY_L′ • REQUEST_L′
REQUEST_L = READY • REQUEST  ENABLE_L = (TEST + (READY • REQUEST) )′
ENABLE = TEST + (READY • REQUEST)
TEST
DO NOT COPY
HALT = LOCK + (READY • REQUEST)′
LOCK_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  285
BUBBLE-TO- The following rules are useful for performing bubble-to-bubble logic design:
BUBBLE LOGIC
DO NOT COPY•  The signal name on a device’s output should have the same active level as the
DESIGN RULES device’s output pin, that is, active-low if the device symbol has an inversion
bubble on the output pin, active-high if not.
•  If the active level of an input signal is the same as that of the input pin to which
it is connected, then the logic function inside the symbolic outline is activated
DO NOT COPYwhen the signal is asserted. This is the most common case in a logic diagram.
•  If the active level of an input signal is the opposite of that of the input pin to
which it is connected, then the logic function inside the symbolic outline is
activated when the signal is negated. This case should be avoided whenever
possible because it forces us to keep track mentally of a logical negation to
DO NOT COPYunderstand the circuit.
Another example is shown in Figure 5-12. Reading directly from the logic
diagram, we see that  ENABLE_L  is asserted if  READY_L  and  REQUEST_L  are
asserted or ifDO NOT COPY  TEST  is asserted. The  HALT  output is asserted if  READY_L  and
REQUEST_L  are not both asserted or if  LOCK_L  is asserted. Once again, this
example has only one place where a gate input’s active level does not match the
input signal level, and this is reflected in the verbal description of the circuit.
We can, if we wish, write algebraic equations for the  ENABLE_L and  HALT
DO NOT COPY
outputs. As we propagate expressions through gates towards the output, we
obtain expressions like  READY_L′ ⋅ REQUEST′. However, we can use our
active-level naming convention to simplify terms like  READY_L′. The circuit
contains no signal with the name  READY; but if it did, it would satisfy the rela-
tionship  READY  =  READY_L′  according to the naming convention. This allows
DO NOT COPY
us to write the  ENABLE_L  and  HALT  equations as shown. Complementing both
sides of the  ENABLE_L  equation, we obtain an equation that describes a hypo-
thetical active-high  ENABLE  output in terms of hypothetical active-high inputs.
We’ll see more examples of bubble-to-bubble logic design in this and later
chapters, especially as we begin to use larger-scale logic elements.DO NOT COPY
5.1.6 Drawing Layout
Logic diagrams and schematics should be drawn with gates in their “normal”
orientation with inputs on the left and outputs on the right. The logic symbols
for larger-scale logic elements are also normally drawn with inputs on the leftDO NOT COPY
and outputs on the right.
A complete schematic page should be drawn with system inputs on the left
and outputs on the right, and the general flow of signals should be from left to
right. If an input or output appears in the middle of a page, it should be extended
DO NOT COPY
to the left or right edge, respectively. In this way, a reader can find all inputs and
outputs by looking at the edges of the page only. All signal paths on the page
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

286  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Hand drawn
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-13 Machine drawn not allowed
Line crossings and
connections.
crossing  connection  connection
DO NOT COPY
should be connected when possible; paths may be broken if the drawing gets
crowded, but breaks should be flagged in both directions, as described later.
Sometimes block diagrams are drawn without crossing lines for a neater
appearance, but this is never done in logic diagrams. Instead, lines are allowed to
cross and connections are indicated clearly with a dot. Still, some computer-
DO NOT COPY
aided design systems (and some designers) can’t draw legible connection dots.
To distinguish between crossing lines and connected lines, they adopt the
convention that only “T”-type connections are allowed, as shown in Figure 5-13.
This is a good convention to follow in any case.
Schematics that fit on a single page are the easiest to work with. The largest
DO NOT COPY
practical paper size for a schematic might be E-size (34”×44”). Although its
drawing capacity is great, such a large paper size is unwieldy to work with. The
best compromise of drawing capacity and practicality is B-size (11”×17”). It can
be easily folded for storage and quick reference in standard 3-ring notebooks,
DO NOT COPYand it can be copied on most office copiers. Regardless of paper size, schematics
Figure 5-14  Flat schematic structure.
Page 1 Page 2 Page 3
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Page 4 Page 5 Page 6
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  287
come out best when the page is used in landscape format, that is, with its long
dimension oriented from left to right, the direction of most signal flow.
Schematics that don’t fit on a single page should be broken up into individ-
DO NOT COPY
ual pages in a way that minimizes the connections (and confusion) between
pages. They may also use a coordinate system, like that of a road map, to flag the signal flags
sources and destinations of signals that travel from one page to another. An out-
going signal should have flags referring to all of the destinations of that signal,
while an incoming signal should have a flag referring to the source only. That is,
DO NOT COPY
an incoming signal should be flagged to the place where it is generated, not to a
place somewhere in the middle of a chain of destinations that use the signal.
A multiple-page schematic usually has a “flat” structure. As shown in flat schematic structure
Figure 5-14, each page is carved out from the complete schematic and can con-
nect to any other page as if all the pages were on one large sheet. However, muchDO NOT COPY
like programs, schematics can also be constructed hierarchically, as illustrated in hierarchical schematic
Figure 5-15. In this approach, the “top-level” schematic is just a single page that structure
may take the place of a block diagram. Typically, the top-level schematic con-
DO NOT COPY
Page 1
Figure 5-15
Hierarchical
schematic structure.
DO NOT COPY
Page 2DO NOT COPYPage 3 Page 4
DO NOT COPY
Page 5 Page 6
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

288  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
tains no gates or other logic elements; it only shows blocks corresponding to the
major subsystems, and their interconnections. The blocks or subsystems are turn
on lower-level pages, which may contain ordinary gate-level descriptions, or
DO NOT COPY
may themselves use blocks defined in lower-level hierarchies. If a particular
lower-level hierarchy needs to be used more than once, it may be reused (or
“called,” in the programming sense) multiple times by the higher-level pages.
Most computer-aided logic design systems support both flat and hierarchi-
cal schematics. Proper signal naming is very important in both styles, since there
DO NOT COPY
are a number of common errors that can occur:
•  Like any other program, a schematic-entry program does what you say, not
what you mean. If you use slightly different names for what you intend to
be the same signal on different pages, they won’t be connected.
DO NOT COPY
•  Conversely, if you inadvertently use the same name for different signals on
different pages of a flat schematic, many programs will dutifully connect
them together, even if you haven’t connected them with an off-page flag.
(In a hierarchical schematic, reusing a name at different places in the hier-
archy is generally OK, because the program qualifies each name with its
DO NOT COPY
position in the hierarchy.)
•  In a hierarchical schematic, you have to be careful in naming the external
interface signals on pages in the lower levels of the hierarchy. These are the
names that will appear inside the blocks corresponding to these pages
DO NOT COPYwhen they are used at higher levels of the hierarchy. It’s very easy to trans-
pose signal names or use a name with the wrong active level, yielding
incorrect results when the block is used.
•  This is not usually a naming problem, but all schematic programs seem to
have quirks in which signals that appear to be connected are not. Using the
DO NOT COPY
“T” convention in Figure 5-13 can help minimize this problem.
Fortunately, most schematic programs have error-checking facilities that
can catch many of these errors, for example, by searching for signal names that
have no inputs, no outputs, or multiple outputs associated with them. But most
DO NOT COPYlogic designers learn the importance of careful, manual schematic double-
checking only through the bitter experience of building a printed-circuit board or
an ASIC based on a schematic containing some dumb error.
5.1.7 Buses
DO NOT COPYAs defined previously, a bus is a collection of two or more related signal lines.
For example, a microprocessor system might have an address bus with 16 lines,
ADDR0–ADDR15, and a data bus with 8 lines,  DATA0–DATA7. The signal
names in a bus are not necessarily related or ordered as in these first examples.
For example, a microprocessor system might have a control bus containing five
DO NOT COPY
signals,  ALE,  MIO,  RD_L,  WR_L, and  RDY.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  289
Logic diagrams use special notation for buses in order to reduce the
amount of drawing and to improve readability. As shown in Figure 5-16, a bus
has its own descriptive name, such as  ADDR[15:0],  DATA[7:0], or  CONTROL. A
DO NOT COPY
bus name may use brackets and a colon to denote a range. Buses are drawn with
thicker lines than ordinary signals. Individual signals are put into or pulled out of
the bus by connecting an ordinary signal line to the bus and writing the signal
name. Often a special connection dot is also used, as in the example.
A computer-aided design system keeps track of the individual signals in a
DO NOT COPY
bus. When it actually comes time to build a circuit from the schematic, signal
lines in a bus are treated just as though they had all been drawn individually.
The symbols at the right-hand edge of Figure 5-16 are interpage signal
flags. They indicate that  LA  goes out to page 2,  DB  is bidirectional and connects
to page 2, andDO NOT COPY  CONTROL  is bidirectional and connects to pages 2 and 3.
Microprocessor
Figure 5-16
ADDR15
A15 Examples of buses.
ADDR14
A14
ADDR13 LA[15:0] 2
A13
DO NOT COPYADDR12
A12
ADDR11 ADDR15  LA15 ADDR7 LA7
A11
ADDR10 ADDR14 LA14 ADDR6 LA6
A10
ADDR9 ADDR13 LA13 ADDR5 LA5
A9
ADDR8 ADDR12 LA12 ADDR4 LA4
A8
ADDR7 ADDR11 LA11 ADDR3 LA3
A7
DO NOT COPYADDR6 ADDR10 LA10 ADDR2 LA2
A6
ADDR5 ADDR9 LA7 ADDR1 LA1
A5
ADDR4 ADDR8 LA8 ADDR0 LA0
A4
ADDR3
A3
ADDR2
A2
ADDR1
DO NOT COPYA1
ADDR0
A0 ADDR[15:0]
ALE
ALE
ALE
DATA7
D7 
DATA6
DO NOT COPYD6 DATA7 DB7
DATA5
D5 DATA6 DB6
DATA4
D4 DATA5 DB5
DATA3
D3 DATA4 DB4
DATA2
D2 DATA3 DB3
DATA1
D1 DATA2 DB2
DO NOT COPYDATA0
D0 DATA1 DB1
DATA[7:0]
DATA0 DB0
RDY  MIO 2
READY MEMIO  DB[7:0]
RD_L RD_L
READ 
WR_L WR_L
WRITE
DO NOT COPY
2,3
CONTROL
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

290  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
A
74HCT00
74HCT04  1
3 M1_L
1 2 B_L  2 
DO NOT COPY74HCT00
U3  U1 10
8
9  X
74HCT04
74HCT00
3 4 A_L  4 U1
6 M2_L
5 
U3
DO NOT COPY
B U1
74HCT00
13
11 M3_L
12 
C 74HCT00
4
U1 6
Figure 5-17DO NOT COPY5  Y
74HCT00
Schematic diagram 1
3 M4_L U2
for a circuit using a 2 
74HCT00.
U2
DO NOT COPY
5.1.8 Additional Schematic Information
Complete schematic diagrams indicate IC types, reference designators, and pin
IC type numbers, as in Figure 5-17. The IC type is a part number identifying the integrat-
ed circuit that performs a given logic function. For example, a 2-input  NAND
DO NOT COPYgate might be identified as a 74HCT00 or a 74LS00. In addition to the logic
function, the IC type identifies the device’s logic family and speed.
reference designator The reference designator  for an IC identifies a particular instance of that IC
type installed in the system. In conjunction with the system’s mechanical
documentation, the reference designator allows a particular IC to be located
DO NOT COPYduring assembly, test, and maintenance of the system. Traditionally, reference
designators for ICs begin with the letter  U  (for “unit”).
pin number Once a particular IC is located,  pin numbers  are used to locate individual
logic signals on its pins. The pin numbers are written near the corresponding
inputs and outputs of the standard logic symbol, as shown in Figure 5-17.
DO NOT COPY
In the rest of this book, just to make you comfortable with properly drawn
schematics, we’ll include reference designators and pin numbers for all of the
logic circuit examples that use SSI and MSI parts.
Figure 5-18 shows the pinouts of many different SSI ICs that are used in
examples throughout this book. Some special graphic elements appear in a few
DO NOT COPY
of the symbols:
•  Symbols for the 74x14 Schmitt-trigger inverter has a special element
inside the symbol to indicate hysteresis.
•  Symbols for the 74x03 quad  NAND  and the 74x266 quad  Exclusive NOR
DO NOT COPY
have a special element to indicate an open-drain or open-collector output.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.1  Documentation Standards  291
74x00 74x02 74x03 74x04  74x08
1 2 1 1  2 1
3 1 3 3
2 3 2 2
DO NOT COPY
3  4
4 5 4 4
6 4 6 6
5 6 5 5  6 5
9 8 9 9  8 9
8 10 8 8
10 DO NOT COPY9 10 10
11  10
12 11 12 12
11 13 11 11
13 12 13 13  12 13
DO NOT COPY
74x10  74x11 74x14  74x20 74x21
1  2
1 1
1 1
2 12 2 12
3  4 2 2
13 13
DO NOT COPY6 6
4 4
3 3 5  6 5 5
4 6 4 6
5 5 9  8 9 9
10 10
8 8
9 DO NOT COPY9 11  10 12 12
10 8 10 8
13 13
11 11
13  12
DO NOT COPY
74x27 74x30 74x32 74x86 74x266
1 1 1
1 3 3 3
2  2  2 
2 12 1
13 2
4 4 5
DO NOT COPY3 6 6 4
3 5 5 6
4
4 6 8
5
5 9 9 8
6 8 8 10
10 10 9
9 11
10 8 12
DO NOT COPY12 12 12
11 11 11 11
13 13 13
Figure 5-18  Pinouts for SSI ICs in standard dual-inline packages.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

292  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
When you prepare a schematic diagram for a board-level design using a
schematic  drawing  program,  the  program  automatically  provides  the  pin
numbers for the devices that you select from its component library. Note that an
DO NOT COPY
IC’s pin numbers may differ depending on package type, so you have to be
careful to select the right version of the component from the library. Figure 5-18
shows the pin numbers that are used in a dual-inline package, the type of
package that you would use in a digital design laboratory course or in a low-
density, “thru-hole” commercial printed-circuit board.
DO NOT COPY
5.2 Circuit Timing
“Timing is everything”—in investing, in comedy, and yes, in digital design. As
we studied in Section 3.6, the outputs of real circuits take time to react to their
DO NOT COPYinputs, and many of today’s circuits and systems are so fast that even the speed-
of-light delay in propagating an output signal to an input on the other side of a
board or chip is significant.
Most digital systems are sequential circuits that operate step-by-step under
the control of a periodic clock signal, and the speed of the clock is limited by the
DO NOT COPY
worst-case time that it takes for the operations in one step to complete. Thus,
digital designers need to be keenly aware of timing behavior in order to build fast
circuits that operate correctly under all conditions.
The last several years have seen great advances in the number and quality
of CAD tools for analyzing circuit timing. Still, quite often the greatest
DO NOT COPY
challenge in completing a board-level or especially an ASIC design is achieving
the required timing performance. In this section, we start with the basics, so you
can understand what the tools are doing when you use them, and so you can
figure out how to fix your circuits when their timing isn’t quite making it.
DO NOT COPY
5.2.1 Timing Diagrams
timing diagram A  timing diagram  illustrates the logical behavior of signals in a digital circuit as
a function of time. Timing diagrams are an important part of the documentation
of any digital system. They can be used both to explain the timing relationships
among signals within a system, and to define the timing requirements of external
DO NOT COPY
signals that are applied to the system.
Figure 5-19(a) is the block diagram of a simple combinational circuit with
two inputs and two outputs. Assuming that the  ENB  input is held at a constant
value, (b) shows the delay of the two outputs with respect to the  GO  input. In
DO NOT COPYeach waveform, the upper line represents a logic 1, and the lower line a logic 0.
Signal transitions are drawn as slanted lines to remind us that they do not occur
in zero time in real circuits. (Also, slanted lines look nicer than vertical ones.)
Arrows are sometimes drawn, especially in complex timing diagrams, to
causality show  causality—which input transitions cause which output transitions. In
DO NOT COPYany case, the most important information provided by a timing diagram is a
delay specification of the  delay  between transitions.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.2  Circuit Timing  293
(b)
GO
DO NOT COPYREADY
tRDY  tRDY
DAT
tDAT tDAT
DO NOT COPY
(a) (c)
GO
GO READY
READY
ENBDO NOT COPYDAT t
RDYmin
tRDYmax
DAT
tDATmin
DO NOT COPYt
DATmax
Figure 5-19  Timing diagrams for a combinational circuit: (a) block diagram of
circuit; (b) causality and propagation delay; (c) minimum and
maximum delays.
DO NOT COPY
Different paths through a circuit may have different delays. For example,
Figure 5-19(b) shows that the delay from  GO  to  READY  is shorter than the delay
from  GO  to  DAT. Similarly, the delays from the  ENB  input to the outputs may
vary, and could be shown in another timing diagram. And, as we’ll discuss later,
the delay through any given path may vary depending on whether the output is
DO NOT COPY
changing from  LOW  to  HIGH  or from  HIGH  to  LOW  (this phenomenon is not
shown in the figure).
Delay in a real circuit is normally measured between the centerpoints of
transitions, so the delays in a timing diagram are marked this way. A single tim-
ing diagram may contain many different delay specifications. Each different
DO NOT COPY
delay is marked with a different identifier, such as  tRDY  and  tDAT  in the figure. In
large timing diagrams, the delay identifiers are usually numbered for easier
reference (e.g.,  t1,  t2 ,  …,  t42 ). In either case, the timing diagram is normally
accompanied by a  timing table  that specifies each delay amount and the timing table
conditions under which it applies.DO NOT COPY
Since the delays of real digital components can vary depending on voltage,
temperature, and manufacturing parameters, delay is seldom specified as a
single number. Instead, a timing table may specify a range of values by giving
minimum,  typical, and  maximum  values for each delay. The idea of a range of
delays is sometimes carried over into the timing diagram itself by showing theDO NOT COPY
transitions to occur at uncertain times, as in Figure 5-19(c).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

294  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
(a) WRITE_L
DATAIN must be stable
DO NOT COPY
DATAOUT old new data
tsetup  tOUTmin t hold
DO NOT COPY
tOUTmax
Figure 5-20
Timing diagrams for
(b) CLEAR
“data” signals:
(a) certain and
DO NOT COPY
uncertain transitions; COUNT
(b) sequence of values
on an 8-bit bus. STEP[7:0] FF  00 01  02  03
DO NOT COPY
For some signals, the timing diagram needn’t show whether the signal
changes from 1 to 0 or from 0 to 1 at a particular time, only that a transition
occurs then. Any signal that carries a bit of “data” has this characteristic—the
actual value of the data bit varies according to circumstances but, regardless of
value, the bit is transferred, stored, or processed at a particular time relative to
DO NOT COPY
“control”  signals in  the  system. Figure 5-20(a)  is a  timing  diagram  that
illustrates this concept. The “data” signal is normally at a steady 0 or 1 value, and
transitions occur only at the times indicated. The idea of an uncertain delay time
can also be used with “data” signals, as shown for the  DATAOUT  signal.
DO NOT COPYQuite often in digital systems, a group of data signals in a bus is processed
by identical circuits. In this case, all signals in the bus have the same timing, and
can be represented by a single line in the timing diagram and corresponding
specifications in the timing table. If the bus bits are known to take on a particular
combination at a particular time, this is sometimes shown in the timing diagram
DO NOT COPYusing binary, octal, or hexadecimal numbers, as in Figure 5-20(b).
5.2.2 Propagation Delay
propagation delay In Section 3.6.2, we formally defined the  propagation delay  of a signal path as
the time that it takes for a change at the input of the path to produce a change at
DO NOT COPYthe output of the path. A combinational circuit with many inputs and outputs has
many different paths, and each one may have a different propagation delay. Also,
the propagation delay when the output changes from  LOW  to  HIGH  (tpLH ) may
be different from the delay when it changes from  HIGH  to  LOW  (tpHL ).
The manufacturer of a combinational-logic IC normally specifies all of
DO NOT COPY
these different propagation delays, or at least the delays that would be of interest
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.2  Circuit Timing  295
in typical applications. A logic designer who combines ICs in a larger circuit
uses the individual device specifications to analyze the overall circuit timing.
The delay of a path through the overall circuit is the sum of the delays through
DO NOT COPY
subpaths in the individual devices.
5.2.3 Timing Specifications
The timing specification for a device may give minimum, typical, and maximum
values for each propagation-delay path and transition direction:
DO NOT COPY
•  Maximum. This specification is the one that is most often used by experi- maximum delay
enced designers, since a path “never” has a propagation delay longer than
the maximum. However, the definition of “never” varies among logic
families and manufacturers. For example, “maximum” propagation delays
DO NOT COPY
of 74LS and 74S TTL devices are specified with  VCC  =  5 V,  TA  =  25ºC, and
almost no capacitive load. If the voltage or temperature is different, or if
the capacitive load is more than 15 pF, the delay may be longer. On the
other hand, a “maximum” propagation delay is specified for 74AC and
74ACT devices over the full operating voltage and temperature range, and
DO NOT COPY
with a heavier capacitive load of 50 pF.
•  Typical.  This specification is the one that is most often used by designers typical delay
who don’t expect to be around when their product leaves the friendly envi-
ronment of the engineering lab and is shipped to customers. The “typical”
DO NOT COPYdelay is what you see from a device that was manufactured on a good day
and is operating under near-ideal conditions.
•  Minimum.  This is the smallest propagation delay that a path will ever minimum delay
exhibit. Most well-designed circuits don’t depend on this number; that is,
they will work properly even if the delay is zero. That’s good because
DO NOT COPY
manufacturers don’t specify minimum delay in most moderate-speed logic
families, including 74LS and 74S TTL. However, in high-speed families,
including ECL and 74AC and 74ACT CMOS, a nonzero minimum delay
is specified to help the designer ensure that timing requirements of latches
and flip-flops discussed in \secref{llff}, are met.
DO NOT COPY
Table 5-2 lists the typical and maximum delays of several 74-series CMOS
and TTL gates. Table 5-3 does the same thing for most of the CMOS and TTL
MSI parts that are introduced later in this chapter.
DO NOT COPY
HOW TYPICAL IS Most ICs, perhaps 99%, really are manufactured on “good” days and exhibit delays
TYPICAL? near the “typical” specifications. However, if you design a system that works only if
all of its 100 ICs meet the “typical” timing specs, probability theory suggests that
100 
63% (1  −  .99  ) of the systems won’t work.But see the next box....
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

296  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 2  Propagation delay in nanoseconds of selected 5-V CMOS and TTL SSI parts.
74HCT 74AHCT 74LS
DO NOT COPY
Typical  Maximum  Typical  Maximum  Typical  Maximum
Part number  tpLH, tpHL  tpLH, tpHL  tpLH  tpHL  tpLH  tpHL  tpLH  tpHL  tpLH  tpHL
’00, ’10  11  35  5.5  5.5  9.0  9.0  9  10  15  15
DO NOT COPY
’02  9  29  3.4  4.5  8.5  8.5  10  10  15  15
‘04  11  35  5.5  5.5  8.5  8.5  9  10  15  15
’08, ’11  11  35  5.5  5.5  9.0  9.0  8  10  15  20
DO NOT COPY
’14  16  48  5.5  5.5  9.0  9.0  15  15  22  22
’20  11  35  9  10  15  15
’21  11  35  8  10  15  20
DO NOT COPY’27  9  29  5.6  5.6  9.0  9.0  10  10  15  15
’30  11  35  8  13  15  20
’32  9  30  5.3  5.3  8.5  8.5  14  14  22  22
’86 (2 levels)  13  40  5.5  5.5  10  10  12  10  23  17
DO NOT COPY
’86 (3 levels)  13  40  5.5  5.5  10  10  20  13  30  22
DO NOT COPY
A COROLLARY OF Murphy’s law states, “If something can go wrong, it will.” A corollary to this is, “If
MURPHY’S LAW you want something to go wrong, it won’t.”
In the boxed example on the previous page, you might think that you have a
63% chance of detecting the potential timing problems in the engineering lab. The
DO NOT COPYproblems aren’t spread out evenly, though, since all ICs from a given batch tend to
behave about the same. Murphy’s Corollary says that  all  of the engineering proto-
types will be built with ICs from the same, “good” batches. Therefore, everything
works fine for a while, just long enough for the system to get into volume production
and for everyone to become complacent and self-congratulatory.
DO NOT COPYThen, unbeknownst to the production department, a “slow” batch of some IC
type arrives from a supplier and gets used in every system that is built, so that nothing
works. The production engineers scurry around trying to analyze the problem (not
easy, because the designer is long gone and didn’t bother to write a circuit descrip-
tion), and in the meantime the company loses big bucks because it is unable to ship
DO NOT COPYits product.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.2  Circuit Timing  297
Ta b l e 5 - 3  Propagation delay in nanoseconds of selected CMOS and TTL MSI parts.
74HCT 74AHCT / FCT 74LS
DO NOT COPY
Typical  Maximum  Typical  Maximum  Typical  Maximum
Part  From  To  tpLH,tpHL  tpLH,tpHL  tpLH,tpHL  tpLH,tpHL  tpLH  tpHL  tpLH  tpHL
’138  any select  output (2)  23  45  8.1 / 5  13 / 9  11  18  20  41
any select  output (3)  23  45  8.1 / 5  13 / 9  21  20  27  39
DO NOT COPYG2A, G2B  output  22  42  7.5 / 4  12 / 8  12  20  18  32
G1  output  22  42  7.1 / 4  11.5 / 8  14  13  26  38
’139  any select  output (2)  14  43  6.5 / 5  10.5 / 9  13  22  20  33
any select  output (3)  14  43  6.5 / 5  10.5 / 9  18  25  29  38
enable  output  11  43  5.9 / 5  9.5 / 9  16  21  24  32
’151DO NOT COPY  any select  Y  17  51  - / 5  - / 9  27  18  43  30
any select  Y  18  54  - / 5  - / 9  14  20  23  32
any data  Y  16  48  - / 4  - / 7  20  16  32  26
any data  Y  15  45  - / 4  - / 7  13  12  21  20
enable  Y  12  36  - / 4  - / 7  26  20  42  32
DO NOT COPYenable  Y  15  45  - / 4  - / 7  15  18  24  30
’153  any select  output  14  43  - / 5  - / 9  19  25  29  38
any data  output  12  43  - / 4  - / 7  10  17  15  26
enable  output  11  34  - / 4  - / 7  16  21  24  32
’157  select  output  15  46  6.8 / 7  11.5 / 10.5  15  18  23  27
DO NOT COPYany data  output  12  38  5.6 / 4  9.5 / 6  9  9  14  14
enable  output  12  38  7.1 / 7  12.0 / 10.5  13  14  21  23
’182  any  Gi,  Pi  C1–3  13  41  4.5  4.5  7  7
any  Gi,  Pi  G  13  41  5  7  7.5  10.5
any  Pi  P  11  35  4.5  6.5  6.5  10
DO NOT COPYC0  C1–3  17  50  6.5  7  10  10.5
’280  any input  EVEN  18  53  - / 6  - / 10  33  29  50  45
any input  ODD  19  56  - / 6  - / 10  23  31  35  50
’283  C0  any Si  22  66  16  15  24  24
any  Ai,  Bi  any Si  21  61  15  15  24  24
DO NOT COPYC0  C4  19  58  11  11  17  22
any  Ai,  Bi  C4  20  60  11  12  17  17
’381  CIN  any Fi  18  14  27  21
any  Ai,  Bi  G  20  21  30  33
any  Ai,  Bi  P  21  33  23  33
DO NOT COPYany  Ai,  Bi  any Fi  20  15  30  23
any select  any Fi  35  34  53  51
any select  G, P  31  32  47  48
’682  any  Pi  PEQQ  26  69  - / 7  - / 11  13  15  25  25
any  Qi  PEQQ  26  69  - / 7  - / 11  14  15  25  25
DO NOT COPYany  Pi  PGTQ  26  69  - / 9  - / 14  20  15  30  30
any  Qi  PGTQ  26  69  - / 9  - / 14  21  19  30  30
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

298  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
ESTIMATING If the minimum delay of an IC is not specified, a conservative designer assumes that
MINIMUM DELAYS it has a minimum delay of zero.
DO NOT COPY
Some circuits won’t work if the propagation delay actually goes to zero, but
the cost of modifying a circuit to handle the zero-delay case may be unreasonable,
especially since this case is expected never to occur. To obtain a design that always
works under “reasonable” conditions, logic designers often estimate that ICs have
minimum delays of one-fourth to one-third of their published  typical  delays.
DO NOT COPY
All inputs of an SSI gate have the same propagation delay to the output.
Note that TTL gates usually have different delays for  LOW-to-HIGH  and  HIGH-
DO NOT COPYto-LOW  transitions (t and  t ), but CMOS gates usually do not. CMOS
pLH  pHL 
gates have a more symmetrical output driving capability, so any difference
between the two cases is usually not worth noting.
The delay from an input transition to the corresponding output transition
depends on the internal path taken by the changing signal, and in larger circuits
DO NOT COPY
the path may be different for different input combinations. For example, the
74LS86 2-input  XOR  gate is constructed from four  NAND  gates as shown in
Figure 5-70 on page 372, and has two different-length paths from either input to
the output. If one input is  LOW, and the other is changed, the change propagates
through two  NAND  gates, and we observe the first set of delays shown in
DO NOT COPY
Table 5-2. If one input is  HIGH, and the other is changed, the change propagates
through  three  NAND  gates internally, and we observe the second set of delays.
Similar behavior is exhibited by the 74LS138 and 74LS139 in Table 5-3.
However, the corresponding CMOS parts do not show these differences; they are
DO NOT COPYsmall enough to be ignored.
5.2.4 Timing Analysis
To accurately analyze the timing of a circuit containing multiple SSI and
MSI devices, a designer may have to study its logical behavior in excruciating
DO NOT COPYdetail. For example, when TTL inverting gates (NAND,  NOR, etc.) are placed in
series, a  LOW-to-HIGH  change at one gate’s output causes a  HIGH-to-LOW
change at the next one’s, and so the differences between  tpLH  and  tpHL  tend to
average out. On the other hand, when noninverting gates (AND,  OR, etc.) are
placed in series, a transition causes all outputs to change in the same direction,
DO NOT COPY
and so the gap between  tpLH  and  tpHL  tends to widen. As a student, you’ll have
the privilege of carrying out this sort of analysis in Drills 5.8–5.13.
The analysis gets more complicated if there are MSI devices in the delay
path, or if there are multiple paths from a given input signal to a given output
signal. Thus, in large circuits, analysis of all of the different delay paths and
DO NOT COPY
transition directions can be very complex.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  299
To permit a simplified “worst-case” analysis, designers often use a single
worst-case delay  specification that is the maximum of  tpLH  and  tpHL  specifica- worst-case delay
tions. The worst-case delay through a circuit is then computed as the sum of the
DO NOT COPY
worst-case delays through the individual components, independent of the transi-
tion direction and other circuit conditions. This may give an overly pessimistic
view of the overall circuit delay, but it saves design time and it’s guaranteed to
work.
DO NOT COPY
5.2.5 Timing Analysis Tools
Sophisticated CAD tools for logic design make timing analysis even easier.
Their component libraries typically contain not only the logic symbols and
functional models for various logic elements, but also their timing models. A
simulator allows you to apply input sequences and observe how and when out-DO NOT COPY
puts are produced in response. You typically can control whether minimum,
typical, maximum, or some combination of delay values are used.
Even with a simulator, you’re not completely off the hook. It’s usually up
the designer to supply the input sequences for which the simulator should
produce outputs. Thus, you’ll need to have a good feel for what to look for andDO NOT COPY
how to stimulate your circuit to produce and observe the worst-case delays.
Some timing analysis programs can automatically find all possible delay
paths in a circuit, and print out a sorted list of them, starting with the slowest.
These results may be overly pessimistic, however, as some paths may actually
DO NOT COPY
not be used in normal operations of the circuit; the designer must still use some
intelligence to interpret the results properly.
5.3 Combinational PLDs
5.3.1 Programmable LogicDO NOT COPY  Arrays
Historically, the first PLDs were  programmable logic arrays (PLAs).  A PLA is programmable logic
a combinational, two-level  AND-OR  device that can be programmed to realize array (PLA)
any sum-of-products logic expression, subject to the size limitations of the
device. Limitations are
DO NOT COPY
•  the number of inputs (n), inputs
•  the number of outputs (m), and outputs
•  the number of product terms (p). product terms
We might describe such a device as “anDO NOT COPY  n  ×  m  PLA with  p  product terms.” In
n
general,  p  is far less than the number of  n-variable minterms (2 ). Thus, a PLA
cannot perform arbitrary  n-input,  m-output logic functions; its usefulness is
limited to functions that can be expressed in sum-of-products form using  p  or
fewer product terms.
DO NOT COPYAn  n  ×  m  PLA with  p  product terms contains  p  2n-input  AND  gates and  m
p-input  OR  gates. Figure 5-21 shows a small PLA with four inputs, six  AND
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

300  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
I1
I2
I3
DO NOT COPY
I4
P1  P2  P3  P4 P5  P6
DO NOT COPY
O1
O2
DO NOT COPY
O3
Figure 5-21  A 4  ×  3 PLA with six product terms.
DO NOT COPY
gates, and three  OR  gates and outputs. Each input is connected to a buffer that
produces both a true and a complemented version of the signal for use within the
array. Potential connections in the array are indicated by X’s; the device is
programmed by establishing only the connections that are actually needed. The
PLD fusesDO NOT COPYneeded connections are made by  fuses, which are actual fusible links or non-
volatile memory cells, depending on technology as we explain in Sections 5.3.4
and 5.3.5. Thus, each  AND  gate’s inputs can be any subset of the primary input
signals and their complements. Similarly, each  OR  gate’s inputs can be any
subset of the  AND-gate outputs.
DO NOT COPY
As shown in Figure 5-22, a more compact diagram can be used to represent
PLA diagram a PLA. Moreover, the layout of this diagram more closely resembles the actual
internal layout of a PLA chip (e.g., Figure 5-28 on page 308).
I1
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-22
Compact representation I2
of a 4  ×  3 PLA with six
I3
product terms.
I4
DO NOT COPY
P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6
O1
O2
DO NOT COPY
O3
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  301
I1
Figure 5-23
I2
A 4  ×  3 PLA programmed
I3 DO NOT COPYwith a set of three logic
equations.
I4
P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6
DO NOT COPY
O1
O2
O3
DO NOT COPY
The PLA in Figure 5-22 can perform any three 4-input combinational logic
functions that can be written as sums of products using a total of six or fewer
distinct product terms, for example:
O1  =  I1  ⋅  I2  +  I1′  ⋅  I2′  ⋅  I3′  ⋅  I4′
DO NOT COPY
O2  =  I1  ⋅  I3′  +  I1′  ⋅  I3  ⋅  I4  +  I2
O3  =  I1  ⋅  I2  +  I1  ⋅  I3′  +  I1′  ⋅  I2′  ⋅  I4′
These equations have a total of eight product terms, but the first two terms in the
O3  equation are the same as the first terms in the  O1  and  O2  equations. The
programmed connection pattern in Figure 5-23 matches these logic equations.DO NOT COPY
Sometimes a PLA output must be programmed to be a constant 1 or a PLA constant outputs
constant 0. That’s no problem, as shown in Figure 5-24. Product term  P1  is
always 1 because its product line is connected to no inputs and is therefore
always pulled  HIGH; this constant-1 term drives the  O1  output. No product term
DO NOT COPY
drives the  O2  output, which is therefore always 0. Another method of obtaining
a constant-0 output is shown for  O3. Product term  P2  is connected to each input
variable and its complement; therefore, it’s always 0 (X  ⋅  X′  =  0).
I1
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-24
I2 A 4  ×  3 PLA
programmed to
I3
produce constant
I4
0 and 1 outputs.
DO NOT COPY
P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6
O1  1
O2 0
DO NOT COPY
O3 0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

302  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
AN UNLIKELY Theoretically, if  all  of the input variables in Figure 5-24 change simultaneously,
GLITCH the output of product term  P2  could have a brief 0-1-0 glitch. This is highly
DO NOT COPY
unlikely in typical applications, and is impossible if one input happens to be
unused and is connected to a constant logic signal.
DO NOT COPYOur example PLA has too few inputs, outputs, and  AND  gates (product
n
terms) to be very useful. An  n-input PLA could conceivably use as many as 2
product terms, to realize all possible  n-variable minterms. The actual number of
product terms in typical commercial PLAs is far fewer, on the order of 4 to 16
per output, regardless of the value of  n.
DO NOT COPYThe Signetics 82S100 was a typical example of the PLAs that were intro-
duced in the mid-1970s. It had 16 inputs, 48  AND  gates, and 8 outputs. Thus, it
had 2  ×  16  ×  48  =  1536 fuses in the  AND  array and 8  ×  48  =  384 in the OR  array.
Off-the-shelf PLAs like the 82S100 have since been supplanted by PALs,
CPLDs, and FPGAs, but custom PLAs are often synthesized to perform com-
DO NOT COPY
plex combinational logic within a larger ASIC.
5.3.2 Programmable Array Logic Devices
A special case of a PLA, and today’s most commonly used type of PLD, is the
programmable array programmable array logic (PAL) device. Unlike a PLA, in which both the  AND
DO NOT COPY
logic (PAL) device and  OR  arrays are programmable, a PAL device has a  fixed  OR  array.
The first PAL devices used TTL-compatible bipolar technology and were
introduced in the late 1970s. Key innovations in the first PAL devices, besides
the introduction of a catchy acronym, were the use of a fixed  OR  array and
DO NOT COPYbidirectional input/output pins.
PAL16L8 These ideas are well illustrated by the PAL16L8, shown in Figures 5-25 and
5-26 and one of today’s most commonly used combinational PLD structures. Its
programmable  AND  array has 64 rows and 32 columns, identified for program-
ming purposes by the small numbers in the figure, and 64  ×  32  =  2048 fuses.
DO NOT COPYEach of the 64  AND  gates in the array has 32 inputs, accommodating 16
variables and their complements; hence, the “16” in “PAL16L8”.
FRIENDS AND PAL is a registered trademark of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. Like other
DO NOT COPY
FOES trademarks, it should be used only as an adjective. Use it as a noun or without a
trademark notice at your own peril (as I learned in a letter from AMD’s lawyers
in February 1989).
To get around AMD’s trademark, I suggest that you use a descriptive
name that is more indicative of the device’s internal structure: a  fixed-OR
DO NOT COPYelement (FOE).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  303
(1)
I1
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27  28 2930 31
0
1
2
DO NOT COPY3 (19)
4 O1
5
6
7
(2)
I2
8
9
DO NOT COPY10
11 (18)
12 IO2
13
14
15
(3)
I3
16
17
DO NOT COPY18
19 (17)
20 IO3
21
22
23
(4)
I4
24
25
DO NOT COPY26
27 (16)
28 IO4
29
30
31
(5)
I5
32
DO NOT COPY33
34
35 (15)
36 IO5
37
38
39
(6)
I6
40
DO NOT COPY41
42
43 (14)
44 IO6
45
46
47
(7)
I7
DO NOT COPY4849
50
51 (13)
52 IO7
53
54
55
(8)
I8
DO NOT COPY56
57
58
59 (12)
60 O8
61
62
63
(9) (11)
I9 I10
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-25  Logic diagram of the PAL16L8.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

304  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
PAL16L8
1
I1
2 19
I2 O1
DO NOT COPY3 18
I3 IO2
4 17
I4 IO3
5 16
I5 IO4
6 15
I6 IO5
7 14
I7 IO6
DO NOT COPY8 13
I8 IO7
Figure 5-26 9 12
I9 O8
Traditional logic symbol for
11
the PAL16L8. I10
DO NOT COPYEight  AND  gates are associated with each output pin of the PAL16L8.
Seven of them provide inputs to a fixed 7-input  OR  gate. The eighth, which we
output-enable gate call the  output-enable gate, is connected to the three-state enable input of the
output buffer; the buffer is enabled only when the output-enable gate has a 1 out-
put. Thus, an output of the PAL16L8 can perform only logic functions that can
DO NOT COPY
be written as sums of seven or fewer product terms. Each product term can be a
function of any or all 16 inputs, but only seven such product terms are available.
Although the PAL16L8 has up to 16 inputs and up to 8 outputs, it is housed
in a dual in-line package with only 20 pins, including two for power and ground
(the corner pins, 10 and 20). This magic is the result of six bidirectional pins
DO NOT COPY
(13–18) that may be used as inputs or outputs or both. This and other differences
between the PAL16L8 and a PLA structure are summarized below:
•  The PAL16L8 has a fixed  OR  array, with seven  AND  gates permanently
connected to each  OR  gate.  AND-gate outputs cannot be shared; if a prod-
DO NOT COPY
uct term is needed by two  OR  gates, it must be generated twice.
•  Each output of the PAL16L8 has an individual three-state output enable
signal, controlled by a dedicated  AND  gate (the output-enable gate). Thus,
outputs may be programmed as always enabled, always disabled, or
enabled by a product term involving the device inputs.
DO NOT COPY
HOW USEFUL The worst-case logic function for two-level AND-OR  design is an  n-input XOR
n−1 
ARE SEVEN (parity) function, which requires 2 product terms. However, less perverse
DO NOT COPYPRODUCT functions with more than seven product terms of a PAL16L8 can often be built
TERMS? by decomposing them into a 4-level structure (AND-OR-AND-OR) that can be
realized with two passes through the  AND-OR  array. Unfortunately, besides
using up PLD outputs for the first-pass terms, this doubles the delay, since a
first-pass input must pass through the PLD twice to propagate to the output.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  305
COMBINATIONAL, A step  backwards  in MMI’s introduction of PAL devices was their popular-
NOT ization of the word “combinatorial” to describe combinational circuits.
DO NOT COPY
COMBINATORIAL! Combinational  circuits have no memory—their output at any time depends
on the current input  combination. For well-rounded computer engineers, the
word  “combinatorial”  should  conjure  up  vivid  images  of  binomial
coefficients,  problem-solving  complexity,  and  computer-science-great
Donald Knuth.
DO NOT COPY
•  There is an inverter between the output of each  OR  gate and the external
pin of the device.
•DO NOT COPY  Six of the output pins, called  I/O pins, may also be used as inputs. This I/O pin
provides many possibilities for using each I/O pin, depending on how the
device is programmed:
–  If an I/O pin’s output-control gate produces a constant 0, then the
output is always disabled and the pin is used strictly as an input.
DO NOT COPY
–  If the input signal on an I/O pin is not used by any gates in the  AND
array, then the pin may be used strictly as an output. Depending on
the programming of the output-enable gate, the output may always be
enabled, or it may be enabled only for certain input conditions.
DO NOT COPY
–  If an I/O pin’s output-control gate produces a constant 1, then the
output is always enabled, but the pin may still be used as an input too.
In this way, outputs can be used to generate first-pass “helper terms”
for logic functions that cannot be performed in a single pass with the
limited number of  AND  terms available for a single output. We’ll
DO NOT COPY
show an example of this case on page 325.
–  In another case with an I/O pin always output-enabled, the output
may be used as an input to  AND  gates that affect the very same
output. That is, we can embed a feedback sequential circuit in a
DO NOT COPYPAL16L8. We’ll discuss this case in \secref{palatch}.
The  PAL20L8  is another combinational PLD similar to the PAL16L8, PAL16L8
except that its package has four more input-only pins and each of its  AND  gates
has eight more inputs to accommodate them. Its output structure is the same as
the PAL16L8’s.
DO NOT COPY
5.3.3 Generic Array Logic Devices
In \chapref{SeqPLDs} we’ll introduce sequential PLDs, programmable logic
devices that provide flip-flops at some or all  OR-gate outputs. These devices can
be programmed to perform a variety of useful sequential-circuit functions.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

306  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
COMBINATIONAL The speed of a combinational PLD is usually stated as a single number giving
PLD SPEED the propagation delay t from any input to any output for either direction of
DO NOT COPYPD 
transition. PLDs are available in a variety of speed grades; commonly used
parts run at 10 ns. In 1998, the fastest available combinational PLDs included
a bipolar PAL16L8 at 5 ns and a 3.3-V CMOS GAL22LV10 at 3.5 ns.
DO NOT COPY
generic array logic One type of sequential PLD, first introduced by Lattice Semiconductor, is
GAL device called  generic array logic  or a  GAL device, and is particularly popular. A single
GAL16V8 GAL device type, the  GAL16V8, can be configured (via programming and a
corresponding fuse pattern) to emulate the  AND-OR, flip-flop, and output
DO NOT COPY
structure of any of a variety of combinational and sequential PAL devices,
including the PAL16L8 introduced previously. What’s more, the GAL device
can be erased electrically and reprogrammed.
Figure 5-27 shows the logic diagram for a GAL16V8 when it has been
configured as a strictly combinational device similar to the PAL16L8. This
DO NOT COPY
configuration is achieved by programming two “architecture-control” fuses, not
GAL16V8C shown. In this configuration, the device is called a  GAL16V8C.
The most important thing to note about the GAL16V8C logic diagram,
compared to that of a PAL16L8 on page 303, is that an  XOR  gate has been
inserted between each  OR  output and the three-state output driver. One input of
DO NOT COPY
the  XOR  gate is “pulled up” to a logic 1 value but connected to ground (0) via a
fuse. If this fuse is intact, the  XOR  gate simply passes the  OR-gate’s output
unchanged, but if the fuse is blown the  XOR  gate inverts the  OR-gate’s output.
output polarity This fuse is said to control the  output polarity  of the corresponding output pin.
DO NOT COPYOutput-polarity control is a very important feature of modern PLDs,
including the GAL16V8. As we discussed in Section 4.6.2, given a logic
function to minimize, an ABEL compiler finds minimal sum-of-products
expressions for both the function and its complement. If the complement yields
fewer product terms, it can be used if the GAL16V8’s output polarity fuse is set
DO NOT COPYto invert. Unless overridden, the compiler automatically makes the best selection
and sets up the fuse patterns appropriately.
Several companies make a part that is equivalent to the GAL16V8, called
PALCE16V8 the  PALCE16V8. There  is  also  a  24-pin  GAL  device,  the  GAL20V8  or
GAL20V8 PALCE20V8, that can be configured to emulate the structure of the PAL20L8 or
DO NOT COPY
PALCE20V8 any of a variety of sequential PLDs, as described in \secref{seqGAL}.
LEGAL NOTICE  GAL is a trademark of Lattice Semiconductor, Hillsboro, OR 97124.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  307
(1)
I1
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27  28 2930 31
0
1
2
DO NOT COPY3
4 (19)
5 O1
6
7
(2)
I2
8
9
DO NOT COPY10
11
12 (18)
13 IO2
14
15
(3)
I3
16
17
DO NOT COPY18
19
20 (17)
21 IO3
22
23
(4)
I4
24
25
DO NOT COPY26
27
28 (16)
29 IO4
30
31
(5)
I5
32
DO NOT COPY33
34
35
36 (15)
37 IO5
38
39
(6)
I6
40
DO NOT COPY41
42
43
44 (14)
45 IO6
46
47
(7)
I7
DO NOT COPY4849
50
51
52 (13)
53 IO7
54
55
(8)
I8
DO NOT COPY56
57
58
59
60 (12)
61 O8
62
63
(9) (11)
I9 I10
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-27  Logic diagram of the GAL16V8C.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

308  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
VCC
DO NOT COPYI1
I1
I1′
I2
I2
I2′
I3
I3
I3′
DO NOT COPYI4
I4
I4′
P1′  P2′  P3′  P4′  P5′  P6′
VCC O1
Figure 5-28
DO NOT COPY
A 4  ×  3 PLA built using
O2
TTL-like open-collector
gates and diode logic. O3
DO NOT COPY
*5.3.4 Bipolar PLD Circuits
There are several different circuit technologies for building and physically
programming a PLD. Early commercial PLAs and PAL devices used bipolar
circuits. For example, Figure 5-28 shows how the example 4  ×  3 PLA circuit of
DO NOT COPY
the preceding section might be built in a bipolar, TTL-like technology. Each
potential connection is made by a diode in series with a metal link that may be
present or absent. If the link is present, then the diode connects its input into a
diode-AND  function. If the link is missing, then the corresponding input has no
effect on that  AND  function.
DO NOT COPY
A diode-AND  function is performed because each and every horizontal
“input” line that is connected via a diode to a particular vertical “AND” line must
be  HIGH  in order for that  AND  line to be  HIGH. If an input line is  LOW, it pulls
LOW  all of the  AND  lines to which it is connected. This first matrix of circuit
ANDDO NOT COPY  plane elements that perform the  AND  function is called the AND  plane.
Each  AND  line is followed by an inverting buffer, so overall a  NAND
function is obtained. The outputs of the first-level  NAND  functions are combined
by another set of programmable diode  AND  functions, once again followed by
inverters. The result is a two-level  NAND-NAND  structure that is functionally
DO NOT COPYequivalent to the AND-OR  PLA structure described in the preceding section. The
matrix of circuit elements that perform the  OR  function (or the second  NAND
OR  plane function, depending on how you look at it) is called the OR  plane.
A bipolar PLD chip is manufactured with all of its diodes present, but with
fusible link a tiny  fusible link  in series with each one (the little squiggles in Figure 5-28). By
DO NOT COPY
* Throughout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  309
VCC
DO NOT COPY/I1′
I1
/I1
/I2′
I2
/I2
/I3′
I3
/I3
DO NOT COPY/I4′
I4
/I4
P1  P2  P3  P4  P5  P6
VCC O1
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-29
O2
A 4  ×  3 PLA built
O3 using CMOS logic.
DO NOT COPY
applying special input patterns to the device, it is possible to select individual
links, apply a high voltage (10–30 V), and thereby vaporize selected links.
Early  bipolar  PLDs  had  reliability  problems.  Sometimes  the  stored
patterns changed because of incompletely vaporized links that would “growDO NOT COPY
back,” and sometimes intermittent failures occurred because of floating shrapnel
inside the IC package. However, these problems have been largely worked out,
and reliable fusible-link technology is used in today’s bipolar PLDs.
*5.3.5 CMOS PLD CircuitsDO NOT COPY
Although they’re still available, bipolar PLDs have been largely supplanted by
CMOS PLDs with a number of advantages, including reduced power consump-
tion and reprogrammability. Figure 5-29 shows a CMOS design for the 4  ×  3
PLA circuit of Section 5.3.1.
DO NOT COPY
Instead of a diode, an  n-channel transistor with a programmable connec-
tion is placed at each intersection between an input line and a word line. If the
input is  LOW, then the transistor is “off,” but if the input is  HIGH, then the tran-
sistor is “on,” which pulls the  AND  line  LOW. Overall, an inverted-input  AND
(i.e.,  NOR) function is obtained. This is similar in structure and function to a
DO NOT COPY
normal CMOS  k-input  NOR  gate, except that the usual series connection of  k
p-channel pull-up transistors has been replaced with a passive pull-up resistor
(in practice, the pull-up is a single  p-channel transistor with a constant bias).
As shown in color on Figure 5-29, the effects of using an  inverted-input
ANDDO NOT COPY  gate are canceled by using the opposite (complemented) input lines for
each input, compared with Figure 5-28. Also notice that the connection between
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

310  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
VCC
DO NOT COPY
floating gate
nonfloating gate
DO NOT COPY
active-low
input lines
Figure 5-30
DO NOT COPYAND  plane of an
EPLD using floating-
gate MOS transistors.
active-high AND lines
DO NOT COPY
the  AND  plane and the  OR  plane is noninverting, so the  AND  plane performs a
true  AND  function.
The outputs of the first-level  AND  functions are combined in the  OR  plane
by another set of  NOR  functions with programmable connections. The output of
each  NOR  function is followed by an inverter, so a true  OR  function is realized,
DO NOT COPY
and overall the PLA performs an  AND-OR  function as desired.
In  CMOS  PLD  technologies,  the  programmable  links  shown  in
Figure 5-29 are not normally fuses. In non-field-programmable devices, such as
custom VLSI chips, the presence or absence of each link is simply established as
DO NOT COPYpart of the metal mask pattern for the manufacture of the device. By far the most
common programming technology, however, is used in CMOS EPLDs, as
discussed next.
erasable programmable An  erasable programmable logic device (EPLD)  can be programmed with
logic device (EPLD) any desired link configuration, as well as “erased” to its original state, either
DO NOT COPYelectronically or by exposing it to ultraviolet light. No, erasing does not cause
links to suddenly appear or disappear! Rather, EPLDs use a different technology,
called “floating-gate MOS.”
floating-gate MOS As shown in Figure 5-30, an EPLD uses  floating-gate MOS transistors.
transistor Such a transistor has two gates. The “floating” gate is unconnected and is
DO NOT COPY
surrounded by extremely high-impedance insulating material. In the original,
manufactured state, the floating gate has no charge on it and has no effect on
circuit operation. In this state, all transistors are effectively “connected”; that is,
there is a logical link present at every crosspoint in the  AND  and  OR  planes.
To program an EPLD, the programmer applies a high voltage to the non-
DO NOT COPY
floating gate at each location where a logical link is not wanted. This causes a
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.3  Combinational PLDs  311
temporary breakdown in the insulating material and allows a negative charge to
accumulate on the floating gate. When the high voltage is removed, the negative
charge remains on the floating gate. During subsequent operations, the negative
DO NOT COPY
charge prevents the transistor from turning “on” when a  HIGH  signal is applied
to the nonfloating gate; the transistor is effectively disconnected from the circuit.
EPLD manufacturers claim that a properly programmed bit will retain 70%
of its charge for at least 10 years, even if the part is stored at 125°C, so for most
applications the programming can be considered to be permanent. However,
DO NOT COPY
EPLDs can also be erased.
Although some early EPLDs were packaged with a transparent lid and
used light for erasing, today’s devices are popular are  electrically erasable
PLDs. The floating gates in an electrically erasable PLD are surrounded by an electrically erasable
extremely thin insulating layer, and can be erased by applying a voltage of theDO NOT COPYPLD
opposite polarity as the charging voltage to the nonfloating gate. Thus, the same
piece of equipment that is normally used to program a PLD can also be used to
erase an EPLD before programming it.
Larger-scale, “complex” PLDs (CPLDs), also use floating-gate program-
ming technology. Even larger devices, often calledDO NOT COPY  field-programmable gate field-programmable
arrays (FPGAs), use read/write memory cells to control the state of each gate array (FPGA)
connection. The read/write memory cells are volatile—they do not retain their
state when power is removed. Therefore, when power is first applied to the
FPGA, all of its read/write memory must be initialized to a state specified by a
DO NOT COPY
separate, external nonvolatile memory. This memory is typically either a
programmable read-only memory (PROM) chip attached directly to the FPGA
or it’s part of a microprocessor subsystem that initializes the FPGA as part of
overall system initialization.
DO NOT COPY
*5.3.6 Device Programming and Testing
A special piece of equipment is used to vaporize fuses, charge up floating-gate
transistors, or do whatever else is required to program a PLD. This piece of
equipment, found nowadays in almost all digital design labs and production PLD programmer
facilities, is called a  PLD programmer  or a  PROM programmer. (It can be used PROM programmer
DO NOT COPY
CHANGING PROMs are normally used to supply the connection pattern for a read/write-
HARDWARE memory-based FPGA, but there are also applications where the pattern is
DO NOT COPY
ON THE FLY actually read from a floppy disk. You just received a floppy with a new software
version? Guess what, you just got a new hardware version too!
This concept leads us to the intriguing idea, already being applied in some
applications, of “reconfigurable hardware,” where a hardware subsystem is
redefined, on the fly, to optimize its performance for the particular task at hand.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

312  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
with programmable read-only memories, “PROMs,” as well as for PLDs.) A
typical PLD programmer includes a socket or sockets that physically accept the
devices to be programmed, and a way to “download” desired programming
DO NOT COPY
patterns into the programmer, typically by connecting the programmer to a PC.
PLD programmers typically place a PLD into a special mode of operation
in order to program it. For example, a PLD programmer typically programs the
PLDs described in this chapter eight fuses at a time as follows:
DO NOT COPY1.  Raise a certain pin to a predetermined, high voltage (such as 14 V) to put
the device into programming mode.
2.  Select a group of eight fuses by applying a binary “address” to certain
inputs of the device. (For example, the 82S100 has 1920 fuses, and would
therefore require 8 inputs to select one of 240 groups of 8 fuses.)
DO NOT COPY
3.  Apply an 8-bit value to the  outputs  of the device to specify the desired
programming for each fuse (the outputs are used as inputs in programming
mode).
4.  Raise a second predetermined pin to the high voltage for a predetermined
DO NOT COPYlength of time (such as 100 microseconds) to program the eight fuses.
5.  Lower the second predetermined pin to a low voltage (such as 0 V) to read
out and verify the programming of the eight fuses.
6.  Repeat steps 1–5 for each group of eight fuses.
DO NOT COPY
in-system Many PLDs, especially larger CPLDs, feature  in-system programmability.
programmability This means that the device can be programmed after it is already soldered into
the system. In this case, the fuse patterns are applied to the device serially using
JTAG port four extra signals and pins, called the  JTAG port, defined by IEEE standard
1149.1. These signals are defined so that multiple devices on the same printed-
DO NOT COPY
circuit board can be “daisy chained” and selected and programmed during the
board manufacturing process using just one JTAG port on a special connector.
No special high-voltage power supply is needed; each device uses a charge-
pump circuit internally to generate the high voltage needed for programming.
DO NOT COPYAs noted in step 5 above, fuse patterns are verified as they are programmed
into a device. If a fuse fails to program properly the first time, the operation can
be retried; if it fails to program properly after a few tries, the device is discarded
(often with great prejudice and malice aforethought).
While verifying the fuse pattern of a programmed device proves that its
DO NOT COPYfuses are programmed properly, it does not prove that the device will perform the
logic function specified by those fuses. This is true because the device may have
unrelated internal defects such as missing connections between the fuses and
elements of the  AND-OR  array.
The only way to test for all defects is to put the device into its normal oper-
DO NOT COPY
ational mode, apply a set of normal logic inputs, and observe the outputs. The
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  313
required input and output patterns, called test vectors, can be specified by the
designer as we showed in Section 4.6.7,or can be generated automatically by a
special test-vector-generation program. Regardless of how the test vectors are
DO NOT COPY
generated, most PLD programmers have the ability to apply test-vector inputs to
a PLD and to check its outputs against the expected results.
Most PLDs have a  security fuse  which, when programmed, disables the security fuse
ability to read fuse patterns from the device. Manufacturers can program this
fuse to prevent others from reading out the PLD fuse patterns in order to copy the
DO NOT COPY
product design. Even if the security fuse is programmed, test vectors still work,
so the PLD can still be checked.
5.4 Decoders
DO NOT COPY
A  decoder  is a multiple-input, multiple-output logic circuit that converts coded decoder
inputs into coded outputs, where the input and output codes are different. The
input code generally has fewer bits than the output code, and there is a one-to-
one mapping from input code words into output code words. In a  one-to-one
mappingDO NOT COPY, each input code word produces a different output code word. one-to-one mapping
The general structure of a decoder circuit is shown in Figure 5-31. The
enable inputs, if present, must be asserted for the decoder to perform its normal
mapping function. Otherwise, the decoder maps all input code words into a
single, “disabled,” output code word.
DO NOT COPYThe most commonly used input code is an  n-bit binary code, where an  n-bit
n 
word represents one of 2 different coded values, normally the integers from 0
n
through 2 −1. Sometimes an  n-bit binary code is truncated to represent fewer
n 
than 2 values. For example, in the BCD code, the 4-bit combinations 0000
through 1001 represent the decimal digits 0–9, and combinations 1010 through
DO NOT COPY
1111 are not used.
The most commonly used output code is a 1-out-of-m  code, which contains
m  bits, where one bit is asserted at any time. Thus, in a 1-out-of-4 code with
active-high outputs, the code words are 0001, 0010, 0100, and 1000. With
active-low outputs, the code words are 1110, 1101, 1011, and 0111.
DO NOT COPY
Decoder
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-31
input map Decoder circuit structure.
code word
output
code word
enable
inputs
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

314  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 4
Inputs Outputs
Truth table for a 2-to-4
binary decoder. EN  I1  I0  Y3  Y2  Y1  Y0
DO NOT COPY
0  x  x  0  0  0  0
1  0  0  0  0  0  1
1  0  1  0  0  1  0
1  1  0  0  1  0  0
DO NOT COPY1  1  1  1  0  0  0
5.4.1 Binary Decoders
n 
binary decoder The most common decoder circuit is an  n-to-2 decoder or  binary decoder. Such
n 
DO NOT COPYa decoder has an  n-bit binary input code and a 1-out-of-2 output code. A binary
n 
decoder is used when you need to activate exactly one of 2 outputs based on an
n-bit input value.
For example, Figure 5-32(a) shows the inputs and outputs and Table 5-4 is
the truth table of a 2-to-4 decoder. The input code word  1,I0  represents an integer
DO NOT COPYin the range 0–3. The output code word Y3,Y2,Y1,Y0 has Yi equal to 1 if and only
enable input if the input code word is the binary representation of  i  and the  enable input  EN  is
1. If  EN  is 0, then all of the outputs are 0. A gate-level circuit for the 2-to-4
decode decoder is shown in Figure 5-32(b). Each  AND  gate  decodes  one combination of
the input code word  I1,I0.
DO NOT COPY
The binary decoder’s truth table introduces a “don’t-care” notation for
input combinations. If one or more input values do not affect the output values
for some combination of the remaining inputs, they are marked with an “x” for
that input combination. This convention can greatly reduce the number of rows
in the truth table, as well as make the functions of the inputs more clear.
DO NOT COPY
The input code of an  n-bit binary decoder need not represent the integers
n
from 0 through 2 −1. For example, Table 5-5 shows the 3-bit Gray-code output
I0′  I0 I1′  I1 EN
I0
Figure 5-32DO NOT COPY
Y0
A 2-to-4 decoder:
(a) inputs and outputs;
(b) logic diagram.
2-to-4 Y1
decoder I1
DO NOT COPY
I0 Y0
I1 Y1 Y2
Y2
EN Y3
Y3
DO NOT COPYEN
(a)  (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  315
Ta b l e 5 - 5
Disk Position  I2  I1  I0 Binary Decoder Output 
Position encoding for
0°  0  0  0  Y0 a 3-bit mechanical
DO NOT COPY45°  0  0  1  Y1 encoding disk.
90°  0  1  1  Y3
135°  0  1  0  Y2
180°  1  1  0  Y6
225°  1  1  1  Y7
DO NOT COPY
270°  1  0  1  Y5
315°  1  0  0  Y4
of a mechanical encoding disk with eight positions. The eight disk positions can
be decoded with a 3-bit binary decoder with the appropriate assignment ofDO NOT COPY
signals to the decoder outputs, as shown in Figure 5-33.
Also, it is not necessary to use all of the outputs of a decoder, or even to
decode all possible input combinations. For example, a  decimal  or BCD decoder decimal decoder
decodes only the first ten binary input combinations 0000–1001 to produce BCD decoder
DO NOT COPY
outputs  Y0–Y9.
5.4.2 Logic Symbols for Larger-Scale Elements
Before describing some commercially available 74-series MSI decoders, we
need to discuss general guidelines for drawing logic symbols for larger-scale
DO NOT COPY
logic elements.
The most basic rule is that logic symbols are drawn with inputs on the left
and outputs on the right. The top and bottom edges of a logic symbol are not
normally used for signal connections. However, explicit power and ground
connections are sometimes shown at the top and bottom, especially if these
DO NOT COPY
connections are made on “nonstandard” pins. (Most MSI parts have power and
ground connected to the corner pins, e.g., pins 8 and 16 of a 16-pin DIP
package.)
DO NOT COPY
3-to-8
decoder Figure 5-33
Y0 DEG0 Using a 3-to-8 binary
Y1 DEG45 decoder to decode a
Gray code.
DO NOT COPYSHAFTI0 I0 Y2 DEG135
SHAFTI1 I1 Y3 DEG90
SHAFTI2 I2 Y4 DEG315
ENABLE EN Y5 DEG270
Y6 DEG180
Y7 DEG225
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

316  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
LOGIC FAMILIES  Most logic gates and larger-scale elements are available in a variety of CMOS and
families, many of which we described in Sections 3.8 and 3.11. For example, the
DO NOT COPY
74LS139,  74S139,  74ALS139,  74AS139,  74F139,  74HC139,  74HCT139,
74ACT139,  74AC139,  74FCT139  74AHC139,  74AHCT139,  74LC139,
74LVC139, and 74VHC139 are all dual 2-to-4 decoders with the same logic
function, but in electrically different TTL and CMOS families and sometimes in
different packages. In addition, “macro” logic elements with the same pin names and
DO NOT COPY
functions as the ’139 and other popular 74-series devices are available as building
blocks in most FPGA and ASIC design environments.
Throughout this text, we use “74x” as a generic prefix. And we’ll sometimes
omit the prefix and write, for example, ’139. In a real schematic diagram for a circuit
that you are going to build or simulate, you should include the full part number, since
DO NOT COPY
timing, loading, and packaging characteristics depend on the family.
Like gate symbols, the logic symbols for larger-scale elements associate an
DO NOT COPYactive level with each pin. With respect to active levels, it’s important to use a
consistent convention to naming the internal signals and external pins.
Larger-scale elements almost always have their signal names defined in
terms of the functions performed  inside  their symbolic outline, as explained in
Section 5.1.4. For example, Figure 5-34(a) shows the logic symbol for one
DO NOT COPY
section of a 74x139 dual 2-to-4 decoder, an MSI part that we’ll fully describe in
the next subsection. When the  G  input is asserted, one of the outputs  Y0–Y3  is
asserted, as selected by a 2-bit code applied to the  A  and  B  inputs. It is apparent
from the symbol that the  G  input pin and all of the output pins are active low.
When the 74x139 symbol appears in the logic diagram for a real applica-
DO NOT COPY
tion, its inputs and outputs have signals connected to other devices, and each
such signal has a name that indicates its function in the application. However,
when we describe the 74x139 in isolation, we might still like to have a name for
the signal on each external pin. Figure 5-34(b) shows our naming convention in
DO NOT COPYthis case. Active-high pins are given the same name as the internal signal, while
active-low pins have the internal signal name followed by the suffix “_L”.
1/2 74x139 1/2 74x139
Figure 5-34
Logic symbol for one-half G Y0 G_L G Y0 Y0_L
DO NOT COPY
of a 74x139 dual 2-to-4
Y1 Y1 Y1_L
decoder: (a) conventional
A Y2 A A Y2 Y2_L
symbol; (b) default signal
B Y3 B B Y3 Y3_L
names associated with
external pins.
DO NOT COPY
(a) (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  317
IEEE STANDARD Throughout this book, we use “traditional” symbols for larger-scale logic elements.
LOGIC SYMBOLS The IEEE standard uses somewhat different symbols for larger-scale logic elements.
DO NOT COPY
IEEE standard symbols, as well as the pros and cons of IEEE versus traditional
symbols, are discussed in Appendix A.
5.4.3 The 74x139 Dual 2-to-4 Decoder
DO NOT COPY
Two independent and identical 2-to-4 decoders are contained in a single MSI
part, the  74x139. The gate-level circuit diagram for this IC is shown in 74x139
Figure 5-35(a). Notice that the outputs and the enable input of the ’139 are
active-low. Most MSI decoders were originally designed with active-low
outputs, since TTL inverting gates are generally faster than noninverting ones.DO NOT COPY
Also notice that the ’139 has extra inverters on its select inputs. Without these
inverters, each select input would present three AC or DC loads instead of one,
consuming much more of the fanout budget of the device that drives it.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-35  The 74x139 dual 2-to-4 decoder: (a) logic diagram, including pin
numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line package;
(b) traditional logic symbol; (c) logic symbol for one decoder.
(4)
1Y0_L 74x139
DO NOT COPY
(1) 1  4
1G_L 1G 1Y0
5
(5) 1Y1
1Y1_L 2 6
1A 1Y2
3 7
1B 1Y3
(6)
DO NOT COPY1Y2_L 15  12
2G 2Y0
(2) 11
1A 2Y1
14 10
(7) 2A 2Y2
(3) 1Y3_L 13 9
1B 2B 2Y3
(a) DO NOT COPY
(12) (b)
2Y0_L
(15)
2G_L
(11) 1/2 74x139
2Y1_L
DO NOT COPY
G Y0
Y1
(10)
2Y2_L A Y2
(14) B Y3
2A
(9)
DO NOT COPY2Y3_L
(13)
(c)
2B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

318  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e  5 - 6
Inputs Outputs
Truth table for one-
half of a 74x139 dual G_L  B  A  Y3_L  Y2_L  Y1_L  Y0_L
DO NOT COPY2-to-4 decoder.
1  x  x  1  1  1  1
0  0  0  1  1  1  0
0  0  1  1  1  0  1
0  1  0  1  0  1  1
DO NOT COPY0  1  1  0  1  1  1
A logic symbol for the 74x139 is shown in Figure 5-35(b). Notice that all
of the signal names inside the symbol outline are active-high (no “_L”), and that
inversion bubbles indicate active-low inputs and outputs. Often a schematic may
DO NOT COPY
use a generic symbol for just one decoder, one-half of a ’139, as shown in (c). In
this case, the assignment of the generic function to one half or the other of a
particular ’139 package can be deferred until the schematic is completed.
Table 5-6 is the truth table for a 74x139-type decoder. The truth tables in
some manufacturers’ data books use  L  and  H  to denote the input and output
DO NOT COPY
signal voltage levels, so there can be no ambiguity about the electrical function
function table of the device; a truth table written this way is sometimes called a  function table.
However, since we use positive logic throughout this book, we can use 0 and 1
without ambiguity. In any case, the truth table gives the logic function in terms of
DO NOT COPYthe  external pins  of the device. A truth table for the function performed  inside
the symbol outline would look just like Table 5-4, except that the input signal
names would be  G,  B,  A.
Some logic designers draw the symbol for 74x139s and other logic func-
tions without inversion bubbles. Instead, they use an overbar on signal names
DO NOT COPY
inside the symbol outline to indicate negation, as shown in Figure 5-36(a). This
notation is self-consistent, but it is inconsistent with our drawing standards for
bubble-to-bubble logic design. The symbol shown in (b) is absolutely  incorrect:
according to this symbol, a logic 1, not 0, must be applied to the enable pin to
enable the decoder.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-36
1/2 74x139 1/2 74x139
More ways to
symbolize a 74x139:
DO NOT COPYG Y0 G Y0
(a) correct but to be
Y1 Y1
avoided; (b) incorrect (a)  (b)
A Y2 A Y2
because of double
B Y3 B Y3
negations.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  319
BAD NAMES  Some manufacturers’ data sheets have inconsistencies similar to Figure 5-36(b). For
example, Texas Instruments’ data sheet for the 74AHC139 uses active low-names
DO NOT COPY
like  1G  for the enable inputs, with the overbar indicating an active-low pin, but
active-high names like  1Y0  for all the active-low output pins. On the other hand,
Motorola’s data sheet for the 74VHC139 correctly uses overbars on the names for
both the enable inputs and the outputs, but the overbars are barely visible in the
device’s function table due to a typographical problem.
DO NOT COPY
I’ve also had the personal experience of building a printed-circuit board with
many copies of a new device from a vendor whose documentation clearly indicated
that a particular input was active low, only to find out upon the first power-on that
the input was active high.
The moral of the story is that you have to study the description of each device
DO NOT COPY
to know what’s really going on. And if it’s a brand-new device, whether from a com-
mercial vendor or your own company’s ASIC group, you should double-check all of
the signal polarities and pin assignments before committing to a PCB. Be assured,
however, that the signal names in this text  are  consistent and correct.
DO NOT COPY
5.4.4 The 74x138 3-to-8 Decoder
The  74x138  is a commercially available MSI 3-to-8 decoder whose gate-level 74x138
circuit diagram and symbol are shown in Figure 5-37; its truth table is given in
Table 5-7. Like the 74x139, the 74x138 has active-low outputs, and it has threeDO NOT COPY
enable inputs (G1,  /G2A,  /G2B), all of which must be asserted for the selected
output to be asserted.
The logic function of the ’138 is straightforward—an output is asserted if
and only if the decoder is enabled and the output is selected. Thus, we can easily
DO NOT COPY
write logic equations for an internal output signal such as  Y5  in terms of the
internal input signals:
Y5  = G1  ⋅ G2A  ⋅ G2B ⋅ C  ⋅ B′  ⋅ A
           
enable  select
DO NOT COPY
However, because of the inversion bubbles, we have the following relations
between internal and external signals:
G2A  =  G2A_L′
G2B  =  G2B_L′
DO NOT COPY
Y5  =  Y5_L′
Therefore, if we’re interested, we can write the following equation for the exter-
nal output signal  Y5_L  in terms of external input signals:
Y5_L  =  Y5′  =  (G1  ⋅  G2A_L′  ⋅  G2B_L′  ⋅  C  ⋅  B′  ⋅  A)′
DO NOT COPY
=  G1′  +  G2A_L  +  G2B_L  +  C′  +  B  +  A′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

320  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 7  Truth table for a 74x138 3-to-8 decoder.
Inputs Outputs
DO NOT COPY
G1  G2A_L  G2B_L  C  B  A  Y7_L  Y6_L  Y5_L  Y4_L  Y3_L  Y2_L  Y1_L  Y0_L
0  x  x  x  x  x  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
x  1  x  x  x  x  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
x  x  1  x  x  x  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
1  0  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0
1  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1
1  0  0  0  1  0  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1
DO NOT COPY
1  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1
1  0  0  1  0  0  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1
1  0  0  1  0  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  1
1  0  0  1  1  0  1  0  1  1  1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
1  0  0  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
On the surface, this equation doesn’t resemble what you might expect for a
decoder, since it is a logical sum rather than a product. However, if you practice
DO NOT COPY
bubble-to-bubble logic design, you don’t have to worry about this; you just give
the output signal an active-low name and remember that it’s active low when you
connect it to other inputs.
5.4.5 Cascading Binary Decoders
DO NOT COPY
Multiple binary decoders can be used to decode larger code words. Figure 5-38
shows how two 3-to-8 decoders can be combined to make a 4-to-16 decoder. The
availability of both active-high and active-low enable inputs on the 74x138
makes it possible to enable one or the other directly based on the state of the
DO NOT COPYmost significant input bit. The top decoder (U1) is enabled when  N3  is 0, and the
bottom one (U2) is enabled when  N3  is 1.
To handle even larger code words, binary decoders can be cascaded hierar-
chically. Figure 5-39 shows how to use half of a 74x139 to decode the two high-
order bits of a 5-bit code word, thereby enabling one of four 74x138s that decode
DO NOT COPYthe three low-order bits.
5.4.6 Decoders in ABEL and PLDs
Nothing in logic design is much easier than writing the PLD equations for a
decoder. Since the logic expression for each output is typically just a single prod-
DO NOT COPY
uct term, decoders are very easily targeted to PLDs and use few product-term
resources.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  321
(a) (15) (b) 74x138
Y0_L
15
6  Y0
G1 14
DO NOT COPY(14) 4 Y1
G2A 13
Y1_L 5 Y2
G2B 12
Y3
(6) 11
(13) 1 Y4
G1  A 10
Y2_L 2 Y5
(4) B 9
G2A_L  3 Y6
DO NOT COPYC 7
(5) (12) Y7
G2B_L  Y3_L
(11)
Y4_L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-37
(10) The 74x138 3-to-8
Y5_L
(1) decoder: (a) logic
A 
diagram, including pin
(9) numbers for a
(2) Y6_L
DO NOT COPYB  standard 16-pin dual
in-line package;
(3) (7) (b) traditional logic
C Y7_L
symbol.
DO NOT COPY
74x138
+5V
R  15 Figure 5-38
6  Y0 DEC0_L
G1 14 Design of a 4-to-16
4 Y1 DEC1_L
G2A 13 decoder using
5 Y2 DEC2_L 74x138s.
G2B 12
DO NOT COPYY3 DEC3_L
11
1 Y4 DEC4_L
N0 A 10
2 Y5 DEC5_L
N1 B 9
3 Y6 DEC6_L
N2 C 7
Y7 DEC7_L
N3
DO NOT COPY
EN_L U1
74x138
15
6  Y0 DEC8_L
G1 14
4 Y1 DEC9_L
G2A 13
DO NOT COPY5 Y2 DEC10_L
G2B 12
Y3 DEC11_L
11
1 Y4 DEC12_L
A 10
2 Y5 DEC13_L
B 9
3 Y6 DEC14_L
C 7
DO NOT COPYY7 DEC15_L
U2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

322  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x138
15
6  Y0 DEC0_L
G1 14
Y1 DEC1_L
DO NOT COPY4 G2A
13
5 Y2 DEC2_L
G2B 12
Y3 DEC3_L
11
1 Y4 DEC4_L
N0 A 10
2 Y5 DEC5_L
N1 B 9
3 Y6 DEC6_L
DO NOT COPYN2 C 7
Y7 DEC7_L
U2
74x138
15
6  Y0 DEC8_L
DO NOT COPYG1 14
4 Y1 DEC9_L
G2A 13
5 Y2 DEC10_L
G2B 12
Y3 DEC11_L
11
1 Y4 DEC12_L
A 10
2 Y5 DEC13_L
1/2 74x139 B
DO NOT COPYY6 9 DEC14_L
3
1  4 EN0X7_L C 7
EN3_L 1G 1Y0 Y7 DEC15_L
5 EN8X15_L
1Y1
2 6 EN16X23_L U3
N3 1A 1Y2
3 7 EN24X31_L 74x138
N4 1B 1Y3
15
DO NOT COPY6  Y0 DEC16_L
U1 G1 14
4 Y1 DEC17_L
G2A 13
5 Y2 DEC18_L
G2B 12
Y3 DEC19_L
11
1 Y4 DEC20_L
A 10
DO NOT COPY2 Y5 DEC21_L
EN1 B 9
3 Y6 DEC22_L
EN2_L C 7
Y7 DEC23_L
U4
74x138
DO NOT COPY
15
6  Y0 DEC24_L
G1 14
4 Y1 DEC25_L
G2A 13
5 Y2 DEC26_L
G2B 12
Y3 DEC27_L
11
1 Y4 DEC28_L
DO NOT COPYA 10
2 Y5 DEC29_L
B 9
3 Y6 DEC30_L
C 7
Y7 DEC31_L
U5
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-39  Design of a 5-to-32 decoder using 74x138s and a 74x139.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  323
Ta b l e 5 - 8  An ABEL program for a 74x138-like 3-to-8 binary decoder.
module Z74X138
title '74x138 Decoder PLDDO NOT COPY
J. Wakerly, Stanford University'
Z74X138 device 'P16L8';
" Input pins
A, B, C, !G2A, !G2B, G1  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
DO NOT COPY
" Output pins
!Y0, !Y1, !Y2, !Y3  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'com';
!Y4, !Y5, !Y6, !Y7  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype 'com';
" Constant expression
DO NOT COPY
ENB = G1 & G2A & G2B;
equations
Y0 = ENB & !C & !B & !A;
Y1 = ENB & !C & !B &  A;
Y2 = ENB & !C &DO NOT COPY  B & !A;
Y3 = ENB & !C &  B &  A;
Y4 = ENB &  C & !B & !A;
Y5 = ENB &  C & !B &  A;
Y6 = ENB &  C &  B & !A;
Y7 = ENB &  C &  B &  A;
DO NOT COPY
end Z74X138
For example, Table 5-8 is an ABEL program for a 74x138-like 3-to-8
binary decoder as realized in a PAL16L8. A corresponding logic diagram with
DO NOT COPY
signal names is shown in Figure 5-40. In the ABEL program, notice the use of
the “!” prefix in the pin declarations to specify active-low inputs and outputs,
even though the equations are written in terms of active-high signals.
PAL16L8
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-40
1
A I1 Logic diagram for
2 19
B I2 O1 Y0_L the PAL16L8 used as
3 18
C I3 IO2 Y1_L a 74x138 decoder.
4 17
G2A_L I4 IO3 Y2_L
5 16
DO NOT COPYG2B_L I5 IO4 Y3_L
6 15
G1_L I6 IO5 Y4_L
7 14
N.C. I7 IO6 Y5_L
8 13
N.C. I8 IO7 Y6_L
9 12
N.C. I9 O8 Y7_L
11
DO NOT COPYN.C. I10
Z74X138
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

324  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Also note that this example defines a constant expression for  ENB. Here,
ENB  is not an input or output signal, but merely a user-defined name. In the
equations  section, the compiler substitutes the expression  (G1  &  G2A  &  G2B)
DO NOT COPY
everywhere that “ENB” appears. Assigning the constant expression to a user-
defined name improves the program’s readability and maintainability.
If all you needed was a ’138, you’d be better off using a real ’138 than a
PLD. However, if you need nonstandard functionality, then the PLD can usually
achieve it much more cheaply and easily than an MSISSI-based solution. For
DO NOT COPY
example, if you need the functionality of a ’138 but with active-high outputs,
you need only to change two lines in the pin declarations of Table 5-8:
Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype ’com’;
Y4, Y5, Y6, Y7  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype ’com’;
DO NOT COPY
Since each of the equations required a single product of six variables (including
the three in the  ENB  expression), each complemented equation requires a  sum  of
six product terms, less than the seven available in a PAL16L8. If you use a
PAL16V8 or other device with output polarity selection, then the compiler
DO NOT COPYselects non-inverted output polarity to use only one product term per output.
Another easy change is to provide alternate enable inputs that are  ORed
with the main enable inputs. To do this, you need only define additional pins and
modify the definition of  ENB:
EN1, !EN2  pin 7, 8;
DO NOT COPY
...
ENB = G1 & G2A & G2B # EN1 # EN2;
This change expands the number of product terms per output to three, each
having a form similar to
DO NOT COPY
Y0 = G1 & G2A & G2B & !C & !B &!A
# EN1 & !C & !B & !A
# EN2 & !C & !B & !A;
(Remember that the PAL16L8 has a fixed inverter and the PAL16V8 has a
DO NOT COPYselectable inverter between the  AND-OR  array and the output of the PLD, so the
actual output is active low as desired.)
If you add the extra enables to the version of the program with active-high
outputs, then the PLD must realize the complement of the sum-of-products
expression above. It’s not immediately obvious how many product terms this
DO NOT COPY
expression will have, and whether it will fit in a PAL16L8, but we can use the
ABEL compiler to get the answer for us:
!Y0 = C # B # A # !G2B & !EN1 & !EN2
# !G2A & !EN1 & !EN2
# !G1  & !EN1 & !EN2;
DO NOT COPY
The expression has a total of six product terms, so it fits in a PAL16L8.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  325
Ta b l e 5 - 9  ABEL program fragment showing two-pass logic.
...
" Output pinsDO NOT COPY
!Y0, !Y1, !Y2, !Y3  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'com';
!Y4, !Y5, !Y6, ENB  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype 'com';
equations
ENB = G1 & G2A & G2B # EN1 # EN2;
DO NOT COPY
Y0 = POL $ (ENB & !C & !B & !A);
...
As a final tweak, we can add an input to dynamically control whether the
output is active high or active low, and modify all of the equations as follows:DO NOT COPY
POL  pin 9;
...
Y0 = POL $ (ENB & !C & !B & !A);
Y1 = POL $ (ENB & !C & !B &  A);
...
DO NOT COPY
Y7 = POL $ (ENB &  C &  B &  A);
As a result of the  XOR  operation, the number of product terms needed per output
increases to 9, in either output-pin polarity. Thus, even a PAL16V8 cannot
implement the function as written.
DO NOT COPY
The function can still be realized if we create a  helper output  to reduce the helper output
product term explosion. As shown in Table 5-9, we allocate an output pin for the
ENB  expression, and move the  ENB  equation into the  equations  section of the
program. This reduces the product-term requirement to 5 in either polarity. helper output
Besides sacrificing a pin for the helper output, this realization has the
DO NOT COPY
disadvantage of being slower. Any changes in the inputs to the helper expression
must propagate through the PLD twice before reaching the final output. This is
called  two-pass logic. Many PLD and FPGA synthesis tools can automatically two-pass logic
Ta b l e 5 - 1 0DO NOT COPY
CS_L  RD_L  A2  A1  A0 Output(s) to Assert
Truth table for a
customized decoder 1  x  x  x  x  none
function. x  1  x  x  x  none
0  0  0  0  0  BILL_L, MARY_L
DO NOT COPY0  0  0  0  1  MARY_L, KATE_L
0  0  0  1  0  JOAN_L
0  0  0  1  1  PAUL_L
0  0  1  0  0  ANNA_L
0  0  1  0  1  FRED_L
DO NOT COPY0  0  1  1  0  DAVE_L
0  0  1  1  1  KATE_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

326  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x138 BILL_L
Figure 5-41 +5V 74x08
R 15  1
Customized 6  Y0 3
G1 14 2 MARY_L
decoder circuit.DO NOT COPY4 Y1
CS_L G2A 13 U2
5 Y2 JOAN_L
RD_L G2B 12
Y3 PAUL_L
11
1 Y4 ANNA_L
A0 A 10
2 Y5 FRED_L
A1 B 9
DO NOT COPY3 Y6 DAVE_L
A2 C 7 74x08
Y7 4
6
U1 5  KATE_L
U2
DO NOT COPYgenerate logic with two or more passes if a required expression cannot be
realized in just one pass through the logic array.
Decoders can be customized in other ways. A common customization is
for a single output to decode more than one input combination. For example,
suppose you needed to generate a set of enable signals according to Table 5-10
DO NOT COPYon the preceding page. A 74x138 MSI decoder can be augmented as shown in
Figure 5-41 to perform the required function. This approach, while potentially
less expensive than a PLD, has the disadvantages that it requires extra compo-
nents and delay to create the required outputs, and it is not easily modified.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 1 1  ABEL equations for a customized decoder.
module CUSTMDEC
title 'Customized Decoder PLD
J. Wakerly, Stanford University'
DO NOT COPYCUSTMDEC device ’P16L8’;
" Input pins
!CS, !RD, A0, A1, A2  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
" Output pins
!BILL, !MARY, !JOAN, !PAUL  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
!ANNA, !FRED, !DAVE, !KATE  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype 'com';
equations
BILL = CS & RD & (!A2 & !A1 & !A0);
MARY = CS & RD & (!A2 & !A1 & !A0 # !A2 & !A1 &  A0);
KATE = CS & RD & (!A2 & !A1 &  A0 #  A2 &  A1 &  A0);
DO NOT COPY
JOAN = CS & RD & (!A2 &  A1 & !A0);
PAUL = CS & RD & (!A2 &  A1 &  A0);
ANNA = CS & RD & ( A2 & !A1 & !A0);
FRED = CS & RD & ( A2 & !A1 &  A0);
DAVE = CS & RD & ( A2 &  A1 & !A0);
DO NOT COPY
end CUSTMDEC
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  327
A PLD solution to the same problem is shown in Table 5-11. Each of the
last six equations uses a single  AND  gate in the PLD. The ABEL compiler will
also minimize the  MARY  equation to use just one  AND  gate. Once again, active-
DO NOT COPY
high output signals could be obtained just by changing two lines in the declara-
tion section:
BILL, MARY, JOAN, PAUL  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype ’com’;
ANNA, FRED, DAVE, KATE  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype ’com’;
DO NOT COPY
Another way of writing the equations is shown in Table 5-12. In most
applications, this style is more clear, especially if the select inputs have numeric
significance.
Ta b l e 5 - 1 2  Equivalent ABEL equations for a customized decoder.
DO NOT COPY
ADDR = [A2,A1,A0];
equations
BILL = CS & RD & (ADDR == 0);
MARY = CS & RD & (ADDR == 0) # (ADDR == 1);DO NOT COPY
KATE = CS & RD & (ADDR == 1) # (ADDR == 7);
JOAN = CS & RD & (ADDR == 2);
PAUL = CS & RD & (ADDR == 3);
ANNA = CS & RD & (ADDR == 4);
FRED = CS & RD & (ADDR == 5);
DO NOT COPY
DAVE = CS & RD & (ADDR == 6);
5.4.7 Decoders in VHDL
There are several ways to approach the design of decoders in VHDL. The most
DO NOT COPY
primitive approach would be to write a structural equivalent of a decoder logic
circuit, as Table 5-13 does for the 2-to-4 binary decoder of Figure 5-32 on
page 314. Of course, this mechanical conversion of an existing design into the
equivalent of a netlist defeats the purpose of using VHDL in the first place.
DO NOT COPYInstead, we would like to write a program that uses VHDL to make our
decoder design more understandable and maintainable. Table 5-14 shows one
approach to writing code for a 3-to-8 binary decoder equivalent to the 74x138,
using the dataflow style of VHDL. The address inputs  A(2  downto  0)  and the
active-low decoded outputs  Y_L(0  to  7)  are declared using vectors to improve
readability. ADO NOT COPY  select  statement enumerates the eight decoding cases and
assigns the appropriate active-low output pattern to an 8-bit internal signal
Y_L_i. This value is assigned to the actual circuit output  Y_L  only if all of the
enable inputs are asserted.
This design is a good start, and it works, but it does have a potential pitfall.
DO NOT COPY
The adjustments that handle the fact that two inputs and all the outputs are
active-low happen to be buried in the final assignment statement. While it’s true
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

328  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 1 3  VHDL structural program for the decoder in Figure 5-32.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity V2to4dec is
port (I0, I1, EN: in STD_LOGIC;
Y0, Y1, Y2, Y3: out STD_LOGIC );
end V2to4dec;
DO NOT COPY
architecture V2to4dec_s of V2to4dec is
signal NOTI0, NOTI1: STD_LOGIC;
component inv port (I: in STD_LOGIC; O: out STD_LOGIC ); end component;
component and3 port (I0, I1, I2: in STD_LOGIC; O: out STD_LOGIC ); end component;
DO NOT COPYbegin
U1: inv port map (I0,NOTI0);
U2: inv port map (I1,NOTI1);
U3: and3 port map (NOTI0,NOTI1,EN,Y0);
U4: and3 port map (  I0,NOTI1,EN,Y1);
U5: and3 port map (NOTI0,  I1,EN,Y2);
DO NOT COPYU6: and3 port map (  I0,  I1,EN,Y3);
end V2to4dec_s;
Ta b l e 5 - 1 4  Dataflow-style VHDL program for a 74x138-like 3-to-8 binary decoder.
DO NOT COPY
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity V74x138 is
port (G1, G2A_L, G2B_L: in STD_LOGIC;  -- enable inputs
DO NOT COPYA: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);  -- select inputs
Y_L: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7) );  -- decoded outputs
end V74x138;
architecture V74x138_a of V74x138 is
signal Y_L_i: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);
DO NOT COPY
begin
with A select Y_L_i <=
"01111111" when "000",
"10111111" when "001",
"11011111" when "010",
"11101111" when "011",
DO NOT COPY
"11110111" when "100",
"11111011" when "101",
"11111101" when "110",
"11111110" when "111",
"11111111" when others;
DO NOT COPYY_L <= Y_L_i when (G1 and not G2A_L and not G2B_L)='1' else "11111111";
end V74x138_a;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  329
Ta b l e 5 - 1 5  VHDL architecture with a maintainable approach to active-level handling.
architecture V74x138_b of V74x138 is
signal G2A, G2B: STD_LOGIC;DO NOT COPY  -- active-high version of inputs
signal Y: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);  -- active-high version of outputs
signal Y_s: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);  -- internal signal
begin
G2A <= not G2A_L; -- convert inputs
G2B <= not G2B_L; -- convert inputs
DO NOT COPY
Y_L <= Y;  -- convert outputs
with A select Y_s <=
"10000000" when "000",
"01000000" when "001",
"00100000" when "010",
DO NOT COPY"00010000" when "011",
"00001000" when "100",
"00000100" when "101",
"00000010" when "110",
"00000001" when "111",
"00000000" when others;
Y <= not Y_s when (G1 and G2A and G2B)='1' else "00000000";DO NOT COPY
end V74x138_b;
that most VHDL programs are written almost entirely with active-high signals,
if we’re defining a device with active-low external pins, we really should handle
DO NOT COPY
them in a more systematic and easily maintainable way.
Table 5-15 shows such an approach. No changes are made to the  entity
declarations. However, active-high versions of the active-low external pins are
defined within the  V74x138_a  architecture, and explicit assignment statements
are used to convert between the active-high and active-low signals. The decoderDO NOT COPY
function itself is defined in terms of only the active-high signals, probably the
biggest advantage of this approach. Another advantage is that the design can be
easily modified in just a few well-defined places if changes are required in the
external active levels.
DO NOT COPY
OUT-OF-ORDER In Table 5-15, we’ve grouped all three of the active-level conversion statements
EXECUTION together at the beginning of program, even a value isn’t assigned to  Y_L until  after  a
value is assigned to  Y, later in the program. Remember that this is OK because the
DO NOT COPY
assignment statements in the architecture body are executed “concurrently.” That is,
an assignment to any signal causes all the other statements that use that signal to be
re-evaluated, regardless of their position in the architecture body.
You could put the “Y_L  <=  Y” statement at the end of the body if its current
position bothers you, but the program is a bit more maintainable in its present form,
DO NOT COPY
with all the active-level conversions together.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

330  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 1 6  Hierarchical definition of 74x138-like decoder with active-level handling.
architecture V74x138_c of V74x138 is
DO NOT COPYsignal G2A, G2B: STD_LOGIC;  -- active-high version of inputs
signal Y: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);  -- active-high version of outputs
component V3to8dec port (G1, G2, G3: in STD_LOGIC;
A: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
Y: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7) ); end component;
begin
DO NOT COPY
G2A <= not G2A_L;  -- convert inputs
G2B <= not G2B_L;  -- convert inputs
Y_L <= not Y;  -- convert outputs
U1: V3to8dec port map (G1, G2A, G2B, A, Y);
end V74x138_c;
DO NOT COPY
Active levels can be handled in an even more structured way. As shown in
Table 5-16, the  V74x138  architecture can be defined hierarchically, using a fully
active-high  V3to8dec  component that has its own dataflow-style definition in
Table 5-17. Once again, no changes are required in the top-level definition of the
DO NOT COPY
V74x138  entity. Figure 5-42 shows the relationship between the entities.
Still another approach to decoder design is shown in Table 5-18, which can
replace the  V3to8dec_a  architecture of Table 5-17. Instead of concurrent state-
Ta b l e  5 - 1 7 library IEEE;
DO NOT COPY
Dataflow definition of use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
an active-high 3-to-8
decoder. entity V3to8dec is
port (G1, G2, G3: in STD_LOGIC;
A: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
DO NOT COPYY: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7) );
end V3to8dec;
architecture V3to8dec_a of V3to8dec is
signal Y_s: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);
begin
DO NOT COPY
with A select Y_s <=
"10000000" when "000",
"01000000" when "001",
"00100000" when "010",
"00010000" when "011",
"00001000" when "100",
DO NOT COPY
"00000100" when "101",
"00000010" when "110",
"00000001" when "111",
"00000000" when others;
Y <= Y_s when (G1 and G2 and G3)='1'
DO NOT COPYelse "00000000";
end V3to8dec_a;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  331
entity V74x138
entity V74x138 entity V3to8dec
G1
DO NOT COPYG1  Y_L[0:7] G1
G2A_L G2A
G2A_L not G2 Y[0:7] Y_L[0:7]
G2B_L  G2B  Y[0:7] not
G2B_L not  G3
A[2:0]
A[2:0] A[2:0]
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)
Figure 5-42  VHDL entity V74x138: (a) top level; (b) internal structure using
architecture V74x138_c.
DO NOT COPY
NAME MATCHING  In Figure 5-42, the port names of an entity are drawn inside the corresponding box.
The names of the signals that are connected to the ports when the entity is used are
drawn on the signal lines. Notice that the signal names may match, but they don’t
have to. The VHDL compiler keeps everything straight, associating a scope with
DO NOT COPYeach name. The situation is completely analogous to the way variable and parameter
names are handled in structured, procedural programming languages like C.
ments, this architecture uses a process and sequential statements to define the
decoder’s operation in a behavioral style. However, a close comparison of theDO NOT COPY
two architectures shows that they’re really not that different except for syntax.
architecture V3to8dec_b of V3to8dec is Ta b l e 5 - 1 8
signal Y_s: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7); Behavioral-style
beginDO NOT COPYarchitecture definition
process(A, G1, G2, G3, Y_s) for a 3-to-8 decoder.
begin
case A is
when "000" => Y_s <= "10000000";
when "001" => Y_s <= "01000000";
DO NOT COPY
when "010" => Y_s <= "00100000";
when "011" => Y_s <= "00010000";
when "100" => Y_s <= "00001000";
when "101" => Y_s <= "00000100";
when "110" => Y_s <= "00000010";
when "111" => Y_s <= "00000001";
DO NOT COPY
when others => Y_s <= "00000000";
end case;
if (G1 and G2 and G3)='1' then Y <= Y_s;
else Y <= "00000000";
end if;
end process;DO NOT COPY
end V3to8dec_b;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

332  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 1 9 architecture V3to8dec_c of V3to8dec is
Truly behavioral begin
architecture definition process (G1, G2, G3, A)
DO NOT COPY
for a 3-to-8 decoder. variable i: INTEGER range 0 to 7;
begin
Y <= "00000000";
if (G1 and G2 and G3) = '1' then
for i in 0 to 7 loop
if i=CONV_INTEGER(A) then Y(i) <= '1'; end if;
DO NOT COPY
end loop;
end if;
end process;
end V3to8dec_c;
DO NOT COPY
As a final example, a more truly behavioral, process-based architecture for
the 3-to-8 decoder is shown in Table 5-19. (Recall that the  CONV_INTEGER  func-
tion was defined in \secref{VHDLconv}.) Of the examples we’ve given, this is
the only one that describes the decoder function without essentially embedding
DO NOT COPY
a truth table in the VHDL program. In that respect, it is more flexible because it
can be easily adapted to make a binary decoder of any size. In another respect, it
is less flexible in that it does not have a truth table that can be easily modified to
make custom decoders like the one we specified in Table 5-10 on page 325.
DO NOT COPY
*5.4.8 Seven-Segment Decoders
seven-segment display Look at your wrist and you’ll probably see a  seven-segment display. This type
of display, which normally uses light-emitting diodes (LEDs) or liquid-crystal
display (LCD) elements, is used in watches, calculators, and instruments to
display decimal data. A digit is displayed by illuminating a subset of the seven
DO NOT COPY
line segments shown in Figure 5-43(a).
seven-segment decoder A  seven-segment decoder  has 4-bit BCD as its input code and the “seven-
segment code,” which is graphically depicted in Figure 5-43(b), as its output
code. Figure 5-44 and Table 5-20 are the logic diagram truth table and for a
74x49DO NOT COPY74x49  seven-segment decoder. Except for the strange (clever?) connection of the
“blanking input”  BI_L, each output of the 74x49 is a minimal product-of-sums
Figure 5-43  Seven-segment display: (a) segment identification; (b) decimal digits.
DO NOT COPYa
f b
g
e c
DO NOT COPY
d
(a)  (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  333
(a)
(11)
DO NOT COPYa
DO NOT COPY
(10)
(b) b
74x49
3  11
BI a
10
DO NOT COPYb
5 9
A c 
1 8
B d 
2 6 (9) 
C e  c
4 13
D f 
12
g 
DO NOT COPY
(8) 
d
DO NOT COPY
(3)
BI_L
(6) 
e
DO NOT COPY
(5)
A
DO NOT COPY(13) 
(1) f
B
(2)
C
DO NOT COPY
(12) 
g
(4)
D
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-44  The 74x49 seven-segment decoder: (a) logic diagram, including
pin numbers; (b) traditional logic symbol.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

334  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 2 0  Truth table for a 74x49 seven-segment decoder.
Inputs Outputs
DO NOT COPY
BI_L  D  C  B  A  a  b  c  d  e  f  g
0  x  x  x  x  0  0  0  0  0  0  0
1  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  0
DO NOT COPY
1  0  0  0  1  0  1  1  0  0  0  0
1  0  0  1  0  1  1  0  1  1  0  1
1  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1
1  0  1  0  0  0  1  1  0  0  1  1
DO NOT COPY
1  0  1  0  1  1  0  1  1  0  1  1
1  0  1  1  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1
1  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY1  1  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1
1  1  0  0  1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1
1  1  0  1  0  0  0  0  1  1  0  1
1  1  0  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY
1  1  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  1
1  1  1  0  1  1  0  0  1  0  1  1
1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  1
1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
realization for the corresponding segment, assuming “don’t-cares” for the non-
decimal input combinations. The  INVERT-OR-AND  structure used for each
output may seem a little strange, but it is equivalent under the generalized
DO NOT COPY
DeMorgan’s theorem to an  AND-OR-INVERT  gate, which is a fairly fast and
compact structure to build in CMOS or TTL.
Most modern seven-segment display elements have decoders built into
them, so that a 4-bit BCD word can be applied directly to the device. Many of the
DO NOT COPYolder, discrete seven-segment decoders have special high-voltage or high-
current outputs that are well suited for driving large, high-powered display
elements.
Table 5-21 is an ABEL program for a seven-segment decoder. Sets are
used to define the digit patterns to make the program more readable.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.4  Decoders  335
Ta b l e 5 - 2 1  ABEL program for a 74x49-like seven-segment decoder.
module Z74X49H
title 'Seven-Segment_DecoderDO NOT COPY
J. Wakerly, Micro Design Resources, Inc.'
Z74X49H device 'P16L8';
" Input pins
A, B, C, D  pin 1, 2, 3, 4;
DO NOT COPY
!BI  pin 5;
" Output pins
SEGA, SEGB, SEGC, SEGD  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'com';
SEGE, SEGF, SEGG  pin 15, 14, 13  istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
" Set definitions
DIGITIN = [D,C,B,A];
SEGOUT = [SEGA,SEGB,SEGC,SEGD,SEGE,SEGF,SEGG];
" Segment encodings for digits
DIG0 = [1,1,1,1,1,1,0];DO NOT COPY  " 0
DIG1 = [0,1,1,0,0,0,0];  " 1
DIG2 = [1,1,0,1,1,0,1];  " 2
DIG3 = [1,1,1,1,0,0,1];  " 3
DIG4 = [0,1,1,0,0,1,1];  " 4
DIG5 = [1,0,1,1,0,1,1];  " 5
DO NOT COPY
DIG6 = [1,0,1,1,1,1,1];  " 6  'tail' included
DIG7 = [1,1,1,0,0,0,0];  " 7
DIG8 = [1,1,1,1,1,1,1];  " 8
DIG9 = [1,1,1,1,0,1,1];  " 9  'tail' included
DIGA = [1,1,1,0,1,1,1];  " A
DIGB = [0,0,1,1,1,1,1];DO NOT COPY  " b
DIGC = [1,0,0,1,1,1,0];  " C
DIGD = [0,1,1,1,1,0,1];  " d
DIGE = [1,0,0,1,1,1,1];  " E
DIGF = [1,0,0,0,1,1,1];  " F
DO NOT COPY
equations
SEGOUT = !BI & ( (DIGITIN ==  0) & DIG0 # (DIGITIN ==  1) & DIG1
# (DIGITIN ==  2) & DIG2 # (DIGITIN ==  3) & DIG3
# (DIGITIN ==  4) & DIG4 # (DIGITIN ==  5) & DIG5
# (DIGITIN ==  6) & DIG6 # (DIGITIN ==  7) & DIG7
DO NOT COPY
# (DIGITIN ==  8) & DIG8 # (DIGITIN ==  9) & DIG9
# (DIGITIN == 10) & DIGA # (DIGITIN == 11) & DIGB
# (DIGITIN == 12) & DIGC # (DIGITIN == 13) & DIGD
# (DIGITIN == 14) & DIGE # (DIGITIN == 15) & DIGF );
end Z74X49HDO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

336  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
5.5 Encoders
A decoder’s output code normally has more bits than its input code. If the
DO NOT COPYdevice’s output code has  fewer  bits than the input code, the device is usually
encoder called an  encoder. For example, consider a device with eight input bits repre-
senting an unsigned binary number, and two output bits indicating whether the
number is prime or divisible by 7. We might call such a device a lucky/prime
encoder.
n  DO NOT COPYn
2 -to-n encoder Probably the simplest encoder to build is a 2 -to-n  or  binary encoder. As
binary encoder shown in Figure 5-45(a), it has just the opposite function as a binary  decoder—
n 
its input code is the 1-out-of-2 code and its output code is  n-bit binary. The
equations for an 8-to-3 encoder with inputs  I0–I7  and outputs  Y0–Y2  are given
below:
DO NOT COPY
Y0  =  I1 + I3 + I5 + I7
Y1  =  I2 + I3 + I6 + I7
Y2  =  I4 + I5 + I6 + I7
n
The corresponding logic circuit is shown in (b). In general, a 2 -to-n  encoder can
DO NOT COPYn−1 
be built from  n  2 -input  OR  gates. Bit  i  of the input code is connected to  OR
gate  j  if bit  j  in the binary representation of  i  is 1.
Figure 5-45
Binary encoder:DO NOT COPYBinary
Y0
encoder
(a) general structure;
I0
(b) 8-to-3 encoder.
I0 Y0 I1
Y1
I1 Y1 I2
I2 n outputs I3
DO NOT COPY2n  inputs
I4
Y2
Yn–1 I5
n–1
I2 I6
(a)  (b) I7
DO NOT COPY
5.5.1 Priority Encoders
n 
The 1-out-of-2  coded outputs of an  n-bit binary decoder are generally used to
n 
control a set of 2 devices, where at most one device is supposed to be active at
n 
any time. Conversely, consider a system with 2 inputs, each of which indicates
DO NOT COPY
a request for service, as in Figure 5-46. This structure is often found in micro-
processor input/output subsystems, where the inputs might be interrupt requests.
In this situation, it may seem natural to use a binary encoder of the type
shown in Figure 5-45 to observe the inputs and indicate which one is requesting
DO NOT COPYservice at any time. However, this encoder works properly only if the inputs are
guaranteed to be asserted at most one at a time. If multiple requests can be made
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.5  Encoders  337
Request
encoder
DO NOT COPY
REQ1
Figure 5-46
REQ2
n
A system with 2
Requests REQ3 Requestor's
requestors, and a “request
for service  number
encoder” that indicates
DO NOT COPYwhich request signal is
REQN
asserted at any time.
simultaneously, the encoder gives undesirable results. For example, suppose that
inputs  I2  and  I4  of the 8-to-3 encoder are both 1; then the output is 110, the
DO NOT COPY
binary encoding of 6.
Either 2 or 4, not 6, would be a useful output in the preceding example, but
how can the encoding device decide which? The solution is to assign  priority  to priority
the input lines, so that when multiple requests are asserted, the encoding device
produces the number of the highest-priority requestor. Such a device is called a
DO NOT COPY
priority encoder. priority encoder
The logic symbol for an 8-input priority encoder is shown in Figure 5-47.
Input  I7  has the highest priority. Outputs  A2–A0  contain the number of the
highest-priority asserted input, if any. The  IDLE  output is asserted if no inputs
are asserted.DO NOT COPY
In order to write logic equations for the priority encoder’s outputs, we first
define eight intermediate variables  H0–H7, such that  Hi  is 1 if and only if  Ii  is the
highest priority 1 input:
Priority
encoder
H7  =  I7
DO NOT COPY
H6  =  I6  ⋅  I7′ I7
I6 A2
H5  =  I5  ⋅  I6′  ⋅  I7′
I5 A1
… I4 A0
I3
DO NOT COPYH0  =  I0  ⋅  I1′  ⋅  I2′  ⋅  I3′  ⋅  I4′  ⋅  I5′  ⋅  I6′  ⋅  I7′
I2 IDLE
Using these signals, the equations for the  A2–A0  outputs are similar to the ones I1
for a simple binary encoder: I0
A2  =  H4  +  H5  +  H6  +  H7
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-47
A1  =  H2  +  H3  +  H6  +  H7
Logic symbol for
A0  =  H1  +  H3  +  H5  +  H7 a generic 8-input
priority encoder.
The  IDLE  output is 1 if no inputs are 1:
IDLE 
DO NOT COPY=  (I0  +  I1  +  I2  +  I3  +  I4  +  I5  +  I6  +  I7)′
=  I0′  ⋅  I1′  ⋅  I2′  ⋅  I3′  ⋅  I4′  ⋅  I5′  ⋅  I6′  ⋅  I7′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

338  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
5.5.2 The 74x148 Priority Encoder
74x148 The  74x148  is a commercially available, MSI 8-input priority encoder. Its logic
symbol is shown in Figure 5-48 and its schematic is shown in Figure 5-49. The
DO NOT COPY
main  difference  between  this  IC  and  the  “generic”  priority  encoder  of
Figure 5-47 is that its inputs and outputs are active low. Also, it has an enable
input,  EI_L, that must be asserted for any of its outputs to be asserted. The
74x148
complete truth table is given in Table 5-22.
5
EI
Instead of an  IDLE  output, the ’148 has a  GS_L output that is asserted when
4DO NOT COPY
I7
the device is enabled and one or more of the request inputs is asserted. The
3 6
I6 A2
2 7 manufacturer calls this “Group Select,” but it’s easier to remember as “Got
I5 A1
1 9 Something.” The  EO_L  signal is an enable  output  designed to be connected to
I4 A0
13 the  EI_L  input of another ’148 that handles lower-priority requests.  /EO  is
I3
12DO NOT COPYI2 14 asserted if  EI_L is asserted but no request input is asserted; thus, a lower-priority
GS
11 I1 15 ’148 may be enabled.
EO
10 I0 Figure 5-50 shows how four 74x148s can be connected in this way to
accept 32 request inputs and produce a 5-bit output,  RA4–RA0, indicating the
Figure 5-48
highest-priority requestor. Since the  A2–A0  outputs of at most one ’148 will be
Logic symbol forDO NOT COPYenabled at any time, the outputs of the individual ’148s can be  ORed  to produce
the 74x148 8-input
RA2–RA0. Likewise, the individual  GS_L  outputs can be combined in a 4-to-2
priority encoder.
encoder to produce  RA4  and  RA3. The  RGS  output is asserted if any  GS  output
is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 2 2  Truth table for a 74x148 8-input priority encoder.
Inputs Outputs
/EI  /I0  /I1  /I2  /I3  /I4  /I5  /I6  /I7  /A2  /A1  /A0  /GS  /EO
DO NOT COPY
1  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  1  1  1  1  1
0  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  0  0  0  0  0  1
0  x  x  x  x  x  x  0  1  0  0  1  0  1
DO NOT COPY
0  x  x  x  x  x  0  1  1  0  1  0  0  1
0  x  x  x  x  0  1  1  1  0  1  1  0  1
0  x  x  x  0  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY0  x  x  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1
0  x  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1
0  0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1
0  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.5  Encoders  339
(10)
I0_L
(15)
EO_L
DO NOT COPY
(11)
I1_L
(14)
GS_L
DO NOT COPY
(12)
I2_L
DO NOT COPY
(9)
A0_L
(13)
I3_L
DO NOT COPY
(1)
I4_L
DO NOT COPY
(7)
(2)
A1_L
I5_L
DO NOT COPY
(3)
I6_L
DO NOT COPY
(4)
I7_L (6)
A2_L
DO NOT COPY
(5)
EI_L
Figure 5-49  Logic diagram for the 74x148 8-input priority encoder, including
pin numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line package.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

340  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x148
5
EI
4
REQ31_L I7
DO NOT COPY3 6 G3A2_L
REQ30_L I6 A2
2 7 G3A1_L
REQ29_L I5 A1
1 9 G3A0_L
REQ28_L I4 A0
13
REQ27_L I3
12 14 G3GS_L
REQ26_L I2 GS
11 15
DO NOT COPYREQ25_L I1 EO
10
REQ24_L I0
U1
G3EO_L
74x148
5
EI
DO NOT COPY4
REQ23_L I7
3 6 G2A2_L
REQ22_L I6 A2
2 7 G2A1_L
REQ21_L I5 A1
1 9 G2A0_L 74x00
REQ20_L I4 A0 1
13 3
REQ19_L I3 2  RA4
12 14 G2GS_L
DO NOT COPYREQ18_L I2 GS
11 15 U5
REQ17_L I1 EO
10
REQ16_L I0
74x00
U2 4
G2EO_L 6
5  RA3
74x148
DO NOT COPY5 U5
EI
4
REQ15_L I7 1
3 6 G1A2_L 74x20
REQ14_L I6 A2 2
2 7 G1A1_L 6
REQ13_L I5 A1 4  RA2
1 9 G1A0_L
REQ12_L I4 A0 5
13 U6
DO NOT COPYREQ11_L I3
12 14 G1GS_L
REQ10_L I2 GS 9
11 15 74x20
REQ9_L I1 EO 10
10 8
REQ8_L I0 12  RA1
U3 13
G1EO_L U6
DO NOT COPY74x148
1
5 74x20
EI 2
4 6
REQ7_L  I7 4  RA0
3 6 G0A2_L
REQ6_L I6 A2 5
2 7 G0A1_L U7
REQ5_L I5 A1
DO NOT COPYREQ4_L 1 I4 A0 9 G0A0_L
9
13 74x20
REQ3_L I3 10
12 14 G0GS_L 8
REQ2_L I2 GS 12  RGS
11 15
REQ1_L I1 EO 13
10 U7
REQ0_L I0
DO NOT COPYU4
Figure 5-50  Four 74x148s cascaded to handle 32 requests.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.5  Encoders  341
5.5.3 Encoders in ABEL and PLDs
Encoders can be designed in ABEL using an explicit equation for each input
combinations, as in Table 5-8 on page 323, or using truth tables. However, since
DO NOT COPY
the number of inputs is usually large, the number of input combinations is very
large, and this method often is not practical.
For example, how would we specify a 15-input priority encoder for inputs
15 
P0–P14? We obviously don’t want to deal with all 2 possible input combina-
tions! One way to do it is to decompose the priority function into two parts. First,
DO NOT COPY
we write equations for 15 variables  Hi  (0≤ i≤ 14) such that  Hi  is 1 if  Pi  is the
highest-priority asserted input. Since by definition at most one  Hi  variable is 1 at
any time, we can combine the  Hi’s in a binary encoder to obtain a 4-bit number
identifying the highest-priority asserted input.
DO NOT COPYAn ABEL program using this approach is shown in Table 5-23, and a logic
diagram for the encoder using a single PAL20L8 or GAL20V8 is given in
Figure 5-51. Inputs  P0–P14  are asserted to indicate requests, with  P14  having
the highest priority. If  EN_L  (Enable) is asserted, then the  Y3_L–Y0_L  outputs
give the number (active low) of the highest-priority request, and  GS  is asserted
if any request is present. IfDO NOT COPY  EN_L  is negated, then the  Y3_L–Y0_L  outputs are
negated and  GS  is negated.  ENOUT_L  is asserted if  EN_L  is asserted and no
request is present.
Notice that in the ABEL program, the equations for the  Hi  variables are
written as “constant expressions,” before the  equations  declaration. Thus,
DO NOT COPY
these signals will not be generated explicitly. Rather, they will be incorporated in
the subsequent equations for  Y0–Y3, which the compiler cranks on to obtain
PAL20L8
DO NOT COPY1 Figure 5-51
P0 I1
2 Logic diagram for a
P1 I2
PLD-based 15-input
3
P2 I3 priority encoder
4 22
P3 I4 O1 ENOUT_L
5 21
P4 I5 IO2 Y0_L
DO NOT COPY6 I6 IO3 20
P5 Y1_L
7 19
P6 I7 IO4 Y2_L
8 18
P7 I8 IO5 Y3_L
9 17
P8 I9 IO6
10 16
P9 I10 IO7
11 15
DO NOT COPYP10 I11 O8 GS
13
P11 I12
14
P12 I13
23
P13  I14
PRIOR15
DO NOT COPY
P14
EN_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

342  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 2 3  An ABEL program for a 15-input priority encoder.
module PRIOR15
title '15-Input Priority EncoderDO NOT COPY
J. Wakerly, DAVID Systems, Inc.'
PRIOR15 device 'P20L8';
" Input pins
P0, P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
DO NOT COPY
P8, P9, P10, P11, P12, P13, P14  pin 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 23, 16;
!EN  pin 17;
" Output pins
!Y3, !Y2, !Y1, !Y0  pin 18, 19, 20, 21 istype 'com';
GS, !ENOUT  pin 15, 22  istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
" Constant expressions
H14 = EN&P14;
H13 = EN&!P14&P13;
H12 = EN&!P14&!P13&P12;
H11 = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&P11;
H10 = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&P10;DO NOT COPY
H9  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&P9;
H8  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&P8;
H7  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&P7;
H6  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&P6;
H5  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&P5;
DO NOT COPY
H4  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&P4;
H3  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&!P4&P3;
H2  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&!P4&!P3&P2;
H1  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&!P4&!P3&!P2&P1;
H0  = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&!P4&!P3&!P2&!P1&P0;
DO NOT COPY
equations
Y3 = H8 # H9 # H10 # H11 # H12 # H13 # H14;
Y2 = H4 # H5 # H6 # H7 # H12 # H13 # H14;
Y1 = H2 # H3 # H6 # H7 # H10 # H11 # H14;
Y0 = H1 # H3 # H5 # H7 # H9 # H11 # H13;
DO NOT COPY
GS  = EN&(P14#P13#P12#P11#P10#P9#P8#P7#P6#P5#P4#P3#P2#P1#P0);
ENOUT = EN&!P14&!P13&!P12&!P11&!P10&!P9&!P8&!P7&!P6&!P5&!P4&!P3&!P2&!P1&!P0;
end PRIOR15
DO NOT COPY
minimal sum-of-products expressions. As it turns out, each  Yi  output has only
seven product terms, as you can see from the structure of the equations.
The priority encoder can be designed even more intuitively use ABEL’s
WHEN  statement. As shown in Table 5-24, a deeply nested series of  WHEN  state-
DO NOT COPY
ments expresses precisely the logical function of the priority encoder. This
program yields exactly the same set of output equations as the previous program.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.5  Encoders  343
Ta b l e 5 - 2 4  Alternate ABEL program for the same 15-input priority encoder.
module PRIOR15W
title '15-Input Priority Encoder'DO NOT COPY
PRIOR15W device 'P20L8';
" Input pins
P0, P1, P2, P3, P4, P5, P6, P7  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8;
P8, P9, P10, P11, P12, P13, P14  pin 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 23, 16;
DO NOT COPY
!EN  pin 17;
" Output pins
!Y3, !Y2, !Y1, !Y0  pin 18, 19, 20, 21 istype 'com';
GS, !ENOUT  pin 15, 22  istype 'com';
" SetsDO NOT COPY
Y = [Y3..Y0];
equations
WHEN !EN THEN Y = 0;
ELSE WHEN P14 THEN Y = 14;
ELSE WHEN P13 THEN Y = 13;DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN P12 THEN Y = 12;
ELSE WHEN P11 THEN Y = 11;
ELSE WHEN P10 THEN Y = 10;
ELSE WHEN P9 THEN Y = 9;
ELSE WHEN P8 THEN Y = 8;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN P7 THEN Y = 7;
ELSE WHEN P6 THEN Y = 6;
ELSE WHEN P5 THEN Y = 5;
ELSE WHEN P4 THEN Y = 4;
ELSE WHEN P3 THEN Y = 3;
DO NOT COPYELSE WHEN P2 THEN Y = 2;
ELSE WHEN P1 THEN Y = 1;
ELSE WHEN P0 THEN Y = 0;
ELSE {Y = 0; ENOUT = 1;};
GS = EN&(P14#P13#P12#P11#P10#P9#P8#P7#P6#P5#P4#P3#P2#P1#P0);
DO NOT COPY
end PRIOR15W
5.5.4 Encoders in VHDL
The approach to specifying encoders in VHDL is similar to the ABEL approach.DO NOT COPY
We could embed the equivalent of a truth table or explicit equations into the
VHDL program, but a behavioral description is far more intuitive. Since
VHDL’s  IF-THEN-ELSE  construct best describes prioritization and is available
only within a process, we use the process-based behavioral approach.
DO NOT COPYTable 5-25 is a behavioral VHDL program for a priority encoder whose
function is equivalent to the 74x148. It uses a  FOR  loop to look for an asserted
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

344  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 2 5  Behavioral VHDL program for a 74x148-like 8-input priority encoder.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
entity V74x148 is
port (
EI_L: in STD_LOGIC;
DO NOT COPY
I_L: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
A_L: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
EO_L, GS_L: out STD_LOGIC
);
end V74x148;
DO NOT COPY
architecture V74x148p of V74x148 is
signal EI: STD_LOGIC;  -- active-high version of input
signal I: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); -- active-high version of inputs
signal EO, GS: STD_LOGIC;  -- active-high version of outputs
signal A: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0); -- active-high version of outputs
DO NOT COPYbegin
process (EI_L, I_L, EI, EO, GS, I, A)
variable j: INTEGER range 7 downto 0;
begin
EI <= not EI_L; -- convert input
I <= not I_L;  -- convert inputs
DO NOT COPY
EO <= '1'; GS <= '0'; A <= "000";
if (EI)='0' then EO <= '0';
else for j in 7 downto 0 loop
if GS = '1' then null;
elsif I(j)='1' then
DO NOT COPYGS <= '1'; EO <= '0'; A <= CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(j,3);
end if;
end loop;
end if;
EO_L <= not EO; -- convert output
GS_L <= not GS; -- convert output
DO NOT COPY
A_L <= not A;  -- convert outputs
end process;
end V74x148p;
DO NOT COPYinput, starting with the highest-priority input. Like some of our previous pro-
grams, it performs explicit active-level conversion at the beginning and end.
Also recall that the  CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(j,n)  function was defined in
\secref{VHDLconv} to convert from an integer  j  to a  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  of a
specified length  n. This program is easily modified to use a different priority
DO NOT COPYorder or a different number of inputs, or to add more functionality such as find-
ing a second-highest-priority input, as explored in Exercises \exref–\exref.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  345
5.6 Three-State Devices
In Sections 3.7.3 and 3.10.5, we described the electrical design of CMOS and
TTL devices whose outputs may be in one of three states—0, 1, or Hi-Z. In thisDO NOT COPY
section, we’ll show how to use them.
5.6.1 Three-State Buffers
The most basic three-state device is a  three-state buffer, often called a three-state three-state buffer
DO NOT COPY
driver. The logic symbols for four physically different three-state buffers are three-state driver
shown in Figure 5-52. The basic symbol is that of a noninverting buffer (a, b) or
an inverter (c, d). The extra signal at the top of the symbol is a  three-state enable three-state enable
input, which may be active high (a, c) or active low (b, d). When the enable input
is asserted, the device behaves like an ordinary buffer or inverter. When the
DO NOT COPY
enable input is negated, the device output “floats”; that is, it goes to a high-
impedance (Hi-Z), disconnected state and functionally behaves as if it weren’t
even there.
Three-state devices allow multiple sources to share a single “party line,” as
long as only one device “talks” on the line at a time. Figure 5-53 gives an
DO NOT COPY
example of how this can be done. Three input bits,  SSRC2–SSRC0, select one
of eight sources of data that may drive a single line,  SDATA. A 3-to-8 decoder,
the 74x138, ensures that only one of the eight  SEL  lines is asserted at a time,
enabling only one three-state buffer to drive  SDATA. However, if not all of the
ENDO NOT COPY  lines are asserted, then none of the three-state buffers is enabled. The logic
value on  SDATA  is undefined in this case.
Figure 5-52  Various three-state buffers: (a) noninverting, active-high enable;
(b) non-inverting, active-low enable; (c) inverting, active-high
DO NOT COPYenable; (d) inverting, active-low enable.
(a)  (b)  (c)  (d)
DO NOT COPY
DEFINING The actual voltage level of a floating signal depends on circuit details, such as
“UNDEFINED” resistive and capacitive load, and may vary over time. Also, the interpretation of this
DO NOT COPY
level by other circuits depends on the input characteristics of those circuits, so it’s
best not to count on a floating signal as being anything other than “undefined.”
Sometimes a pull-up resistor is used on three-state party lines to ensure that a floating
value is pulled to a HIGH voltage and interpreted as logic 1. This is especially impor-
tant on party lines that drive CMOS devices, which may consume excessive current
DO NOT COPYwhen their input voltage is halfway between logic 0 and 1.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

346  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
1-bit party line
P
DO NOT COPY
Q
74x138
DO NOT COPY15 /SELP R
6 Y0
EN1 G1 14 /SELQ SDATA
5 Y1
/EN2 G2A 13 /SELR
4 Y2
/EN3 G2B 12 /SELS S
Y3
11 /SELT
1 Y4
DO NOT COPYSSRC0 A 10 /SELU
2 Y5
SSRC1 B 9 /SELV T
3 Y6
SSRC2 C 7 /SELW
Y7
U
DO NOT COPY
V
Figure 5-53
Eight sources sharing
a three-state party line.
W
DO NOT COPY
Typical three-state devices are designed so that they go into the Hi-Z state
faster than they come out of the Hi-Z state. (In terms of the specifications in a
data book,  tpLZ  and  tpHZ  are both less than  tpZL  and  tpZH ; also see Section 3.7.3.)
DO NOT COPY
This means that if the outputs of two three-state devices are connected to the
same party line, and we simultaneously disable one and enable the other, the first
device will get off the party line before the second one gets on. This is important
because, if both devices were to drive the party line at the same time, and if both
were trying to maintain opposite output values (0 and 1), then excessive current
DO NOT COPY
would flow and create noise in the system, as discussed in Section 3.7.7. This is
fighting often called  fighting.
Unfortunately, delays and timing skews in control circuits make it difficult
to ensure that the enable inputs of different three-state devices change “simulta-
DO NOT COPYneously.” Even when this is possible, a problem arises if three-state devices from
different-speed logic families (or even different ICs manufactured on different
days) are connected to the same party line. The turn-on time (tpZL  or  tpZH ) of a
“fast” device may be shorter than the turn-off time (tpLZ  or  tpHZ ) of a “slow” one,
and the outputs may still fight.
DO NOT COPYThe only really safe way to use three-state devices is to design control logic
dead time that guarantees a  dead time  on the party line during which no one is driving it.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  347
SSRC[20] 7 0 1  2  3
EN1
DO NOT COPY
/EN2, /EN3
SDATA  W P  Q  R  S
Figure 5-54
DO NOT COPY
max(t pLZmax, t pHZmax )  min(t pZLmin, tpZHmin) Timing diagram for the
three-state party line.
dead time
The dead time must be long enough to account for the worst-case differencesDO NOT COPY
between turn-off and turn-on times of the devices and for skews in the three-state
control signals. A timing diagram that illustrates this sort of operation for the
party line of Figure 5-53 is shown in Figure 5-54. This timing diagram also illus-
trates a drawing convention for three-state signals—when in the Hi-Z state, they
are shown at an “undefined” level halfway between 0 and 1.DO NOT COPY
5.6.2 Standard SSI and MSI Three-State Buffers
Like logic gates, several independent three-state buffers may be packaged in a
single SSI IC. For example, Figure 5-55 shows the pinouts of  74x125  and 74x125
74x126DO NOT COPY, each of which contains four independent noninverting three-state
74x126
buffers in a 14-pin package. The three-state enable inputs in the ’125 are active
low, and in the ’126 they are active high.
Most party-line applications use a bus with more than one bit of data. For
example, in an 8-bit microprocessor system, the data bus is eight bits wide, and
DO NOT COPY
peripheral devices normally place data on the bus eight bits at a time. Thus, a
peripheral device enables eight three-state drivers to drive the bus, all at the same
time. Independent enable inputs, as in the ’125 and ’126, are not necessary.
Thus, to reduce the package size in wide-bus applications, most commonly
used MSI parts contain multiple three-state buffers with common enable inputs.
DO NOT COPY
For example, Figure 5-56 shows the logic diagram and symbol for a  74x541 74x541
octal noninverting three-state buffer.  Octal  means that the part contains eight
(1) (13) (1) (13)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-55
(2) (3) (12) (11) (2) (3) (12) (11)
Pinouts of the 74x125
and 74x126 three-
74x125 74x126 state buffers.
(4) (10) (4) (10)
DO NOT COPY(5) (6) (9) (8) (5) (6) (9) (8)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

348  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x541 (1)
G1_L
1 (19)
G1 G2_L
19
G2
DO NOT COPY
2 18
A1 Y1 (2) (18) 
3 17 A1 Y1
A2 Y2
4 16
A3 Y3
5 15 (3) (17) 
A4 Y4 A2 Y2
6 14
A5 Y5
DO NOT COPY7 13
A6 Y6 (4) (16) 
8 12 A3 Y3
A7 Y7
9 11
A8 Y8
(b) (5) (15)  Y4
A4
(6) (14) 
Figure 5-56DO NOT COPYA5 Y5
The 74x541 octal three-state
buffer: (a) logic diagram, (7) (13) 
A6 Y6
including pin numbers for a
standard 20-pin dual in-line
(8) (12) 
A7 Y7
package; (b) traditional logic
DO NOT COPY
symbol. (a)
(9) (11) 
A8  Y8
Microprocessor 74x541
Figure 5-57DO NOT COPY1 Input Port 1
READ G1
Using a 74x541 as a 19
INSEL1 G2
microprocessor input
DB0 INSEL2 2 18  DB0
port. D0 A1 Y1
DB1 INSEL3 3 17 DB1
D1 A2 Y2
DB2 4 16 DB2
D2 A3 Y3
DO NOT COPYDB3 5 15 DB3
D3 User A4 Y4
DB4 6 14 DB4
D4 Inputs A5 Y5
DB5 7 13 DB5
D5 A6 Y6
DB6 8 12 DB6
D6 A7 Y7
DB7 9 11 DB7
D7 A8 Y8
DO NOT COPY
74x541
1 Input Port 2
G1
19
G2
2 18 DB0
A1 Y1
3 17 DB1
DO NOT COPYA2 Y2
4 16 DB2
A3 Y3
5 15 DB3
User A4 Y4
6 14 DB4
Inputs A5 Y5
7 13 DB5
A6 Y6
8 12 DB6
A7 Y7
DO NOT COPY9 A8 Y8 11 DB7
DB[0:7]
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  349
(19)
G_L 
(1)
DIR 
DO NOT COPY
(2) (18) 
A1  B1
74x245
19
G
DO NOT COPY1 DIR
(3) (17) 
A2  B2
2 18
A1 B1
3 17
A2 B2
4 16
A3 B3
(4) (16)  5 15
A3  B3 A4 B4
6 14
DO NOT COPYA5 B5
7 13
A6 B6
8 12
A7 B7
(5) (15)  9 11
A4  B4 A8 B8
(b)
DO NOT COPY
(6) (14) 
A5  B5
(7) (13) 
A6  B6
DO NOT COPY
(8) (12) 
A7  B7 Figure 5-58
The 74x245 octal
DO NOT COPYthree-state transceiver:
(9) (11)  (a) logic diagram;
A8  B8
(b) traditional logic
(a) symbol.
DO NOT COPY
individual buffers. Both enable inputs,  G1_L  and  G2_L, must be asserted to octal
enable the device’s three-state outputs. The little rectangular symbols inside the
buffer symbols indicate  hysteresis, an electrical characteristic of the inputs that hysteresis
improves noise immunity, as we explained in Section 3.7.2. The 74x541 inputs
typically have 0.4 volts of hysteresis.DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-57 shows part of a microprocessor system with an 8-bit data bus,
DB[0–7], and a 74x541 used as an input port. The microprocessor selects Input
Port 1 by asserting  INSEL1  and requests a read operation by asserting  READ.
The selected 74x541 responds by driving the microprocessor data bus with user-
supplied input data. Other input ports may be selected when a differentDO NOT COPY  INSEL
line is asserted along with  READ.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

350  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Bus A
74x245
ENTFR_L 19
DO NOT COPYG
ATOB 1
DIR
Control
2 18
Circuits A1 B1
3 17
A2 B2
4 16
A3 B3
DO NOT COPY5 15
A4 B4
6 14
A5 B5
7 13
A6 B6
8 12
A7 B7
9 11
A8 B8
DO NOT COPY
Bus B
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-59
Bidirectional buses
DO NOT COPY
and transceiver
operation.
Many other varieties of octal three-state buffers are commercially avail-
74x540DO NOT COPYable. For example, the  74x540  is identical to the 74x541 except that it contains
74x240 inverting buffers. The  74x240  and  74x241  are similar to the ’540 and ’541,
74x241 except that they are split into two 4-bit sections, each with a single enable line.
bus transceiver A  bus transceiver  contains pairs of three-state buffers connected in
opposite directions between each pair of pins, so that data can be transferred in
DO NOT COPYeither direction. For example, Figure 5-58 on the preceding page shows the logic
74x245 diagram and symbol for a  74x245  octal three-state transceiver. The  DIR  input
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  351
Ta b l e 5 - 2 6  Modes of operation for a pair of bidirectional buses.
ENTFR_L  ATOB Operation
DO NOT COPY
0  0  Transfer data from a source on bus  B  to a destination on bus A.
0  1  Transfer data from a source on bus  A  to a destination on bus B.
1  x  Transfer data on buses  A  and  B  independently.
DO NOT COPY
determines the direction of transfer, from  A  to  B  (DIR  =  1) or from  B  to  A
(DIR  =  0). The three-state buffer for the selected direction is enabled only if  G_L
is asserted.
DO NOT COPYA bus transceiver is typically used between two  bidirectional buses, as bidirectional bus
shown in Figure 5-59. Three different modes of operation are possible, depend-
ing on the state of  G_L  and  DIR, as shown in Table 5-26. As usual, it is the
designer’s responsibility to ensure that neither bus is ever driven simultaneously
by two devices. However, independent transfers where both buses are driven at
the same time may occur when the transceiver is disabled, as indicated in the lastDO NOT COPY
row of the table.
5.6.3 Three-State Outputs in ABEL and PLDs
The combinational-PLD applications in previous sections have used the bidirec-
DO NOT COPY
tional I/O pins (IO2–IO7  on a PAL16L8 or GAL16V8) statically, that is, always
output-enabled or always output-disabled. In such applications, the compiler can
take care of programming the output-enable gates appropriately—all fuses
blown, or all fuses intact. By default in ABEL, a three-state output pin is
programmed to be always enabled if its signal name appears on the left-hand
DO NOT COPY
side of an equation, and always disabled otherwise.
Three-state output pins can also be controlled dynamically, by a single
input, by a product term, or, using two-pass logic, by a more complex logic
expression. In ABEL, an  attribute suffix .OE  is attached to a signal name on the .OE  attribute suffix
left-hand side of an equation to indicate that the equation applies to the output-
DO NOT COPY
enable for the signal. In a PAL16L8 or GAL16V8, the output enable is con-
trolled by a single  AND  gate, so the right-hand side of the enable equation must
reduce to a single product term.
Table 5-27 shows a simple PLD program fragment with three-state control.
Adapted from the program for a 74x138-like decoder on Table 5-8, this programDO NOT COPY
includes a three-state output control  OE  for all eight decoder outputs. Notice that
a set  Y  is defined to allow all eight output enables to be specified in a single
equation; the  .OE  suffix is applied to each member of the set.
In the preceding example, the output pins  Y0–Y7  are always either enabled
or floating, and are used strictly as “output pins.” I/O pins (DO NOT COPYIO2–IO7 in a 16L8 or
16V8) can be used as “bidirectional pins”; that is, they can be used dynamically
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

352  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 2 7  ABEL program for a 74x138-like 3-to-8 binary decoder with
three-state output control.
DO NOT COPYmodule Z74X138T
title '74x138 Decoder with Three-State Output Enable'
Z74X138T device 'P16L8';
" Input pins
A, B, C, !G2A, !G2B, G1, !OE  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
DO NOT COPY
" Output pins
!Y0, !Y1, !Y2, !Y3  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'com';
!Y4, !Y5, !Y6, !Y7  pin 15, 14, 13, 12 istype 'com';
" Constant expression
DO NOT COPYENB = G1 & G2A & G2B;
Y = [Y0..Y7];
equations
Y.OE = OE;
Y0 = ENB & !C & !B & !A;
DO NOT COPY...
Y7 = ENB &  C &  B &  A;
end Z74X138T
DO NOT COPYas inputs or outputs depending on whether the output-enable gate is producing a
0 or a 1. An example application of I/O pins is a four-way, 2-bit bus transceiver
with the following specifications:
•  The transceiver handles four 2-bit bidirectional buses,  A[1:2],  B[1:2],
DO NOT COPYC[1:2], and  D[1:2].
•  The source of data to drive the buses is selected by three select inputs,
S[2:0], according to Table 5-28. If  S2  is 0, the buses are driven with a con-
stant value, otherwise they are driven with one of the other buses. However,
when the selected source is a bus, the source bus is driven with 00.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 2 8
Source
Bus selection codes S2  S1  S0 selected
for a four-way bus
0  0  0  00
transceiver.
DO NOT COPY0  0  1  01
0  1  0  10
0  1  1  11
1  0  0  A  bus
1  0  1  B  bus
DO NOT COPY1  1  0  C  bus
1  1  1  D  bus
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  353
Ta b l e 5 - 2 9  An ABEL program for four-way, 2-bit bus transceiver.
module XCVR4X2
title 'Four-way 2-bit Bus Transceiver'DO NOT COPY
XCVR4X2 device 'P16L8';
" Input pins
A1I, A2I  pin 1, 11;
!AOE, !BOE, !COE, !DOE, !MOE  pin 2, 3, 4, 5, 6;
DO NOT COPY
S0, S1, S2  pin 7, 8, 9;
" Output and bidirectional pins
A1O, A2O  pin 19, 12  istype 'com';
B1, B2, C1, C2, D1, D2  pin 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13 istype 'com';
" Set definitionsDO NOT COPY
ABUSO = [A1O,A2O];
ABUSI = [A1I,A2I];
BBUS  = [B1,B2];
CBUS  = [C1,C2];
DBUS  = [D1,D2];
SELDO NOT COPY  = [S2,S1,S0];
CONST = [S1,S0];
" Constants
SELA = [1,0,0];
SELB = [1,0,1];
SELC = [1,1,0];
DO NOT COPY
SELD = [1,1,1];
equations
ABUSO.OE = AOE & MOE;
BBUS.OE = BOE & MOE;
CBUS.OE = COE & MOE;DO NOT COPY
DBUS.OE = DOE & MOE;
ABUSO = !S2&CONST # (SEL==SELB)&BBUS # (SEL==SELC)&CBUS # (SEL==SELD)&DBUS;
BBUS = !S2&CONST # (SEL==SELA)&ABUSI # (SEL==SELC)&CBUS # (SEL==SELD)&DBUS;
CBUS = !S2&CONST # (SEL==SELA)&ABUSI # (SEL==SELB)&BBUS # (SEL==SELD)&DBUS;
DBUS = !S2&CONST # (SEL==SELA)&ABUSI # (SEL==SELB)&BBUS # (SEL==SELC)&CBUS;
DO NOT COPY
end XCVR4X2
•  Each bus has its own output-enable signal,  AOE_L,  BOE_L,  COE_L, or
DO NOT COPYDOE_L. There is also a “master” output-enable signal,  MOE_L. The trans-
ceiver drives a particular bus if and only if  MOE_L  and the output-enable
signal for that bus are both asserted.
Table 5-29 is an ABEL program that performs the transceiver function.
According to the enable (DO NOT COPY.OE) equations, each bus is output-enabled if  MOE  and
its own  OE  are asserted. Each bus is driven with  S1  and  S0  if  S2  is 0, and with
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

354  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
PAL16L8
1
I1
2 19
DO NOT COPYAOE_L  I2 O1 A1
3 18
BOE_L I3 IO2 B1
4 17
COE_L I4 IO3 B2
5 16
DOE_L  I5 IO4 C1
6 15
MOE_L I6 IO5 C2
7 14
DO NOT COPYS0 I7 IO6 D1
8 13
S1 I8 IO7 D2
9 12
Figure 5-60 S2 I9 O8 A2
11
PLD inputs and I10
outputs for a four-way,
2-bit bus transceiver. XCVR4X2
DO NOT COPY
the selected bus if a different bus is selected. If the bus itself is selected, the
output equation evaluates to 0, and the bus is driven with 00 as required.
Figure 5-60 is a logic diagram for a PAL16L8 (or GAL16V8) with the
DO NOT COPYrequired inputs and outputs. Since the device has only six bidirectional pins and
the specification requires eight, the  A  bus uses one pair of pins for input and
another for output. This is reflected in the program by the use of separate signals
and sets for the  A-bus input and output.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 3 0  IEEE 1164 package declarations for  STD_ULOGIC  and  STD_LOGIC.
PACKAGE std_logic_1164 IS
-- logic state system (unresolved)
TYPE std_ulogic IS ( 'U',  -- Uninitialized
DO NOT COPY'X',  -- Forcing  Unknown
'0',  -- Forcing  0
'1',  -- Forcing  1
'Z',  -- High Impedance
'W',  -- Weak  Unknown
'L',  -- Weak  0
DO NOT COPY'H',  -- Weak  1
'-'  -- Don't care
);
-- unconstrained array of std_ulogic
TYPE std_ulogic_vector IS ARRAY ( NATURAL RANGE <> ) OF std_ulogic;
DO NOT COPY
-- resolution function
FUNCTION resolved ( s : std_ulogic_vector ) RETURN std_ulogic;
-- *** industry standard logic type ***
DO NOT COPYSUBTYPE std_logic IS resolved std_ulogic;
...
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  355
Ta b l e 5 - 3 1  IEEE 1164 package body for  STD_ULOGIC  and  STD_LOGIC.
PACKAGE BODY std_logic_1164 IS
-- local typeDO NOT COPY
TYPE stdlogic_table IS ARRAY(std_ulogic, std_ulogic) OF std_ulogic;
-- resolution function
CONSTANT resolution_table : stdlogic_table := (
--  ---------------------------------------------------------
DO NOT COPY
--  |  U  X  0  1  Z  W  L  H  -  |  |
--  ---------------------------------------------------------
( 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U', 'U' ), -- | U |
( 'U', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X' ), -- | X |
( 'U', 'X', '0', 'X', '0', '0', '0', '0', 'X' ), -- | 0 |
DO NOT COPY( 'U', 'X', 'X', '1', '1', '1', '1', '1', 'X' ), -- | 1 |
( 'U', 'X', '0', '1', 'Z', 'W', 'L', 'H', 'X' ), -- | Z |
( 'U', 'X', '0', '1', 'W', 'W', 'W', 'W', 'X' ), -- | W |
( 'U', 'X', '0', '1', 'L', 'W', 'L', 'W', 'X' ), -- | L |
( 'U', 'X', '0', '1', 'H', 'W', 'W', 'H', 'X' ), -- | H |
( 'U', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X', 'X' )  -- | - |
DO NOT COPY);
FUNCTION resolved ( s : std_ulogic_vector ) RETURN std_ulogic IS
VARIABLE result : std_ulogic := 'Z';  -- weakest state default
BEGIN
-- the test for a single driver is essential otherwise the
DO NOT COPY
-- loop would return 'X' for a single driver of '-' and that
-- would conflict with the value of a single driver unresolved
-- signal.
IF  (s'LENGTH = 1) THEN  RETURN s(s'LOW);
ELSE
DO NOT COPYFOR i IN s'RANGE LOOP
result := resolution_table(result, s(i));
END LOOP;
END IF;
RETURN result;
END resolved;
DO NOT COPY
...
*5.6.4 Three-State Outputs in VHDL
VHDL itself does not have built-in types and operators for three-state outputs.
However, it does have primitives which can be used to create signals and systemsDO NOT COPY
with three-state behavior; the IEEE 1164 package uses these primitives. As a
start, as we described in \secref{VHDL1164}, the IEEE 1164  STD_LOGIC  type
defines  'Z'  as one of its nine possible signal values; this value is used for the
high-impedance state. You can assign this value to any  STD_LOGIC  signal, and
the definitions of the standard logic functions account for the possibility ofDO NOT COPY  'Z'
inputs (generally a  'Z'  input will cause a  'U'  output).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

356  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Given the availability of three-state signals, how do we create three-state
buses in VHDL? A three-state bus generally has two or more drivers, although
the mechanisms we discuss work fine with just one driver. In VHDL, there is no
DO NOT COPY
explicit language construct for joining three-state outputs into a bus. Instead, the
compiler automatically joins together signals that are driven in two or more
different processes, that is, signals that appear on the left-hand side of a signal
assignment statement in two or more processes. However, the signals must have
the appropriate type, as explained below.
DO NOT COPY
subtype The IEEE 1164  STD_LOGIC  type is actually defined as a  subtype  of an
STD_ULOGIC unresolved type, STD_ULOGIC. In VHDL, an  unresolved type  is used for any
unresolved type signal that may be driven in two or more processes. The definition of an
resolution function unresolved type includes a  resolution function  that is called every time an
DO NOT COPYassignment is made to a signal having that type. As the name implies, this
function resolves the value of the signal when it has multiple drivers.
Tables 5-30 and 5-31 show the IEEE 1164 definitions of  STD_ULOGIC,
STD_LOGIC  and  the  resolution  function  “resolved”. This code uses a
two-dimensional array  resolution_table  to determine the final  STD_LOGIC
DO NOT COPYvalue produced by  n  processes that drive a signal to  n  possibly different values
passed in the input vector  s. If, for example, a signal has four drivers, the VHDL
compiler automatically constructs a 4-element vector containing the four driven
values, and passes this vector to  resolved  every time that any one of those
values changes. The result is passed back to the simulation.
DO NOT COPY
Notice that the order in which the driven signal values appear in s does not
affect the result produced by  resolved, due to the strong ordering of “strengths”
in the  resolution_table:  'U'> 'X'>'0,1'> 'W'>'L,H'> '-'. That is, once
a signal is partially resolved to a particular value, it never further resolves to a
“weaker” value; and  0/1 and  L/H  conflicts always resolve to a stronger undefined
DO NOT COPY
value ('X'  or  'W').
So, do you need to know all of this in order to use three-state outputs in
VHDL? Well, usually not, but it can help if your simulations don’t match up with
reality. All that’s normally required to use three-state outputs within VHDL is to
declare the corresponding signals as type  STD_ULOGIC.
DO NOT COPY
For example, Table 5-32 describes a system that uses four 8-bit three-state
drivers (in four processes) to select one of four 8-bit buses,  A,  B,  C, and  D, to drive
onto a result bus  X. Within each process, the IEEE 1164 standard function
To_StdULogicVector  is used to convert the input type of  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR
DO NOT COPYto  STD_ULOGIC_VECTOR  as required to make a legal assignment to result bus  X.
VHDL is flexible enough that you can use it to define other types of bus
operation. For example, you could define a subtype and resolution function for
open-drain outputs such that a wired-AND  function is obtained. However, the
definitions for specific output types in PLDs, FPGAs, and ASICs are usually
DO NOT COPY
already done for you in libraries provided by the component vendors.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.6  Three-State Devices  357
Ta b l e 5 - 3 2  VHDL program with four 8-bit three-state drivers.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity V3statex is
port (
G_L: in STD_LOGIC;  -- Global output enable
SEL: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 downto 0);  -- Input select 0,1,2,3 ==> A,B,C,D
DO NOT COPY
A, B, C, D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 8); -- Input buses
X: out STD_ULOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 8)  -- Output bus (three-state)
);
end V3statex;
architecture V3states of V3statex isDO NOT COPY
constant ZZZZZZZZ: STD_ULOGIC_VECTOR := ('Z','Z','Z','Z','Z','Z','Z','Z');
begin
process (G_L, SEL, A)
begin
if G_L='0' and SEL = "00" then X <= To_StdULogicVector(A);
DO NOT COPYelse X <= ZZZZZZZZ;
end if;
end process;
process (G_L, SEL, B)
begin
DO NOT COPY
if G_L='0' and SEL = "01" then X <= To_StdULogicVector(B);
else X <= ZZZZZZZZ;
end if;
end process;
process (G_L, SEL, C)DO NOT COPY
begin
if G_L='0' and SEL = "10" then X <= To_StdULogicVector(C);
else X <= ZZZZZZZZ;
end if;
end process;
DO NOT COPY
process (G_L, SEL, D)
begin
if G_L='0' and SEL = "11" then X <= To_StdULogicVector(D);
else X <= ZZZZZZZZ;
end if;
DO NOT COPY
end process;
end V3states;
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

358  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
5.7 Multiplexers
multiplexer A  multiplexer  is a digital switch—it connects data from one of  n  sources to its
DO NOT COPYoutput. Figure 5-61(a)  shows the  inputs and outputs of an  n-input,  b-bit
multiplexer. There are  n  sources of data, each of which is  b  bits wide, and there
are  b  output bits. In typical commercially available multiplexers,  n  =  1, 2, 4, 8,
or 16, and  b  =  1, 2, or 4. There are  s  inputs that select among the  n  sources, so
s  =  log 2  n. An enable input  EN  allows the multiplexer to “do its thing”; when
DO NOT COPY
mux EN  =  0, all of the outputs are 0. A multiplexer is often called a  mux  for short.
Figure 5-61(b) shows a switch circuit that is roughly equivalent to the mul-
tiplexer. However, unlike a mechanical switch, a multiplexer is a unidirectional
device: information flows only from inputs (on the left) to outputs (on the right).
We can write a general logic equation for a multiplexer output:
DO NOT COPY
n – 1
iY  = EN  ⋅ M ⋅ iDj
∑ j 
j = 0
Here, the summation symbol represents a logical sum of product terms. Variable
DO NOT COPY
iY  is a particular output bit (1  ≤  i  ≤  b), and variable  iDj  is input bit  i  of source  j
(0  ≤  j  ≤  n  −  1).  M j  represents minterm  j  of the  s  select inputs. Thus, when the
multiplexer is enabled and the value on the select inputs is  j, each output  iY
equals the corresponding bit of the selected input,  iDj.
DO NOT COPYMultiplexers are obviously useful devices in any application in which data
must be switched from multiple sources to a destination. A common application
in computers is the multiplexer between the processor’s registers and its
arithmetic logic unit (ALU). For example, consider a 16-bit processor in which
DO NOT COPY(b) 1D0
Figure 5-61
1D1
Multiplexer structure:
1Y
(a) inputs and outputs;
(b) functional equivalent. 1Dn1
DO NOT COPYmultiplexer 2D0
(a)
2D1
enable EN
2Y
s
select SEL 2Dn1
b
DO NOT COPYD0
b bD0
D1 b
n data Y data bD1
sources output
bY
b
Dn1 bDn1
DO NOT COPY
SEL  EN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  359
each instruction has a 3-bit field that specifies one of eight registers to use. This
3-bit field is connected to the select inputs of an 8-input, 16-bit multiplexer. The
multiplexer’s data inputs are connected to the eight registers, and its data outputs
DO NOT COPY
are connected to the ALU to execute the instruction using the selected register.
5.7.1 Standard MSI Multiplexers
The sizes of commercially available MSI multiplexers are limited by the number
of pins available in an inexpensive IC package. Commonly used muxes come in
DO NOT COPY
16-pin packages. At one extreme is the  74x151, shown in Figure 5-62, which 74x151
selects among eight 1-bit inputs. The select inputs are named  C,  B, and  A, where
C  is most significant numerically. The enable input  EN_L  is active low; both
active-high (Y) and active-low (Y_L) versions of the output are provided.
DO NOT COPY
(7)
EN_L
Figure 5-62
The 74x151 8-input, 1-bit
A′  A B′  B C′  C
(4) multiplexer: (a) logic diagram,
D0
including pin numbers for a
DO NOT COPY
standard 16-pin dual in-line
(3) package; (b) traditional logic
D1
symbol.
(2)
D2
DO NOT COPY
(1)
D3 (5)
Y
(6)
(15) Y_L
D4
DO NOT COPY
(14)
D5
74x151
7
(13) EN
11
DO NOT COPYD6 A
10
B
9
(12) C
D7 4 D0 Y 5
3 6
D1 Y
2
D2
DO NOT COPY(11) 1
D3
A 15
D4
14
D5
13
(10) D6
B 12
D7
DO NOT COPY
(9)
C (a)  (b)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

360  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 3 3
Inputs Outputs
Truth table for a
74x151 8-input, EN_L  C  B  A  Y  Y_L
DO NOT COPY1-bit multiplexer.
1  x  x  x  0  1
0  0  0  0  D0  D0′
0  0  0  1  D1  D1′
0  0  1  0  D2  D2′
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1  1  D3  D3′
0  1  0  0  D4  D4′
0  1  0  1  D5  D5′
0  1  1  0  D6  D6′
DO NOT COPYD7 
0  1  1  1  D7′
Figure 5-63  The 74x157 2-input, 4-bit multiplexer: (a) logic diagram,
including pin numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line
DO NOT COPYpackage; (b) traditional logic symbol.
(a) (15) (b) 74x157
G_L 
(1)
S 15 G
1
S
2 
1A 4
DO NOT COPY3 1Y
1B
5
(2) 2A 2Y 7
1A 6 2B
11
(4) 3A 9
10 3Y
1Y
(3) 3B
1B 14
DO NOT COPY4A 12
13 4Y
4B
(5)
2A
(7)
2Y
(6)
DO NOT COPY2B
(11)
3A
(9)
3Y
(10)
DO NOT COPY3B
(14)
4A
(12)
4Y
DO NOT COPY(13)
4B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  361
Ta b l e 5 - 3 4
Inputs Outputs 
Truth table for a
G_L  S  1Y  2Y  3Y  4Y 74x157 2-input,
DO NOT COPY4-bit multiplexer.
1  x  0  0  0  0
0  0  1A  2A  3A  4A
0  1  1B  2B  3B  4B
DO NOT COPY
The 74x151’s truth table is shown in Table 5-33. Here we have once again
extended our notation for truth tables. Up until now, our truth tables have speci-
fied an output of 0 or 1 for each input combination. In the 74x151’s table, only a
few of the inputs are listed under the “Inputs” heading. Each output is specified
as 0, 1, or a simple logic function of the remaining inputs (e.g.,DO NOT COPY  D0 or  D0′). This
notation saves eight columns and eight rows in the table, and presents the logic
function more clearly than a larger table would.
At the other extreme of muxes in 16-pin packages, we have the  74x157, 74x157
shown in Figure 5-63, which selects between two 4-bit inputs. Just to confuse
things, the manufacturer has named the select inputDO NOT COPY  S  and the active-low enable
input  G_L. Also note that the data sources are named  A  and  B  instead of  D0  and
D1  as in our generic example. Our extended truth-table notation makes the
74x157’s description very compact, as shown in Table 5-34.
Intermediate between the 74x151 and 74x157 is the  74x153, a 4-input, 74x153
DO NOT COPY
2-bit multiplexer. This device, whose logic symbol is shown in Figure 5-64, has
separate enable inputs (1G,  2G) for each bit. As shown in Table 5-35, its
function is very straightforward.
DO NOT COPYInputs Outputs  Ta b l e 5 - 3 5 Figure 5-64
Truth table for a Traditional logic
1G_L  2G_L  B  A  1Y  2Y 74x153 4-input, 2-bit symbol for the
multiplexer. 74x153.
0  0  0  0  1C0  2C0
0  0  0  1  1C1  2C1 74x153
DO NOT COPY1C2  2C2
0  0  1  0  14
A
0  0  1  1  1C3  2C3 2
B
1
0  1  0  0  1C0  0 1G
6
0  1  0  1  1C1  0 1C0
5
0  1  1  0  1C2  0 1C1 1Y 7
4
DO NOT COPY1C2
0  1  1  1  1C3  0 3
1C3
1  0  0  0  0  2C0 15
2G
10
1  0  0  1  0  2C1 2C0
11
1  0  1  0  0  2C2 2C1 9
12 2Y
1  0  1  1  0  2C3 2C2
DO NOT COPY13
2C3
1  1  x  x  0  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

362  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Some multiplexers have three-state outputs. The enable input of such a
multiplexer, instead of forcing the outputs to zero, forces them to the Hi-Z state.
74x251 For example, the 74x251 is identical to the ’151 in its pinout and its internal logic
DO NOT COPY
design, except that  Y  and  Y_L  are three-state outputs. When the  EN_L  input is
negated, instead of forcing the outputs to be negated, it forces the outputs into
74x253 the high-Z state. Similarly, the  74x253 and  74x257  are three-state versions of the
74x257 ’153 and ’157. The three-state outputs are especially useful when  n-input muxes
are combined to form larger muxes, as suggested in the next subsection.
DO NOT COPY
5.7.2 Expanding Multiplexers
Seldom does the size of an MSI multiplexer match the characteristics of the
problem at hand. For example, we suggested earlier that an 8-input, 16-bit
DO NOT COPYmultiplexer might be used in the design of a computer processor. This function
could be performed by 16 74x151 8-input, 1-bit multiplexers or equivalent ASIC
cells, each handling one bit of all the inputs and the output. The processor’s 3-bit
register-select field would be connected to the A, B, and  C inputs of all 16 muxes,
so they would all select the same register source at any given time.
DO NOT COPYThe device that produces the 3-bit register-select field in this example must
have enough fanout to drive 16 loads. With 74LS-series ICs this is possible
because typical devices have a fanout of 20 LS-TTL loads.
Still, it is fortunate that the ’151 was designed so that each of the  A,  B, and
C  inputs presents only one LS-TTL load to the circuit driving it. Theoretically,
DO NOT COPY
the ’151 could have been designed without the first rank of three inverters shown
on the select inputs in Figure 5-62, but then each select input would have
presented five LS-TTL loads, and the drivers in the register-select application
would need a fanout of 80.
Another dimension in which multiplexers can be expanded is the number
DO NOT COPY
of data sources. For example, suppose we needed a 32-input, 1-bit multiplexer.
Figure 5-65 shows one way to build it. Five select bits are required. A 2-to-4
decoder (one-half of a 74x139) decodes the two high-order select bits to enable
one of four 74x151 8-input multiplexers. Since only one ’151 is enabled at a
time, the ’151 outputs can simply be  ORed  to obtain the final output.
DO NOT COPY
CONTROL-SIGNAL Just the sort of fanout consideration that we described above occurs quite frequently
FANOUT IN ASICS in ASIC design. When a set of control signals, such as the register-select field in the
DO NOT COPY
example, controls a large number of bits, the required fanout can be enormous. In
CMOS chips, the consideration is not DC loading but capacitive load which slows
down performance. In such an application, the designer must carefully partition the
load and select points at which to buffer the control signals to reduce fanout. While
inserting the extra buffers, the designer must be careful not increase the chip area
DO NOT COPY
significantly or to put so many buffers in series that their delay is unacceptable.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  363
74x151
7
XA0 EN
11
XA1 A
10
XA2DO NOT COPYB
9
C
4 5
X0 D0 Y
3 6 XO0_L
X1 D1 Y
2
X2 D2
1
X3 D3
15
X4 D4
X5DO NOT COPY14 D5
13
X6 D6
12
X7 D7
U2
1/2 74x139
1  4 EN0_L 
XEN_L 1G 1Y0 74x151
5 EN1_L
1Y1 7
XA3DO NOT COPY2 1A 1Y2 6 EN2_L 11 EN
3 7 EN3_L A
XA4 1B 1Y3 10
B
9
U1 C
4 5
X8 D0 Y
3 6 XO1_L
X9 D1 Y
2
X10 D2
1
X11DO NOT COPYD3
15
X12 D4
14
X13 D5
13
X14 D6 1/2 74x20
12 1
X15 D7
U3 2
6
4  XOUT
DO NOT COPY74x151 5
U6
7
EN
11
A
10
B
9
C
4 5
X16 D0 Y
3 6 XO2_L
X17DO NOT COPYD1 Y
2
X18 D2
1
X19 D3
15
X20 D4
14
X21 D5
13
X22 D6
12
X23 D7
DO NOT COPYU4
74x151
7
EN
11
A
10
B
9
C
DO NOT COPY4 5
X24 D0 Y
3 6 XO3_L
X25 D1 Y
2
X26 D2
1
X27 D3 Figure 5-65
15
X28 D4 Combining 74x151s
14
X29 D5 to make a 32-to-1
13
X30DO NOT COPYD6
12 multiplexer.
X31 D7
U5
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

364  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
TURN ON THE The use of bubble-to-bubble logic design should help your understanding of these
BUBBLE multiplexer design examples. Since the decoder outputs and the multiplexer enable
DO NOT COPY
MACHINE inputs are all active low, they can be hooked up directly. You can ignore the inver-
sion bubbles when thinking about the logic function that is performed—you just say
that when a particular decoder output is asserted, the corresponding multiplexer is
enabled.
Bubble-to-bubble design also provides two options for the final  OR  function
DO NOT COPY
in Figure 5-65. The most obvious design would have used a 4-input  OR  gate
connected to the Y outputs. However, for faster operation, we used an inverting gate,
a 4-input  NAND  connected to the  /Y  outputs. This eliminated the delay of two
inverters—the one used inside the ’151 to generate  Y  from  /Y, and the extra inverter
circuit that is used to obtain an  OR  function from a basic  NOR  circuit in a CMOS or
DO NOT COPY
TTL  OR  gate.
The 32-to-1 multiplexer can also be built using 74x251s. The circuit is
DO NOT COPYidentical to Figure 5-65, except that the output NAND gate is eliminated.
Instead, the  Y  (and, if desired,  Y_L) outputs of the four ’251s are simply tied
together. The ’139 decoder ensures that at most one of the ’251s has its three-
state outputs enabled at any time. If the ’139 is disabled (XEN_L  is negated),
then all of the ’251s are disabled, and the  XOUT  and  XOUT_L  outputs are
DO NOT COPY
undefined. However, if desired, resistors may be connected from each of these
signals to  +5 volts to pull the output  HIGH  in this case.
(a) multiplexer  demultiplexer
Figure 5-66
DO NOT COPYSRCA DSTA
A multiplexer driving a bus
SRCB DSTB
and a demultiplexer
BUS
receiving the bus: SRCC DSTC
(a) switch equivalent;
(b) block diagram symbols. SRCZ DSTZ
DO NOT COPY
SRCSEL  DSTSEL
(b)
SRCA DSTA
DO NOT COPY
SRCB DSTB
BUS
SRCC MUX  DMUX DSTC
SRCZ DSTZ
DO NOT COPY
SRCSEL  DSTSEL
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  365
5.7.3 Multiplexers, Demultiplexers, and Buses
A multiplexer can be used to select one of  n  sources of data to transmit on a bus.
At the far end of the bus, a  demultiplexer  can be used to route the bus data to one demultiplexer
DO NOT COPY
of  m  destinations. Such an application, using a 1-bit bus, is depicted in terms of
our switch analogy in Figure 5-66(a). In fact, block diagrams for logic circuits
often depict multiplexers and demultiplexers using the wedge-shaped symbols
in (b), to suggest visually how a selected one of multiple data sources gets direct-
ed onto a bus and routed to a selected one of multiple destinations.
DO NOT COPY
The function of a demultiplexer is just the inverse of a multiplexer’s. For
example, a 1-bit,  n-output demultiplexer has one data input and  s  inputs to select
s 
one of  n  =  2 data outputs. In normal operation, all outputs except the selected
one are 0; the selected output equals the data input. This definition may be
generalized for aDO NOT COPY  b-bit,  n-output demultiplexer; such a device has  b  data inputs,
s 
and its  s  select inputs choose one of  n  =  2 sets of  b  data outputs.
A binary decoder with an enable input can be used as a demultiplexer, as
shown in Figure 5-67. The decoder’s enable input is connected to the data line,
and its select inputs determine which of its output lines is driven with the data
bit. The remaining output lines are negated. Thus, the 74x139 can be used as aDO NOT COPY
2-bit, 4-output demultiplexer with active-low data inputs and outputs, and the
74x138 can be used as a 1-bit, 8-output demultiplexer. In fact, the manufactur-
er’s catalog typically lists these ICs as “decoders/demultiplexers.”
DO NOT COPY
(a) 2-to-4 decoder (b) 1/2 74x139
SRCDATA G Y0 DST0DATA SRCDATA_L G Y0 DST0DATA_L
Y1 DST1DATA Y1 DST1DATA_L
DSTSEL0 A Y2 DST2DATA DSTSEL0 A Y2 DST2DATA_L
DSTSEL1 B Y3 DST3DATA DSTSEL1 B Y3 DST3DATA_L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-67  Using a 2-to-4 binary decoder as a 1-bit, 4-output demultiplexer:
(a) generic decoder; (b) 74x139.
5.7.4 Multiplexers in ABEL and PLDsDO NOT COPY
Multiplexers are very easy to design using ABEL and combinational PLDs. For
example, the function of a 74x153 4-input, 2-bit multiplexer can be duplicated
in a PAL16L8 as shown in Figure 5-68 and Table 5-36. Several characteristics
of the PLD-based design and program are worth noting:
DO NOT COPY
•  Signal names in the ABEL program are changed slightly from the signal
names shown for a 74x153 in Figure 5-64 on page 361, since ABEL does
not allow a number to be used as the first character of a signal name.
•  A 74x153 has twelve inputs, while a PAL16L8 has only ten inputs. There-
DO NOT COPYfore, two of the ’153 inputs are assigned to 16L8 I/O pins, which are no
longer usable as outputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

366  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
A
B
PAL16L8
DO NOT COPY
1
G1_L I1
2 19
C10 I2 O1 Y1
3 18
C11 I3 IO2
4 17
C12 I4 IO3
5 16
C13 I5 IO4 N.C.
DO NOT COPY6 15
G2_L I6 IO5 N.C.
7 14
C20 I7 IO6 N.C.
8 13
C21 I8 IO7 N.C.
Figure 5-68 9 12
C22 I9 O8 Y2
Logic diagram for the 11
C23 I10
DO NOT COPYPAL16L8 used as a
74x153-like multiplexer. Z74X153
•  The ’153 outputs (1Y  and  2Y) are assigned to pins 19 and 12 on the 16L8,
which are usable  only  as outputs. This is preferable to assigning them to I/
DO NOT COPY
O pins; given a choice, it’s better to leave I/O pins than output-only pins as
spares.
•  Although the multiplexer equations in the table are written quite naturally
in sum-of-products form, they don’t map directly onto the 16L8’s structure
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 3 6 module Z74X153
ABEL program for a title '74x153-like multiplexer PLD
74x153-like 4-input, J. Wakerly, Stanford University'
2-bit multiplexer. Z74X153 device 'P16L8';
DO NOT COPY
" Input pins
A, B, !G1, !G2  pin 17, 18, 1, 6;
C10, C11, C12, C13  pin 2, 3, 4, 5;
C20, C21, C22, C23  pin 7, 8, 9, 11;
" Output pins
DO NOT COPYY1, Y2  pin 19, 12 istype 'com';
equations
Y1 = G1 & ( !B & !A & C10
# !B &  A & C11
#  B & !A & C12
DO NOT COPY
#  B &  A & C13);
Y2 = G2 & ( !B & !A & C20
# !B &  A & C21
#  B & !A & C22
DO NOT COPY#  B &  A & C23);
end Z74X153
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  367
!Y1 = (!B & !A & !C10 Ta b l e 5 - 3 7
# !B &  A & !C11 Inverted, reduced
#  B & !A & !C12 equations for 74x153-
DO NOT COPY#  B &  A & !C13 like 4-input, 2-bit
#  G1); multiplexer.
!Y2 = (!B & !A & !C20
# !B &  A & !C21
#  B & !A & !C22
#  B &  A & !C23
DO NOT COPY
#  G2);
because of the inverter between the  AND-OR  array and the actual output
pins. Therefore, the ABEL compiler must complement the equations in the
DO NOT COPYtable  and  then  reduce  the  result  to  sum-of-products  form.  With  a
GAL16V8, either version of the equations could be used.
Multiplexer functions are even easier to expression using ABEL’s sets and
relations. For example, Table 5-38 shows the ABEL program for a 4-input, 8-bit
multiplexer. No  device  statement is included, because this function has too
DO NOT COPY
many inputs and outputs to fit in any of the PLDs we’ve described so far.
However, it’s quite obvious that a multiplexer of any size can be specified in just
a few lines of code in this way.
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 5 - 3 8
module mux4in8b
title '4-input, 8-bit wide multiplexer PLD' ABEL program for
a 4-input, 8-bit
" Input and output pins multiplexer.
!G  pin;  " Output enable for Y bus
S1..S0DO NOT COPY  pin;  " Select inputs, 0-3 ==> A-D
A1..A8, B1..B8, C1..C8, D1..D8 pin; " 8-bit input buses A, B, C, D
Y1..Y8  pin istype 'com'; " 8-bit three-state output bus
" Sets
SEL = [S1..S0];
A = [A1..A8];DO NOT COPY
B = [B1..B8];
C = [C1..C8];
D = [D1..D8];
Y = [Y1..Y8];
DO NOT COPY
equations
Y.OE = G;
WHEN (SEL == 0) THEN Y = A;
ELSE WHEN (SEL == 1) THEN Y = B;
ELSE WHEN (SEL == 2) THEN Y = C;
ELSE WHEN (SEL == 3) THEN Y = D;DO NOT COPY
end mux4in8b
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

368  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e  5 - 3 9
Input to
Function table for S2  S1  S0 Select
a specialized 4-input,
DO NOT COPY18-bit multiplexer. 0  0  0  A
0  0  1  B
0  1  0  A
0  1  1  C
1  0  0  A
DO NOT COPY1  0  1  D
1  1  0  A
1  1  1  B
DO NOT COPYLikewise, it is easy to customize multiplexer functions using ABEL. For
example, suppose that you needed a circuit that selects one of four 18-bit input
buses,  A,  B,  C, or  D, to drive a 18-bit output bus  F, as specified in Table 5-39 by
three control bits. There are more control-bit combinations than multiplexer
inputs, so a standard 4-input multiplexer doesn’t quite fit the bill (but see
DO NOT COPYExercise \exref). A 4-input, 3-bit multiplexer with the required behavior can be
designed to fit into a single PAL16L8 or GAL16V8 as shown in Figure 5-69 and
Table 5-40, and six copies of this device can be used to make the 18-bit mux.
Alternatively, a single, larger PLD could be used. In any case, the ABEL
program is very easily modified for different selection criteria.
DO NOT COPY
Since this function uses all of the available pins on the PAL16L8, we had
to make the pin assignment in Figure 5-69 carefully. In particular, we had to
assign two output signals to the two output-only pins (O1  and  O8), to maximize
the number of input pins available.
DO NOT COPY
S0
Figure 5-69 S1
Logic diagram for the S2
PAL16L8
PAL16L8 used as a
specialized 4-input, 1
I1
DO NOT COPYA0
3-bit multiplexer. 2 19
A1  I2 O1 F0
3 18
A2 I3 IO2
4 17
B0 I4 IO3
5 16
B1  I5 IO4
6 15
B2 I6 IO5 F1
DO NOT COPY7 14
C0 I7 IO6
8 13
C1 I8 IO7
9 12
C2 I9 O8 F2
11
D0 I10
DO NOT COPYMUX4IN3B
D1
D2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.7  Multiplexers  369
Ta b l e 5 - 4 0  ABEL program for a specialized 4-input, 3-bit multiplexer.
module mux4in3b
title 'Specialized 4-input, 3-bit Multiplexer'DO NOT COPY
mux4in3b device 'P16L8';
" Input and output pins
S2..S0  pin 16..18;  " Select inputs
A0..A2, B0..B2, C0..C2, D0..D2  pin 1..9, 11, 13, 14;  " Bus inputs
DO NOT COPY
F0..F2  pin 19, 15, 12 istype 'com'; " Bus outputs
" Sets
SEL = [S2..S0];
A = [A0..A2];
B = [B0..B2];DO NOT COPY
C = [C0..C2];
D = [D0..D2];
F = [F0..F2];
equations
WHEN (SEL== 0) # (SEL== 2) # (SEL== 4) # (SEL== 6) THEN F = A;DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN (SEL== 1) # (SEL== 7) THEN F = B;
ELSE WHEN (SEL== 3) THEN F = C;
ELSE WHEN (SEL== 5) THEN F = D;
end mux4in3b
DO NOT COPY
EASIEST, BUT As you’ve seen, it’s very easy to program a PLD to perform decoder and multiplexer
NOT CHEAPEST functions. Still, if you need the logic function of a standard decoder or multiplexer,
DO NOT COPY
it’s usually less costly to use a standard MSI chip than it is to use a PLD. The PLD-
based approach is best if the multiplexer has some nonstandard functional require-
ments, or if you think you may have to change its function as a result of debugging.
DO NOT COPY
5.7.5 Multiplexers in VHDL
Multiplexers are very easy to describe in VHDL. In the dataflow style of
architecture, the  SELECT  statement provides the required functionality, as shown
in Table 5-41, the VHDL description of 4-input, 8-bit multiplexer.
DO NOT COPYIn a behavioral architecture, a  CASE  statement is used. For example,
Table 5-42 shows a process-based architecture for the same  mux4in8b  entity.
As in ABEL, it is very easy to customize the selection criteria in a VHDL
multiplexer program. For example, Table 5-43 is a behavioral-style program for
a specialized 4-input, 18-bit multiplexer with the selection criteria of Table 5-39.
DO NOT COPY
In each example, if the select inputs are not valid (e.g., contain  U’s or  X’s),
the output bus is set to “unknown” to help catch errors during simulation.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

370  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 4 1  Dataflow VHDL program for a 4-input, 8-bit multiplexer.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity mux4in8b is
port (
S: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 downto 0);  -- Select inputs, 0-3 ==> A-D
A, B, C, D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 8); -- Data bus input
DO NOT COPY
Y: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 8)  -- Data bus output
);
end mux4in8b;
architecture mux4in8b of mux4in8b is
DO NOT COPYbegin
with S select Y <=
A when "00",
B when "01",
C when "10",
D when "11",
DO NOT COPY(others => 'U') when others; -- this creates an 8-bit vector of 'U'
end mux4in8b;
Ta b l e 5 - 4 2  Behavioral architecture for a 4-input, 8-bit multiplexer.
DO NOT COPY
architecture mux4in8p of mux4in8b is
begin
process(S, A, B, C, D)
begin
case S is
DO NOT COPY
when "00" => Y <= A;
when "01" => Y <= B;
when "10" => Y <= C;
when "11" => Y <= D;
when others => Y <= (others => 'U');  -- 8-bit vector of 'U'
DO NOT COPYend case;
end process;
end mux4in8p;
5.8 EXCLUSIVE OR Gates and Parity Circuits
DO NOT COPY
5.8.1  EXCLUSIVE OR  and  EXCLUSIVE NOR  Gates
Exclusive OR (XOR) An Exclusive OR (XOR)  gate is a 2-input gate whose output is 1 if exactly one
Exclusive NOR (XNOR) of its inputs is 1. Stated another way, an  XOR  gate produces a 1 output if its
Equivalence inputs are different. An Exclusive NOR (XNOR) or Equivalence  gate is just the
DO NOT COPY
opposite—it produces a 1 output if its inputs are the same. A truth table for these
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.8  EXCLUSIVE OR Gates and Parity Circuits  371
Ta b l e 5 - 4 3  Behavioral VHDL program for a specialized 4-input, 3-bit multiplexer.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity mux4in3b is
port (
S: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);  -- Select inputs, 0-7 ==> ABACADAB
A, B, C, D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 18); -- Data bus inputs
DO NOT COPY
Y: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 18)  -- Data bus output
);
end mux4in3b;
architecture mux4in3p of mux4in3b is
beginDO NOT COPY
process(S, A, B, C, D)
variable i: INTEGER;
begin
case S is
when "000" | "010" | "100" | "110" => Y <= A;
DO NOT COPYwhen "001" | "111" => Y <= B;
when "011" => Y <= C;
when "101" => Y <= D;
when others => Y <= (others => 'U'); -- 18-bit vector of 'U'
end case;
end process;
DO NOT COPY
end mux4in3p;
functions is shown in Table 5-44. The  XOR  operation is sometimes denoted by
the symbol “⊕”, that is, ⊕
DO NOT COPY
X  ⊕  Y  =  X′  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  Y′
Although  EXCLUSIVE OR  is not one of the basic functions of switching algebra,
discrete  XOR  gates are fairly commonly used in practice. Most switching
technologies cannot perform the  XOR  function directly; instead, they use
DO NOT COPY
multigate designs like the ones shown in Figure 5-70.
Ta b l e  5 - 4 4
X  ⊕ Y (X  ⊕ Y)′
X  Y (XOR) (XNOR) Truth table for  XOR
DO NOT COPYand  XNOR  functions.
0  0  0  1
0  1  1  0
1  0  1  0
1  1  0  1
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

372  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
(a) X
DO NOT COPY
F = X ¯ Y
Y
DO NOT COPY
(b) X
Figure 5-70
Multigate designs for F = X ¯ Y
the 2-inputDO NOT COPY  XOR
function: (a)  AND-OR ;
(b) three-level  NAND. Y
DO NOT COPY(a)
(b)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-71  Equivalent symbols for (a)  XOR  gates; (b)  XNOR  gates.
The logic symbols for XOR  and  XNOR  functions are shown in Figure 5-71.
There are four equivalent symbols for each function. All of these alternatives are
DO NOT COPYa consequence of a simple rule:
•  Any two signals (inputs or output) of an  XOR  or  XNOR  gate may be
complemented without changing the resulting logic function.
In bubble-to-bubble logic design, we choose the symbol that is most expressive
DO NOT COPY
of the logic function being performed.
74x86 Four  XOR  gates are provided in a single 14-pin SSI IC, the  74x86  shown in
Figure 5-72. New SSI logic families do not offer  XNOR  gates, although they are
readily available in FPGA and ASIC libraries and as primitives in HDLs.
DO NOT COPY
1 9
3 8
Figure 5-72
2 10
Pinouts of the 74x86
quadruple 2-input
Exclusive OR  gate. 4 12
DO NOT COPY6 11
5  13 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.8  EXCLUSIVE OR Gates and Parity Circuits  373
(a) I1
I2
I3
DO NOT COPY
I4
ODD
IN
DO NOT COPY
(b) I1
I2
I3
DO NOT COPYI4
ODD
Figure 5-73
Cascading  XOR
gates: (a) daisy-chain
connection; (b) tree
DO NOT COPYIM
structure.
IN
5.8.2 Parity Circuits
As shown in Figure 5-73(a),  n  XOR  gates may be cascaded to form a circuit with
DO NOT COPY
n  +  1 inputs and a single output. This is called an  odd-parity circuit, because its odd-parity circuit
output is 1 if an odd number of its inputs are 1. The circuit in (b) is also an odd-
parity circuit, but it’s faster because its gates are arranged in a tree-like structure.
If the output of either circuit is inverted, we get an  even-parity circuit, whose even-parity circuit
output is 1 if an even number of its inputs are 1.DO NOT COPY
5.8.3 The 74x280 9-Bit Parity Generator
Rather than build a multibit parity circuit with discrete  XOR  gates, it is more
economical to put all of the  XORs in a single MSI package with just the primary
DO NOT COPY
inputs and outputs available at the external pins. The  74x280  9-bit parity 74x280
generator, shown in Figure 5-74, is such a device. It has nine inputs and two
outputs that indicate whether an even or odd number of inputs are 1.
5.8.4 Parity-Checking ApplicationsDO NOT COPY
In Section 2.15, we described error-detecting codes that use an extra bit, called
a parity bit, to detect errors in the transmission and storage of data. In an even-
parity code, the parity bit is chosen so that the total number of 1 bits in a code
word is even. Parity circuits like the 74x280 are used both to generate the correct
value of the parity bit when a code word is stored or transmitted, and to checkDO NOT COPY
the parity bit when a code word is retrieved or received.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

374  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x280
(b) 8
A
9
DO NOT COPYB
10
C
11 5
D EVEN
12
E
13 6
F ODD
1
G
DO NOT COPY(a) (8) 2
A H
(9) 4
B I
(10)
C
(11)
DO NOT COPYD
(12)  (5)
E EVEN
(13)
F
(1)
G
DO NOT COPY(2) (6)
H ODD
(4)
I
Figure 5-74  The 74x280 9-bit odd/even parity generator: (a) logic diagram,
including pin numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line
DO NOT COPY
package; (b) traditional logic symbol.
Figure 5-75 shows how a parity circuit might be used to detect errors in the
memory of a microprocessor system. The memory stores 8-bit bytes, plus a
parity bit for each byte. The microprocessor uses a bidirectional bus  D[0:7]  to
DO NOT COPY
transfer data to and from the memory. Two control lines,  RD  and  WR, are used to
indicate whether a read or write operation is desired, and an  ERROR  signal is
asserted to indicate parity errors during read operations. Complete details of the
memory chips, such as addressing inputs, are not shown; memory chips are
DO NOT COPYdescribed in detail in \chapref{MEMORY}.
SPEEDING UP THE If each  XOR  gate in Figure 5-74 were built using discrete  NAND  gates as in
XOR TREE Figure 5-70(b), the 74x280 would be pretty slow, having a propagation delay
DO NOT COPY
equivalent to 4  ⋅  3  +  1, or 13,  NAND  gates. Instead, a typical implementation of the
74x280 uses a 4-wide  AND-OR-INVERT gate to perform the function of each shaded
pair of XOR gates in the figure with about the same delay as a single  NAND gate. The
A–I inputs are buffered through two levels of inverters so that each input presents just
one unit load to the circuit driving it. Thus, the total propagation delay through this
DO NOT COPYimplementation of the 74x280 is about the same as five inverting gates, not 13.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.8  EXCLUSIVE OR Gates and Parity Circuits  375
74x08
4
6 ERROR
5 
D[0:7]DO NOT COPYU1
74LS04
RD 1 2 RD_L
WR
U3
74x541
74x280 Memory Chips
DO NOT COPY1
D0 8 G1
A READ 19
D1 9 G2
B WRITE
D2 10 D0 DO0 2 18 D0
C DIN0 DOUT0 A1 Y1
D3 11 5 D1 DO1 3 17 D1
D EVEN DIN1 DOUT1 A2 Y2
D4 12 D2 DO2 4 16 D2
DO NOT COPYE DIN2 DOUT2 A3 Y3
D5 13 6 PI D3 DO3 5 15 D3
F ODD DIN3 DOUT3 A4 Y4
D6 1 D4 DO4 6 14 D4
G DIN4 DOUT4 A5 Y5
74x08 D7 2 D5 DO5 7 13 D5
1 H DIN5 DOUT5 A6 Y6
3 RP 4 D6 DO6 8 12 D6
2  I DIN6 DOUT6 A7 Y7
U2 D7 DO7 9 11 D7
DIN7 DOUT7 A8 Y8
DO NOT COPYU1
PIN POUT U4
PO
Figure 5-75  Parity generation and checking for an 8-bit-wide memory system.
DO NOT COPY
To store a byte into the memory chips, we specify an address (not shown),
place the byte on  D[0–7], generate its parity bit on  PIN, and assert  WR. The  AND
gate on the I  input of the 74x280 ensures that  I is 0 except during read operations,
so that during writes the ’280’s output depends only on the parity of the  D-bus
DO NOT COPY
data. The ’280’s  ODD  output is connected to  PIN, so that the total number of 1s
stored is even.
To retrieve a byte, we specify an address (not shown) and assert  RD; the
byte value appears on  DOUT[0–7]  and its parity appears on  POUT. A 74x541
drives the byte onto the  D  bus, and the ’280 checks its parity. If the parity of the
DO NOT COPY
9-bit word  DOUT[0–7],POUT  is odd during a read, the  ERROR  signal is
asserted.
Parity circuits are also used with error-correcting codes such as the
Hamming codes described in Section 2.15.3. We showed the parity-check
matrix for a 7-bit Hamming code in Figure 2-13 on page 59. We can correctDO NOT COPY
errors in this code as shown in Figure 5-76. A 7-bit word, possibly containing an
error, is presented on  DU[1–7]. Three 74x280s compute the parity of the three
bit-groups defined by the parity-check matrix. The outputs of the ’280s form the
syndrome, which is the number of the erroneous input bit, if any. A 74x138 is
used to decode the syndrome. If the syndrome is zero, theDO NOT COPY  NOERROR_L  signal
is asserted (this signal also could be named  ERROR). Otherwise, the erroneous
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

376  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
DU[1:7]
74x280
DO NOT COPYDU7 8
A
DU5 9
B
DU3 10
C
DU1 11 5
D EVEN
12 NOERROR_L
E
DO NOT COPY13 6
F ODD 74x86 DC_L[1:7]
1 DU1 1
G 3 DC1_L
2 E1_L 2
H
4
I U5
U1
74x86
DU2 
DO NOT COPY74x280 4 DC2_L
6
E2_L 5
DU7 8
A
DU6 9 U5
B +5V
DU3 10 74x86
C DU3 10
DU2 11 5 8 DC3_L
D EVEN E3_L 9
DO NOT COPY12 R
E 74x138
13 6 U5
F ODD 15
1 6  Y0 74x86
G G1 14 DU4 13
2 4 Y1 11DC4_L
H G2A 13 E4_L12
4 5 Y2
I G2B 12
U5
DO NOT COPYU2 Y3
11
SYN0 1 Y4 74x86
74x280 A 10 DU5 1
SYN1 2 Y5 3 DC5_L
DU7 8 B 9 E5_L 2
A SYN2 3 Y6
DU6 9 C 7
B Y7 U6
DU5 10
C 74x86
DO NOT COPYDU4 11 5 U4 DU6 4
D EVEN 6 DC6_L
12 E6_L 5
E
13 6
F ODD U6
1
G 74x86
2 DU7 10
H 8 DC7_L
DO NOT COPY4 E7_L 9
I
U3
U6
Figure 5-76  Error-correcting circuit for a 7-bit Hamming code.
DO NOT COPY
bit is corrected by complementing it. The corrected code word appears on the
DC_L  bus.
Note that the active-low outputs of the ’138 led us to use an active-low
DC_L  bus. If we required an active-high  DC  bus, we could have put a discrete
inverter on each  XOR  input or output, or used a decoder with active-high
DO NOT COPY
outputs, or used  XNOR  gates.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.8  EXCLUSIVE OR Gates and Parity Circuits  377
5.8.5 Exclusive OR Gates and Parity Circuits in ABEL and PLDs
The  Exclusive OR  function is denoted in ABEL by the  $  operator, and its
complement, the  Exclusive NOR  function, is denoted by  !$. In principle, these
DO NOT COPY
operators may be used freely in ABEL expressions. For example, you could
specify a PLD output equivalent to the 74x280’s  EVEN  output using the
following ABEL equation:
EVEN = !(A $ B $ C $ D $ E $ F $ G $ H $ I);
DO NOT COPY
However, most PLDs realize expressions using two-level  AND-OR  logic and
have little if any capability of realizing  XOR  functions directly. Unfortunately,
n−1 
the Karnaugh map of an  n-input  XOR  function is a checkerboard with 2 prime
implicants. Thus, the sum-of-products realization of the simple equation above
requires 256 product terms, well beyond the capability of any PLD.DO NOT COPY
As we’ll see in Section 10.5.2, some PLDs can realize a two-input XOR
function directly in a three-level structure combining two independent sums of
products. This structure turns out to be useful in the design of counters. To create
larger  XOR  functions, however, a board-level designer must normally use a
DO NOT COPY
specialized parity generator/checker component like the 74x280, and an ASIC
designer must combine individual  XOR  gates in a multilevel parity tree similar
to Figure 5-73(b) on page 373.
5.8.6 Exclusive OR Gates and Parity Circuits in VHDL
DO NOT COPY
Like ABEL, VHDL provides primitive operators,  xor  and  xnor, for specifying
XOR  and  XNOR  functions (xnor  was introduced in VHDL-93). For example,
Table 5-45 is a dataflow-style program for a 3-input  XOR  device that uses the
xor  primitive. It’s also possible to specify  XOR  or parity functions behaviorally,
as Table 5-46 does for a 9-input parity function similar to the 74x280.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 4 5  Dataflow-style VHDL program for a 3-input  XOR  device.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
DO NOT COPY
entity vxor3 is
port (
A, B, C: in STD_LOGIC;
Y: out STD_LOGIC
DO NOT COPY);
end vxor3;
architecture vxor3 of vxor3 is
begin
Y <= A xor B xor C;
DO NOT COPY
end vxor3;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

378  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 4 6  Behavioral VHDL program for a 9-input parity checker.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity parity9 is
port (
I: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 9);
EVEN, ODD: out STD_LOGIC
DO NOT COPY
);
end parity9;
architecture parity9p of parity9 is
begin
DO NOT COPYprocess (I)
variable p : STD_LOGIC;
variable j : INTEGER;
begin
p := I(1);
for j in 2 to 9 loop
DO NOT COPYif I(j) = '1' then p := not p; end if;
end loop;
ODD <= p;
EVEN <= not p;
end process;
end parity9p;
DO NOT COPY
When a VHDL program containing large  XOR  functions is synthesized,
the synthesis tool will do the best it can to realize the function in the targeted
device technology. There’s no magic—if we try to target the VHDL program in
DO NOT COPY
Table 5-46 to a 16V8 PLD, it still won’t fit!
Typical ASIC and FPGA libraries contain two- and three-input  XOR  and
XNOR  functions as primitives. In CMOS ASICs, these primitives are usually
realized quite efficiently at the transistor level using transmission gates as shown
DO NOT COPYin Exercises 5.73 and 5.75. Fast and compact  XOR  trees can be built using these
primitives. However, typical VHDL synthesis tools are not be smart enough to
create an efficient tree structure from a behavioral program like Table 5-46.
Instead, we can use a structural program to get exactly what we want.
For example, Table 5-47 is a structural VHDL program for a 9-input  XOR
DO NOT COPYfunction that is equivalent to the 74x280 of Figure 5-74(a) in structure as well as
function. In this example, we’ve used the previously defined  vxor3  component
as the basic building block of the  XOR  tree. In an ASIC, we would replace the
vxor3  with a 3-input  XOR  primitive from the ASIC library. Also, if a 3-input
XNOR  were available, we could eliminate the explicit inversion for  Y3N  and
DO NOT COPY
instead use the  XNOR  for  U5, using the noninverted  Y3  signal as its last input.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  379
Ta b l e 5 - 4 7  Structural VHDL program for a 74x280-like parity checker.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity V74x280 is
port (
I: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 9);
EVEN, ODD: out STD_LOGIC
DO NOT COPY
);
end V74x280;
architecture V74x280s of V74x280 is
component vxor3
port (A, B, C: in STD_LOGIC; Y: out STD_LOGIC);DO NOT COPY
end component;
signal Y1, Y2, Y3, Y3N: STD_LOGIC;
begin
U1: vxor3 port map (I(1), I(2), I(3), Y1);
U2: vxor3 port map (I(4), I(5), I(6), Y2);
U3: vxor3 port map (I(7), I(8), I(9), Y3);DO NOT COPY
Y3N <= not Y3;
U4: vxor3 port map (Y1, Y2, Y3, ODD);
U5: vxor3 port map (Y1, Y2, Y3N, EVEN);
end V74x280s;
DO NOT COPY
Our final example is a VHDL version of the Hamming decoder circuit of
Figure 5-76. A function  syndrome(DU)  is defined to return the 3-bit syndrome
of a 7-bit uncorrected data input vector  DU. In the “main” process, the corrected
data output vector  DC  is initially set equal to  DU. The  CONV_INTEGER  function,
DO NOT COPY
introduced in \secref{VHDLconv}, is used to convert the 3-bit syndrome to an
integer. If the syndrome is nonzero, the corresponding bit of  DC  is complemented
to correct the assumed 1-bit error. If the syndrome is zero, either no error or an
undetectable error has occurred; the output  NOERROR  is set accordingly.
DO NOT COPY
5.9 Comparators
Comparing two binary words for equality is a commonly used operation in com-
puter systems and device interfaces. For example, in Figure 2-7(a) on page 52,
we showed a system structure in which devices are enabled by comparing a
DO NOT COPY
“device select” word with a predetermined “device ID.” A circuit that compares
two binary words and indicates whether they are equal is called a  comparator. comparator
Some comparators interpret their input words as signed or unsigned numbers
and also indicate an arithmetic relationship (greater or less than) between the
words. These devices are often calledDO NOT COPY  magnitude comparators. magnitude comparator
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

380  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 4 8  Behavioral VHDL program for Hamming error correction.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity hamcorr is
port (
DU: IN STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7);
DO NOT COPY
DC: OUT STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7);
NOERROR: OUT STD_LOGIC
);
end hamcorr;
DO NOT COPYarchitecture hamcorr of hamcorr is
function syndrome (D: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR)
return STD_LOGIC_VECTOR is
variable SYN: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
begin
SYN(0) := D(1) xor D(3) xor D(5) xor D(7);
DO NOT COPYSYN(1) := D(2) xor D(3) xor D(6) xor D(7);
SYN(2) := D(4) xor D(5) xor D(6) xor D(7);
return(SYN);
end syndrome;
begin
DO NOT COPY
process (DU)
variable SYN: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
variable i: INTEGER;
begin
DC <= DU;
DO NOT COPYi := CONV_INTEGER(syndrome(DU));
if i = 0 then NOERROR <= '1';
else NOERROR <= '0'; DC(i) <= not DU(i); end if;
end process;
end hamcorr;
DO NOT COPY
5.9.1 Comparator Structure
EXCLUSIVE OR  and  EXCLUSIVE NOR  gates may be viewed as 1-bit compara-
tors. Figure 5-77(a) shows an interpretation of the 74x86  XOR  gate as a 1-bit
comparator. The active-high output,  DIFF, is asserted if the inputs are different.
DO NOT COPY
The outputs of four  XOR  gates are  ORed to create a 4-bit comparator in (b). The
DIFF  output is asserted if any of the input-bit pairs are different. Given enough
XOR  gates and wide enough  OR  gates, comparators with any number of input
bits can be built.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  381
74x86
1
A0 3 DIFF0
(b)
2
B0
74x02
DO NOT COPYU1
2
4 1 DF01_L
A1 6 DIFF1 3
5 74x00
B1 1
U2 3
U1 2 DIFF
(a) 9 74x02
A2 8 DIFF2 5
U3
10 4 DF23_L
DO NOT COPYB2 6
1/4 74x86 U1
U2
1 12
A0 3 A3 11 DIFF3
2 DIFF 13
B0 B3
U1  U1
DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-77  Comparators using the 74x86: (a) 1-bit comparator; (b) 4-bit comparator.
AN ITERATIVE The  n-bit comparators in the preceding subsection might be called  parallel compar-
DO NOT COPY
COMPARATOR ators because they look at each pair of input bits simultaneously and deliver the 1-bit
comparison results in parallel to an  n-input  OR  or  AND  function. It is also possible
to design an “iterative comparator” that looks at its bits one at a time using a small,
fixed amount of logic per bit. Before looking at the iterative comparator design, you
should understand the general class of “iterative circuits” described in the next
DO NOT COPY
subsection.
5.9.2 Iterative Circuits
An DO NOT COPYiterative circuit  is a special type of combinational circuit, with the structure iterative circuit
shown in Figure 5-78. The circuit contains  n  identical modules, each of which primary inputs and
has both  primary inputs and outputs  and  cascading inputs and outputs. The left- outputs
most cascading inputs are called  boundary inputs  and are connected to fixed cascading inputs and
logic values in most iterative circuits. The rightmost cascading outputs are called outputs
boundary outputsDO NOT COPY  and usually provide important information. boundary outputs
Iterative circuits are well suited to problems that can be solved by a simple
iterative algorithm:
1.  Set  C0  to its initial value and set  i  to 0.
2.DO NOT COPY  Use  C  and  PI  to determine the values of  PO  and  C .
i  i  i  i+1
3.  Increment  i.
4.  If  i  <  n, go to step 2.
In an iterative circuit, the loop of steps 2–4 is “unwound” by providing a separate
DO NOT COPY
combinational circuit that performs step 2 for each value of  i.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

382  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
primary inputs
PI cascading PI cascading PI
DO NOT COPY0  1 n–1
input output
PI  PI PI
C0  C1 C 2 Cn–1  Cn
DO NOT COPYCI  module CO CI  module CO CI  module CO
PO PO PO
boundary boundary
inputs outputs
DO NOT COPYPO0 PO 1 POn–1
primary outputs
Figure 5-78  General structure of an iterative combinational circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Examples of iterative circuits are the comparator circuit in the next subsec-
tion and the ripple adder in Section 5.10.2. The 74x85 4-bit comparator and the
74x283 4-bit adder are examples of MSI circuits that can be used as the individ-
ual modules in a larger iterative circuit. In \secref{itvsseq} we’ll explore the
DO NOT COPY
relationship between iterative circuits and corresponding sequential circuits that
execute the 4-step algorithm above in discrete time steps.
5.9.3 An Iterative Comparator Circuit
Two  n-bit values  X  and  Y  can be compared one bit at a time using a single
DO NOT COPY
bit  EQi  at each step to keep track of whether all of the bit-pairs have been equal
so far:
1.  Set  EQ0  to 1 and set  i  to 0.
2.  If  EQi  is 1 and  Xi  and  Yi  are equal, set  EQi + 1  to 1. Else set  EQi+1  to 0.
DO NOT COPY
3.  Increment  i.
4.  If  i  <  n, go to step 2.
Figure 5-79 shows a corresponding iterative circuit. Note that this circuit has no
primary outputs; the boundary output is all that interests us. Other iterative cir-
DO NOT COPY
cuits, such as the ripple adder of Section 5.10.2, have primary outputs of interest.
Given a choice between the iterative comparator circuit in this subsection
and one of the parallel comparators shown previously, you would probably
prefer the parallel comparator. The iterative comparator saves little if any cost,
DO NOT COPYand it’s very slow because the cascading signals need time to “ripple” from the
leftmost to the rightmost module. Iterative circuits that process more than one bit
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  383
X0  Y0 X1  Y1 X2  Y2  X(N–1) Y(N–1)
(b)
X Y X Y X Y X Y
DO NOT COPY
CMP CMP CMP CMP
EQ1 EQ2 EQ3  EQ(N–1) EQN
1 EQI  EQO EQI  EQO EQI  EQO EQI  EQO
DO NOT COPYX  Y CMP
(a) 
Figure 5-79
An iterative
EQO
comparator circuit:
DO NOT COPYEQI (a) module for one bit;
(b) complete circuit.
at a time, using modules like the 74x85 4-bit comparator and 74x283 4-bit adder,
are much more likely to be used in practical designs.
DO NOT COPY
5.9.4 Standard MSI Comparators
Comparator applications are common enough that several MSI comparators
have been developed commercially. The  74x85  is a 4-bit comparator with the 74x85
logic  symbol  shown  in  Figure 5-80.  It  provides  a  greater-than  output
DO NOT COPY
(AGTBOUT) and a less-than output (ALTBOUT) as well as an equal output
(AEQBOUT). The ’85 also has  cascading inputs  (AGTBIN,  ALTBIN,  AEQBIN) cascading inputs
for combining multiple ’85s to create comparators for more than four bits. Both
the cascading inputs and the outputs are arranged in a 1-out-of-3 code, since in
normal operation exactly one input and one output should be asserted.
DO NOT COPY
The cascading inputs are defined so the outputs of an ’85 that compares
less-significant bits are connected to the inputs of an ’85 that compares more-
74x85
Figure 5-80
DO NOT COPY2 7 
ALTBIN ALTBOUT Traditional logic symbol for
3 6
AEQBIN AEQBOUT the 74x85 4-bit comparator.
4 5
AGTBIN AGTBOUT
10
A0
9
B0
DO NOT COPY12
A1
11
B1
13
A2
14
B2
15
A3
DO NOT COPY1
B3
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

384  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
+5 V
R
DO NOT COPY74x85 74x85 74x85
2 7 XLTY4 2 7 XLTY8 2 7 XLTY
ALTBIN ALTBOUT ALTBIN ALTBOUT ALTBIN ALTBOUT
3 6 XEQY4 3 6 XEQY8 3 6 XEQY
AEQBIN AEQBOUT AEQBIN AEQBOUT AEQBIN AEQBOUT
4 5 XGTY4 4 5 XGTY8 4 5 XGTY
AGTBIN AGTBOUT AGTBIN AGTBOUT AGTBIN AGTBOUT
XD0 10 XD4 10 XD8 10
A0 A0 A0
YD0 9 YD4 9 YD8 9
B0 B0 B0
DO NOT COPYXD1 12 XD5 12 XD9 12
A1 A1 A1
YD1 11 YD5 11 YD9 11
B1 B1 B1
XD2 13 XD6 13 XD10 13
A2 A2 A2
YD2 14 YD6 14 YD10 14
B2 B2 B2
XD3 15 XD7 15 XD11 15
A3 A3 A3
YD3 1 YD7 1 YD11 1
DO NOT COPYB3 B3 B3
XD[011]
YD[011]
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-81  A 12-bit comparator using 74x85s.
significant bits, as shown in Figure 5-81 for a 12-bit comparator. This is an iter-
ative circuit according to the definition in Section 5.9.2. Each ’85 develops its
cascading outputs roughly according to the following pseudo-logic equations:
74x682
DO NOT COPY
2 AGTBOUT  =  (A  >  B)  +  (A  =  B)  ⋅  AGTBIN
P0
3 Q0 AEQBOUT  =  (A  =  B)  ⋅  AEQBIN
4
P1
5 ALTBOUT  =  (A  <  B)  +  (A  =  B)  ⋅  ALTBIN
Q1
6
P2
7DO NOT COPYThe parenthesized subexpressions above are not normal logic expressions, but
Q2 19
8 P EQ Q indicate an arithmetic comparison that occurs between the  A3–A0  and  B3–B0
P3
9 inputs. In other words,  AGTBOUT  is asserted if  A  >  B  or if  A  =  B  and  AGTBIN
Q3
11 P4 is asserted (if the higher-order bits are equal, we have to look at the lower-order
12
Q4 1 bits for the answer). We’ll see this kind of expression again when we look at
13 P GT Q
DO NOT COPYP5 ABEL comparator design in Section 5.9.5. The arithmetic comparisons can be
14
Q5
15 expressed using normal logic expressions, for example,
P6
16
Q6 (A  >  B)  =  A3  ⋅  B3′+
17
P7
18 (A3  ⊕  B3)′  ⋅  A2  ⋅  B2′  +
Q7
DO NOT COPY
(A3  ⊕  B3)′  ⋅  (A2  ⊕  B2)′  ⋅  A1  ⋅  B1′  +
Figure 5-82
(A3  ⊕  B3)′  ⋅  (A2  ⊕  B2)′  ⋅  (A1  ⊕  B1)′  ⋅  A0  ⋅  B0′
Traditional logic
symbol for the Such expressions must be substituted into the pseudo-logic equations above to
74x682 8-bit obtain genuine logic equations for the comparator outputs.
comparator.DO NOT COPY
Several 8-bit MSI comparators are also available. The simplest of these is
the  74x682, whose logic symbol is shown in Figure 5-82 and whose internal
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  385
Figure 5-83
Logic diagram for the
DO NOT COPY74x682 8-bit comparator,
including pin numbers for
a standard 20-pin dual
in-line package.
DO NOT COPY
(19)
PEQQ_L
DO NOT COPY
(3)
Q0 DO NOT COPY
(2)
P0 
(5)
Q1 
(4)
P1 DO NOT COPY
(7)
Q2 
(6)
P2
DO NOT COPY(9)
Q3 
(8) (1)
P3  PGTQ_L
(12)
Q4 
P4 DO NOT COPY(11)
(14)
Q5 
(13)
P5 
DO NOT COPY(16)
Q6 
(15)
P6 
(18)
Q7 
DO NOT COPY(17)
P7 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

386  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
logic diagram is shown in Figure 5-83. The top half of the circuit checks the two
8-bit input words for equality. Each  XNOR-gate output is asserted if its inputs
are equal, and the  PEQQ_L output is asserted if all eight input-bit pairs are equal.
DO NOT COPY
The bottom half of the circuit compares the input words arithmetically, and
asserts  /PGTQ  if  P[7–0]  >  Q[7–0].
Unlike the 74x85, the 74x682 does not have cascading inputs. Also unlike
the ’85, the ’682 does not provide a “less than” output. However, any desired
condition, including  ≤  and  ≥, can be formulated as a function of the  PEQQ_L
DO NOT COPY
and  PGTQ_L  outputs, as shown in Figure 5-84.
PNEQ
Figure 5-84
74x04
Arithmetic conditions
1 2
DO NOT COPYderived from 74x682 PEQQ
outputs. U2
74x04
3 4
PGTQ
U2
74x682
DO NOT COPY
74x00
1
3
2 PGEQ
19 U3
PEQQ
PLEQ
DO NOT COPY
1
PGTQ 74x08
1
3
2 PLTQ
U1  U4
DO NOT COPY
COMPARING The individual 1-bit comparators (XNOR  gates) in the ’682 are drawn in the opposite
COMPARATORS sense as the examples of the preceding subsection—outputs are asserted for  equal
inputs and then  ANDed, rather than asserted for  different  inputs and then  ORed. We
can look at a comparator’s function either way, as long as we’re consistent.
DO NOT COPY
5.9.5 Comparators in ABEL and PLDs
Comparing two sets for equality or inequality is very easy to do in ABEL using
DO NOT COPYthe “==” or “!=” operator in a relational expression. The only restriction is that
the two sets must have an equal number of elements. Thus, given the relational
expression “A!=B” where  A  and  B  are sets each with  n  elements, the compiler
generates the logic expression
(A1 $ B1)  # (A2 $ B2)  # ... # (An $ Bn)
DO NOT COPY
The logic expression for “A==B”is just the complement of the one above.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  387
In the preceding logic expression, it takes one 2-input  XOR  function to
compare each bit. Since a 2-input  XOR  function can be realized as a sum of two
product terms, the complete expression can be realized in a PLD as a relatively
DO NOT COPY
modest sum of 2n  product terms:
(A1&!B1 # !A1&B1) # (A2&!B2 # !A2&&B2) # ... # (An&!Bn # !An&&Bn)
Although ABEL has relational operators for less-than and greater-than
comparisons, the resulting logic expressions are not so small or easy to derive.
DO NOT COPY
For example, consider the relational expression “A<B”, where  [An..A1]  and
[Bn..B1]  are sets with  n  elements. To construct the corresponding logic expres-
sion, ABEL first constructs  n  equations of the form
Li = (!Ai & (Bi # Li-1) # (Ai & Bi & Li-1)
DO NOT COPY
for  i  = 1 to  n  and  L0  = 0 by definition. This is, in effect, an iterative definition of
the less-than function, starting with the least-significant bit. Each  Li  equation
says that, as of bit  i,  A  is less than  B  if  Ai  is 0 and  Bi  is 1 or  A  was less than  B  as
of the previous bit, or if  Ai  and  Bi  are both 1 and  A  was less than  B  as of the
previous bit.DO NOT COPY
The logic expression for “A<B” is simply the equation for  Ln. So, after
creating the  n  equations above, ABEL collapses them into a single equation for
Ln  involving only elements of  A  and  B. It does this by substituting the  Ln-1
equation into the right-hand side of the  Ln  equation, then substituting the  Ln-2
DO NOT COPY
equation into this result, and so on, until substituting 0 for  L0. Finally, it derives
a minimal sum-of-products expression from the result.
Collapsing an iterative circuit into a two-level sum-of-products realization
usually creates an exponential expansion of product terms. The “<“ comparison
n
function follows this pattern, requiring 2 −1 product terms for an  n-bit compara-
DO NOT COPY
tor. Thus, comparators larger than a few bits cannot be realized practically in one
pass through a PLD.
The results for “>” comparators are identical, of course, and logic expres-
sions for “>=”and “<=” are at least as bad, being the complements of the
expressions for “DO NOT COPY<” and “>”. If we use a PLD with output polarity control, the
inversion is free and the number of product terms is the same; otherwise, the
n n−1
minimal number of product terms after inverting is 2 +2 −1.
5.9.6 Comparators in VHDL
VHDL has comparison operators for all of its built-in types.DO NOT COPY  Equality (=)  and equality, =
inequality (/=)  operators apply to all types; for array and record types, the oper- inequality, /=
ands must have equal size and structure, and the operands are compared
component by component. We have used the equality operator to compare a
signal or signal vector with a constant value in many examples in this chapter. If
DO NOT COPY
we compare two signals or variables, the synthesis engine generates equations
similar to ABEL’s in the preceding subsection.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

388  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
VHDL’s other comparison operators,  >,  <,  >=, and  <=, apply only to integer
types, enumerated types (such as  STD_LOGIC), and one-dimensional arrays of
enumeration or integer types. Integer order from smallest to largest is the natural
DO NOT COPY
ordering, from minus infinity to plus infinity, and enumerated types use the
ordering in which the elements of the type were defined, from first to last (unless
you explicitly change the enumeration encoding using a command specific to
the synthesis engine, in which case the ordering is that of your encoding).
The ordering for array types is defined iteratively, starting with the  leftmost
DO NOT COPY
element in each array. Arrays are always compared from left to right, regardless
of the order of their index range (“to” or “downto”). The order of the leftmost
pair of unequal elements is the order of the array. If the arrays have unequal
lengths and all the elements of the shorter array match the corresponding
DO NOT COPYelements of the longer one, then the shorter array is considered to be the smaller.
The result of all this is that the built-in comparison operators compare
equal-length arrays of type  BIT_VECTOR  or  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  as if they
represented unsigned integers. If the arrays have different lengths, then the oper-
ators do  not  yield a valid arithmetic comparison, what you’d get by extending the
DO NOT COPYshorter array with zeroes on the left; more on this in a moment.
Table 5-49 is a VHDL program that produces all of the comparison outputs
for comparing two 8-bit unsigned integers. Since the two input vectors  A  and  B
have equal lengths, the program produces the desired results.
Ta b l e 5 - 4 9DO NOT COPY
library IEEE;
Behavioral VHDL use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
program for comparing
8-bit unsigned integers. entity vcompare is
port (
DO NOT COPYA, B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
EQ, NE, GT, GE, LT, LE: out STD_LOGIC
);
end vcompare;
architecture vcompare_arch of vcompare is
DO NOT COPYbegin
process (A, B)
begin
EQ <= '0'; NE <= '0'; GT <= '0'; GE <= '0'; LT <= '0'; LE <= '0';
if A = B then EQ <= '1'; end if;
if A /= B then NE <= '1'; end if;
DO NOT COPY
if A > B then GT <= '1'; end if;
if A >= B then GE <= '1'; end if;
if A < B then LT <= '1'; end if;
if A <= B then LE <= '1'; end if;
end process;
DO NOT COPYend vcompare_arch
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 5.9  Comparators  389
To allow more flexible comparisons and arithmetic operations, the IEEE
has created a standard package,  IEEE_std_logic_arith, which defines two
important new types and a host of comparison and arithmetic functions that
DO NOT COPY
operate on them. The two new types are  SIGNED  and  UNSIGNED:
type SIGNED is array (NATURAL range <> of STD_LOGIC;
type UNSIGNED is array (NATURAL range <> of STD_LOGIC;
As you can see, both types are defined just indeterminate-length arrays of
DO NOT COPY
STD_LOGIC, no different from  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR. The important thing is that
the package also defines new comparison functions that are invoked when either
or both comparison operands have one of the new types. For example, it defines
eight new “less-than” functions with the following combinations of parameters:
DO NOT COPY
function "<" (L: UNSIGNED; R: UNSIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: SIGNED; R: SIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: UNSIGNED; R: SIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: SIGNED; R: UNSIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: UNSIGNED; R: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: INTEGER; R: UNSIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
DO NOT COPY
function "<" (L: SIGNED; R: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN;
function "<" (L: INTEGER; R: SIGNED) return BOOLEAN;
Thus, the “<” operator can be used with any combination of  SIGNED,  UNSIGNED,
and  INTEGER  operands; the compiler selects the function whose parameter types
DO NOT COPY
match the actual operands. Each of the functions is defined in the package to do
the “right thing,” including making the appropriate extensions and conversions
when operands of different sizes or types are used. Similar functions are provid-
ed for the other five relational operators,  =,  /=,  <=,  >, and  >=.
DO NOT COPYUsing the  IEEE_std_logic_arith  package, you can write programs like
the one in Table 5-50. Its 8-bit input vectors,  A,  B,  C, and  D, have three different
types. In the comparisons involving  A,  B, and  C, the compiler automatically
selects the correct version of the comparison function; for example, for  “ A<B” it
selects the first “<” function above, because both operands have type  UNSIGNED.
DO NOT COPYIn the comparisons involving  D, explicit type conversions are used. The
assumption is that the designer wants this particular  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  to be
interpreted as  UNSIGNED in one case and  SIGNED  in another. The important thing
to understand here is that the  IEEE_std_logic_arith  package does not make
any assumptions about how  STD_LOGIC_VECTORs are to be interpreted; the user
DO NOT COPY
must specify the conversion.
Two other packages,  STD_LOGIC_SIGNED  and  STD_LOGIC_UNSIGNED, do
make assumptions and are useful if all  STD_LOGIC_VECTORs are to be interpret-
ed the same way.  Each package contains three versions of each comparison
function so that  STD_LOGIC_VECTORs are interpreted as  SIGNED  or  UNSIGNED,
DO NOT COPY
respectively, when compared with each other or with integers.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

390  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 5 0  Behavioral VHDL program for comparing 8-bit integers of various types.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
entity vcompa is
port (
A, B: in UNSIGNED (7 downto 0);
DO NOT COPY
C: in SIGNED (7 downto 0);
D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
A_LT_B, B_GE_C, A_EQ_C, C_NEG, D_BIG, D_NEG: out STD_LOGIC
);
end vcompa;
DO NOT COPY
architecture vcompa_arch of vcompa is
begin
process (A, B, C, D)
begin
A_LT_B <= '0'; B_GE_C <= '0'; A_EQ_C <= '0'; C_NEG <= '0'; D_BIG <= '0'; D_NEG <= '0';
DO NOT COPYif A < B then A_LT_B <= '1'; end if;
if B >= C then B_GE_C <= '1'; end if;
if A = C then A_EQ_C <= '1'; end if;
if C < 0 then C_NEG <= '1'; end if;
if UNSIGNED(D) > 200 then D_BIG <= '1'; end if;
if SIGNED(D) < 0 then D_NEG <= '1'; end if;
DO NOT COPY
end process;
end vcompa_arch;
When a comparison function is specified in VHDL, it takes just as many
DO NOT COPYproduct terms as in ABEL to realize the function as a two-level sum of products.
However, most VHDL synthesis engines will realize the comparator as an itera-
tive circuit with far fewer gates, albeit more levels of logic. Also, better synthesis
engines can detect opportunities to eliminate entire comparator circuits. For
example, in the program of Table 5-49 on page 388, the  NE,  GE, and  LE  outputs
DO NOT COPYcould be realized with one inverter each, as the complements of the  EQ,  LT, and
GT  outputs, respectively.
*5.10 Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs
DO NOT COPYAddition is the most commonly performed arithmetic operation in digital sys-
adder tems. An  adder  combines two arithmetic operands using the addition rules
described in Chapter 2. As we showed in Section 2.6, the same addition rules
and therefore the same adders are used for both unsigned and two’s-complement
numbers. An adder can perform subtraction as the addition of the minuend and
DO NOT COPY
subtractor the complemented (negated) subtrahend, but you can also build  subtractor
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  391
circuits that perform subtraction directly. MSI devices called ALUs, described
in Section 5.10.6, perform addition, subtraction, or any of several other opera-
tions according to an operation code supplied to the device.
DO NOT COPY
*5.10.1 Half Adders and Full Adders
The simplest adder, called a  half adder, adds two 1-bit operands  X  and  Y, half adder
producing a 2-bit sum. The sum can range from 0 to 2, which requires two bits
to express. The low-order bit of the sum may be named  HS  (half sum), and the
DO NOT COPY
high-order bit may be named  CO  (carry out). We can write the following
equations for  HS  and  CO:
HS  =  X  ⊕  Y
=  X  ⋅  Y′  +  X′  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPY
CO  =  X  ⋅  Y
To add operands with more than one bit, we must provide for carries
between bit positions. The building block for this operation is called a  full adder. full adder
Besides the addend-bit inputs  X  and Y, a full adder has a carry-bit input, CIN. The
sum of the three inputs can range from 0 to 3, which can still be expressed withDO NOT COPY
just two output bits,  S  and  COUT, having the following equations:
S  =  X  ⊕  Y  ⊕  CIN
=  X  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  CIN′  +  X′  ⋅  Y  ⋅  CIN′  +  X′  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  CIN  +  X  ⋅  Y  ⋅  CIN
DO NOT COPYCOUT 
=  X  ⋅  Y  +  X  ⋅  CIN  +  Y  ⋅  CIN
Here,  S  is 1 if an odd number of the inputs are 1, and  COUT  is 1 if two or more
of the inputs are 1. These equations represent the same operation that was
specified by the binary addition table in Table 2-3 on page 28.
DO NOT COPYOne possible circuit that performs the full-adder equations is shown in
Figure 5-85(a). The corresponding logic symbol is shown in (b). Sometimes the
symbol is drawn as shown in (c), so that cascaded full adders can be drawn more
neatly, as in the next subsection.
DO NOT COPYfull adder
X Figure 5-85
X Full adder: (a) gate-
Y S S
Y level circuit diagram;
CIN
CIN COUT (b) logic symbol;
(b)
(c) alternate logic
DO NOT COPY
symbol suitable for
cascading.
COUT X Y
COUT  CIN
(a)
DO NOT COPYS
(c)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

392  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
*5.10.2 Ripple Adders
ripple adder Two binary words, each with  n  bits, can be added using a  ripple adder—a
cascade of  n  full-adder stages, each of which handles one bit. Figure 5-86 shows
DO NOT COPY
the circuit for a 4-bit ripple adder. The carry input to the least significant bit (c0)
is normally set to 0, and the carry output of each full adder is connected to the
carry input of the next most significant full adder. The ripple adder is a classic
example of an iterative circuit as defined in Section 5.9.2.
A ripple adder is slow, since in the worst case a carry must propagate from
DO NOT COPY
the least significant full adder to the most significant one. This occurs if, for
example, one addend is 11  …  11 and the other is 00  …  01. Assuming that all of
the addend bits are presented simultaneously, the total worst-case delay is
tADD  =  tXYCout  +  (n  −  2)  ⋅  tCinCout  +  tCinS
DO NOT COPY
where  tXYCout  is the delay from  X  or  Y  to  COUT  in the least significant stage,
tCinCout  is the delay from CIN  to  COUT in the middle stages, and  tCinS  is the delay
from  CIN  to  S  in the most significant stage.
A faster adder can be built by obtaining each sum output  si  with just two
DO NOT COPYlevels of logic. This can be accomplished by writing an equation for  s in terms
i 
of  x0–xi,  y0–yi, and  c0, “multiplying out” or “adding out” to obtain a sum-of-
products or product-of-sums expression, and building the corresponding  AND-
OR  or  OR-AND  circuit. Unfortunately, beyond  s2 , the resulting expressions have
too many terms, requiring too many first-level gates and more inputs than
DO NOT COPY
typically possible on the second-level gate. For example, even assuming that  c0
= 0, a two-level  AND-OR  circuit for s 2  requires fourteen 4-input  ANDs, four
5-input  ANDs, and an 18-input  OR  gate; higher-order sum bits are even worse.
Nevertheless, it is possible to build adders with just a few levels of delay using a
more reasonable number of gates, as we’ll see in Section 5.10.4.
DO NOT COPY
*5.10.3 Subtractors
A binary subtraction operation analogous to binary addition was also specified
full subtractor in Table 2-3 on page 28. A  full subtractor  handles one bit of the binary subtrac-
tion algorithm, having input bits  X  (minuend),  Y  (subtrahend), and  BIN  (borrow
DO NOT COPY
x3  y3 x2  y2  x1  y 1  x 0  y0
Figure 5-86
A 4-bit ripple adder.
X Y X  Y X  Y X  Y
DO NOT COPYc c c 
3 2  1
c4 COUT  CIN COUT  CIN COUT  CIN COUT  CIN c0
S S S S
s3 s2  s1  s0
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  393
in), and output bits  D  (difference) and  BOUT  (borrow out). We can write logic
equations corresponding to the binary subtraction table as follows:
D 
DO NOT COPY=  X  ⊕  Y  ⊕  BIN
BOUT  =  X′  ⋅  Y  +  X′  ⋅  BIN  +  Y  ⋅  BIN
These equations are very similar to equations for a full adder, which should not
be surprising. We showed in Section 2.6 that a two’s-complement subtraction
operation,DO NOT COPY  X  −  Y, can be performed by an addition operation, namely, by adding
the two’s complement of  Y  to  X. The two’s complement of  Y  is  Y  +  1, where  Y  is
the bit-by-bit complement of  Y. We also showed in Exercise 2.26 that a binary
adder can be used to perform an unsigned subtraction operation  X  −  Y, by per-
forming the operation  X  +  Y  +  1. We can now confirm that these statements are
true by manipulating the logic equations above:DO NOT COPY
BOUT  =  X′  ⋅  Y  +  X′  ⋅  BIN  +  Y  ⋅  BIN
BOUT′ =  (X  +  Y′)  ⋅  (X  +  BIN′)  ⋅  (Y′ +  BIN′)(generalized DeMorgan’s theorem)
=  X  ⋅  Y′  +  X  ⋅  BIN′  +  Y′  ⋅  BIN′  (multiply out)
DO NOT COPY
D  =  X  ⊕  Y  ⊕  BIN
=  X  ⊕  Y′  ⊕  BIN′  (complementing  XOR  inputs)
For the last manipulation, recall that we can complement the two inputs of an
XOR  gate without changing the function performed.
DO NOT COPY
Comparing with the equations for a full adder, the above equations tell us
that we can build a full subtractor from a full adder as shown in Figure 5-87. Just
to keep things straight, we’ve given the full adder circuit in (a) a fictitious name,
the “74x999.” As shown in (c), we can interpret the function of this same
physical circuit to be a full subtractor by giving it a new symbol with active-low
DO NOT COPY
borrow in, borrow out, and subtrahend signals.
Thus, to build a ripple subtractor for two  n-bit active-high operands, we
can use  n  74x999s and inverters, as shown in (d). Note that for the subtraction
operation, the borrow input of the least significant bit should be negated (no bor-
row), which for an active-low input means that the physical pin must be 1 orDO NOT COPY
HIGH. This is just the opposite as in addition, where the same input pin is an
active-high carry-in that is 0 or  LOW.
By going back to the math in Chapter 2, we can show that this sort of
manipulation works for all adder and subtractor circuits, not just ripple adders
and subtractors. That is, anyDO NOT COPY  n-bit adder circuit can be made to function as a
subtractor by complementing the subtrahend and treating the carry-in and carry-
out signals as borrows with the opposite active level. The rest of this section
discusses addition circuits only, with the understanding that they can easily be
made to perform subtraction.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

394  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
(a) (b)  (c)
1  2 1  2
X Y X Y X Y
DO NOT COPY74x999 74x999
5  3 5  3
COUT  CIN BOUT  BIN BOUT  BIN
S D D
4 4
DO NOT COPY
(d)
xn–1  yn–1 xn–2  yn–2 x0  y 0
1 3 13
74x04  74x04  74x04
DO NOT COPY2 4 12
1  2 1  2 1  2
X Y X Y X Y
74x999 74x999 74x999
5  3 b_Ln–1 3 b_Ln–2  b_L 1 5  3 b_L0 
5
b_Ln  BOUT  BIN BOUT  BIN BOUT  BIN 1
DO NOT COPY
D D D
4 4 4
dn–1 dn–2 d0
Figure 5-87  Designing subtractors using adders: (a) full adder; (b) full subtractor;
DO NOT COPY
(c) interpreting the device in (a) as a full subtractor; (d) ripple subtractor.
*5.10.4 Carry Lookahead Adders
The logic equation for sum bit  i  of a binary adder can actually be written quite
simply:
DO NOT COPY
si  =  xi  ⊕  yi  ⊕  ci
More complexity is introduced when we expand  ci  above in terms of  x0  –  xi−1 ,
y0 –  yi−1 , and  c0, and we get a real mess expanding the  XORs. However, if we’re
willing to forego the  XOR  expansion, we can at least streamline the design of  ci
carry lookaheadDO NOT COPYlogic using ideas of  carry lookahead  discussed in this subsection.
Figure 5-88 shows the basic idea. The block labeled “Carry Lookahead
Logic” calculates  ci  in a fixed, small number of logic levels for any reasonable
value of  i. Two definitions are the key to carry lookahead logic:
•  For a particular combination of inputs  x  and  y  , adder stage  i  is said to
DO NOT COPYi  i
carry generate generate  a carry if it produces a carry-out of 1 (ci+1 =  1) independent of the
inputs on  x 0  –  xi−1 ,  y 0  –  yi−1 , and  c 0.
•  For a particular combination of inputs  x i  and  y i, adder stage  i  is said to
carry propagate propagate  carries if it produces a carry-out of 1 (ci+1  =  1) in the presence
DO NOT COPYof an input combination of  x –  x ,  y –  y , and  c that causes a carry-in
0  i−1  0  i−1  0 
of 1 (ci  =  1).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  395
xi hsi
yi  ci si
DO NOT COPY
xi−1
x Carry
0
Lookahead
y Figure 5-88
i–1 Logic
DO NOT COPYStructure of one
y0 stage of a carry
c0 lookahead adder.
Corresponding to these definitions, we can write logic equations for a carry-
generate signal,DO NOT COPY  g , and a carry-propagate signal,  p , for each stage of a carry loo-
i i
kahead adder:
gi  =  xi  ⋅  yi
pi  =  xi  +  yi
DO NOT COPY
That is, a stage unconditionally generates a carry if both of its addend bits are 1,
and it propagates carries if at least one of its addend bits is 1. The carry output
of a stage can now be written in terms of the generate and propagate signals:
ci+1  =  gi  +  pi  ⋅  ci
DO NOT COPY
To eliminate carry ripple, we recursively expand the  ci  term for each stage, and
multiply out to obtain a 2-level  AND-OR  expression. Using this technique, we
can obtain the following carry equations for the first four adder stages:
c1  =  g0  +  p0  ⋅  c0
DO NOT COPY
c2  =  g1  +  p1  ⋅  c1
=  g1  +  p1  ⋅  (g0  +  p0  ⋅  c0)
=  g1  +  p1  ⋅  g0  +  p1  ⋅  p0  ⋅  c0
c =  g +  p ⋅  c
DO NOT COPY3  2  2  2
=  g2  +  p2  ⋅  (g1  +  p1  ⋅  g0  +  p1  ⋅  p0  ⋅  c0)
=  g2  +  p2  ⋅  g1  +  p2  ⋅  p1  ⋅  g0  +  p2  ⋅  p1  ⋅  p0  ⋅  c0
c4  =  g3  +  p3  ⋅  c3
DO NOT COPY=  g3  +  p3  ⋅  (g2  +  p2  ⋅  g1  +  p2  ⋅  p 1  ⋅  g0  +  p2  ⋅  p1  ⋅  p0  ⋅  c0)
=  g3  +  p3  ⋅  g2  +  p3  ⋅  p2  ⋅  g1  +  p3  ⋅  p2  ⋅  p1  ⋅  g0  +  p3  ⋅  p2  ⋅  p1  ⋅  p0  ⋅  c0
Each equation corresponds to a circuit with just three levels of delay—one for
the generate and propagate signals, and two for the sum-of-products shown. A
carry lookahead adderDO NOT COPY  uses three-level equations such as these in each adder carry lookahead adder
stage for the block labeled “carry lookahead” in Figure 5-88. The sum output for
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

396  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
a stage is produced by combining the carry bit with the two addend bits for the
stage as we showed in the figure. In the next subsection, we’ll study some
commercial MSI adders and ALUs that use carry lookahead.
DO NOT COPY
*5.10.5 MSI Adders
74x283 The  74x283  is a 4-bit binary adder that forms its sum and carry outputs with just
a few levels of logic, using the carry lookahead technique. Figure 5-89 is a logic
74x83 symbol for the 74x283. The older  74x83  is identical except for its pinout, which
DO NOT COPY
has nonstandard locations for power and ground.
The logic diagram for the ’283, shown in Figure 5-90, has just a few differ-
74x283
ences from the general carry-lookahead design that we  described  in the
7 preceding subsection. First of all, its addends are named  A  and B instead of X  and
C0
5 4
DO NOT COPYA0 S0 Y; no big deal. Second, it produces active-low versions of the carry-generate (gi ′)
6 and carry-propagate (pi ′) signals, since inverting gates are generally faster than
B0
3 A1 S1 1 noninverting ones. Third, it takes advantage of the fact that we can algebraically
2
B1 manipulate the half-sum equation as follows:
14 13
A2 S2
15 hsi  =  xi ⊕  yi
DO NOT COPYB2
12 A3 S3 10 =  xi  ⋅  yi′  +  xi′  ⋅  yi
11
B3 9 =  xi  ⋅  yi′  +  xi  ⋅  xi′  +  xi′  ⋅  yi  +  yi  ⋅  yi′
C4
=  (xi  +  yi)  ⋅  (xi′  +  yi′)
=  (x +  y )  ⋅  (x ⋅  y )′
DO NOT COPYFigure 5-89 i  i i  i
Traditional logic
=  pi  ⋅  gi′
symbol for the
74x283 4-bit Thus, an  AND  gate with an inverted input can be used instead of an  XOR  gate to
binary adder. create each half-sum bit.
Finally, the ’283 creates the carry signals using an  INVERT-OR-AND
DO NOT COPY
structure (the DeMorgan equivalent of an  AND-OR-INVERT), which has about
the same delay as a single CMOS or TTL inverting gate. This requires some
explaining, since the carry equations that we derived in the preceding subsection
are used in a slightly modified form. In particular, the  ci+1 equation uses the term
DO NOT COPYpi  ⋅  gi  instead of  gi. This has no effect on the output, since  pi  is always 1 when  gi
is 1. However, it allows the equation to be factored as follows:
ci+1  =  pi  ⋅  gi  +  pi  ⋅  ci
=  pi ⋅  (gi  +  ci)
DO NOT COPY
This leads to the following carry equations, which are used by the circuit :
c1  =  p0 ⋅  (g0 +  c0 )
c2  =  p1 ⋅  (g1 +  c1 )
=  p ⋅  (g +  p ⋅  (g +  c ))
DO NOT COPY1  1  0  0  0
=  p1 ⋅  (g1 +  p0) ⋅  (g1 +  g0 +  c0)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  397
DO NOT COPY
(9)
C4
DO NOT COPY
(11) g ′
B3  3 hs
(12) 3
A3  (10) 
S3
p3′
DO NOT COPY
c3
DO NOT COPY
(15) g ′
B2  2 hs
(14) 2
A2  DO NOT COPY(13) 
S2
p2′
c2
DO NOT COPY
(2) g ′
B1  1 hs
(3) 1
A1  (1) 
DO NOT COPYS1
p1′
c1
DO NOT COPY
(6) g ′
B0  0
(5) hs0
A0  (4)
c0 S0
p0′
Figure 5-90
DO NOT COPY(7) c0′
C0  Logic diagram for the
74x283 4-bit binary adder.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

398  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
c3  =  p2 ⋅  (g2 +  c2 )
=  p2 ⋅  (g2 +  p1 ⋅  (g1 +  p0 )  ⋅  (g1 +  g0 +  c0))
DO NOT COPY=  p2 ⋅  (g2 +  p1)  ⋅  (g2 +  g1 +  p0)  ⋅  (g2 +  g1 +  g0 +  c0 )
c4  =  p3 ⋅  (g3 +  c3 )
=  p3 ⋅  (g3 +  p2 ⋅  (g2 +  p1 )  ⋅  (g2 +  g1 +  p0 )  ⋅  (g2 +  g1 +  g0 +  c0))
=  p3 ⋅  (g3 +  p2 )  ⋅  (g3 +  g2 +  p1)  ⋅  (g3 +  g2 +  g1 +  p0 )  ⋅  (g3 +  g2 +  g1 +  g0 +  c0)
DO NOT COPY
If you’ve followed the derivation of these equations and can obtain the same
ones by reading the ’283 logic diagram, then congratulations, you’re up to speed
on switching algebra! If not, you may want to review Sections 4.1 and 4.2.
The propagation delay from the  C0  input to the  C4  output of the ’283 is
group-ripple adder very short, about the same as two inverting gates. As a result, fairly fast  group-
DO NOT COPY
ripple adders  with more than four bits can be made simply by cascading the
carry outputs and inputs of ’283s, as shown in Figure 5-91 for a 16-bit adder.
The total propagation delay from  C0  to  C16  in this circuit is about the same as
that of eight inverting gates.
DO NOT COPY
X[15:0]
Y[15:0]
74x283 74x283
7 7
C0 C0 C0
X0 5 4 S0 X8 5 4 S8
DO NOT COPYA0 S0 A0 S0
Y0 6 Y8 6
Figure 5-91 B0 B0
X1 3 1 S1 X9 3 1 S9
A 16-bit group-ripple A1 S1 A1 S1
Y1 2 Y9 2
adder. B1 B1
X2 14 13 S2 X10 14 13 S10
A2 S2 A2 S2
Y2 15 Y10 15
DO NOT COPYB2 B2
X3 12 10 S3 X11 12 10 S11
A3 S3 A3 S3
Y3 11 Y11 11
B3 9 B3 9
C4 C4
U1 U3
C4 C12
DO NOT COPY
74x283 74x283
7 7
C0 C0
X4 5 4 S4 X12 5 4 S12
A0 S0 A0 S0
Y4 6 Y12 6
B0 B0
X5 3 1 S5 X13 3 1 S13
A1 S1 A1 S1
DO NOT COPYY5 2 Y13 2
B1 B1
X6 14 13 S6 X14 14 13 S14
A2 S2 A2 S2
Y6 15 Y14 15
B2 B2
X7 12 10 S7 X15 12 10 S15
A3 S3 A3 S3
Y7 11 Y15 11
B3 9 C8  B3 9
DO NOT COPYC4 C4 C16
U2 U4
S[15:0]
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  399
*5.10.6 MSI Arithmetic and Logic Units
An  arithmetic and logic unit (ALU)  is a combinational circuit that can perform arithmetic and logic
any of a number of different arithmetic and logical operations on a pair of  b-bit unit (ALU)
DO NOT COPY
operands. The operation to be performed is specified by a set of function-select
inputs. Typical MSI ALUs have 4-bit operands and three to five function select
inputs, allowing up to 32 different functions to be performed.
Figure 5-92 is a logic symbol for the  74x181  4-bit ALU. The operation 74x181
performed by the ’181 is selected by the  M  and  S3–S0  inputs, as detailed in
DO NOT COPY
Table 5-51. Note that the identifiers  A,  B, and  F  in the table refer to the 4-bit
words  A3–A0,  B3–B0, and  F3–F0; and the symbols  ⋅  and  +  refer to logical  AND
and  OR  operations.
The 181’s  M input selects between arithmetic and logical operations. When
M  =DO NOT COPY  1, logical operations are selected, and each output  Fi is a function only of the
corresponding data inputs,  Ai  and  Bi. No carries propagate between stages, and
the  CIN  input is ignored. The  S3–S0  inputs select a particular logical operation;
any of the 16 different combinational logic functions on two variables may be
selected.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 5 - 5 1  Functions performed by the 74x181 4-bit ALU. Figure 5-92
Logic symbol for the
Inputs Function 74x181 4-bit ALU.
S3DO NOT COPY  S2  S1  S0 M  = 0 (arithmetic) M  = 1 (logic)
74x181
6
0  0  0  0  F  =  A  minus 1 plus  CIN  F  =  A′ S0
5 17
0  0  0  1  F  =  A  ⋅  B  minus 1 plus  CIN  F  =  A′  +  B′ S1 G
4 15
S2 P
0  0  1  0  F  =  A  ⋅  B′  minus 1 plus CIN  F  =  A′  +  B 3
DO NOT COPYS3
8 14
0  0  1  1  F  =  1111 plus  CIN  F  =  1111 M A=B
7
0  1  0  0  F  =  A  plus (A  +  B′) plus  CIN  F  =  A′  ⋅  B′ CIN
2  9
A0 F0
0  1  0  1  F  =  A  ⋅  B  plus (A  +  B′) plus  CIN  F  =  B′ 1
B0
23 10
0  1  1  0  F  =  A  minus B  minus 1 plus CIN  F  =  A  ⊕  B′ A1 F1
DO NOT COPY22
0  1  1  1  F  =  A  +  B′  plus  CIN  F  =  A  +  B′ B1
21 11
A2 F2
1  0  0  0  F  =  A  plus (A  +  B) plus  CIN  F  =  A′  ⋅  B 20
B2
19 13
1  0  0  1  F  =  A  plus  B  plus  CIN  F  =  A  ⊕  B A3 F3
18
1  0  1  0  F  =  A  ⋅  B′  plus (A  +  B) plus  CIN  F  =  B B3 16
DO NOT COPYCOUT
1  0  1  1  F  =  A  +  B  plus  CIN  F  =  A  +  B
1  1  0  0  F  =  A  plus  A  plus  CIN  F  =  0000
1  1  0  1  F  =  A  ⋅  B  plus  A  plus  CIN  F  =  A  ⋅  B′
1DO NOT COPY  1  1  0  F  =  A  ⋅  B′  plus  A  plus  CIN  F  =  A  ⋅  B
1  1  1  1  F  =  A  plus  CIN  F  =  A
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

400  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
When  M  = 0, arithmetic operations are selected, carries propagate between
the stages, and  CIN  is used as a carry input to the least significant stage. For
operations larger than four bits, multiple ’181 ALUs may be cascaded like the
DO NOT COPY
group-ripple adder in the Figure 5-91, with the carry-out (COUT) of each ALU
connected to the carry-in (CIN) of the next most significant stage. The same
function-select signals (M,  S3–S0) are applied to all the ’181s in the cascade.
To perform two’s-complement addition, we use  S3–S0  to select the
operation “A  plus  B  plus  CIN.” The  CIN  input of the least-significant ALU is
DO NOT COPY
normally set to 0 during addition operations. To perform two’s-complement
subtraction, we use  S3–S0  to select the operation  A  minus  B  minus plus  CIN. In
this case, the  CIN  input of the least significant ALU is normally set to 1, since
CIN  acts as the complement of the borrow during subtraction.
DO NOT COPYThe ’181 provides other arithmetic operations, such as “A  minus 1 plus
CIN,” that are useful in some applications (e.g., decrement by 1). It also provides
a bunch of weird arithmetic operations, such as “A  ⋅  B′  plus (A  +  B) plus  CIN,”
that are almost never used in practice, but that “fall out” of the circuit for free.
Notice that the operand inputs  A3_L–A0_L  and  B3_L–B0_L  and the
DO NOT COPYfunction outputs  F3_L–F0_L  of the ’181 are active low. The ’181 can also be
used with active-high operand inputs and function outputs. In this case, a differ-
ent version of the function table must be constructed. When  M  =  1, logical
operations are still performed, but for a given input combination on  S3–S0, the
function obtained is precisely the dual of the one listed in Table 5-51. When
DO NOT COPY
M  =  0, arithmetic operations are performed, but the function table is once again
different. Refer to a ’181 data sheet for more details.
74x381 Two other MSI ALUs, the  74x381  and  74x382  shown in Figure 5-93,
74x382 encode their select inputs more compactly, and provide only eight different but
useful functions, as detailed in Table 5-52. The only difference between the ’381
DO NOT COPY
and ’382 is that one provides group-carry lookahead outputs (which we explain
next), while the other provides ripple carry and overflow outputs.
(a)  74x381 (b)  74x382
Figure 5-93
5 5
Logic symbols for 4-bitDO NOT COPYS0 S0
6 6
ALUs: (a) 74x381; S1 13 S1
7 G 7 13
(b) 74x382. S2 14 S2 OVR
15 P 15 14
CIN CIN COUT
3  8 3  8
A0 F0 A0 F0
4 4
DO NOT COPYB0 B0
1 9 1 9
A1 F1 A1 F1
2 2
B1 B1
19 11 19 11
A2 F2 A2 F2
18 18
B2 B2
17 12 17 12
A3 F3 A3 F3
DO NOT COPY16  16 
B3 B3
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  401
Ta b l e  5 - 5 2
Inputs 
Functions performed
S2  S1  S0 Function by the 74x381 and
DO NOT COPY74x382 4-bit ALUs.
0  0  0  F  =  0000
0  0  1  F = B minus A minus 1 plus CIN
0  1  0  F = A minus B minus 1 plus CIN
0  1  1  F  =  A  plus  B  plus  CIN
1  0  0  F  =  A  ⊕  B
DO NOT COPY
1  0  1  F  =  A  +  B
1  1  0  F  =  A  ⋅  B
1  1  1  F  =  1111
*5.10.7 Group-Carry LookaheadDO NOT COPY
The ’181 and ’381 provide  group-carry lookahead  outputs that allow multiple group-carry lookahead
ALUs to be cascaded without rippling carries between 4-bit groups. Like the
74x283, the ALUs use carry lookahead to produce carries internally. However,
they also provide  G_L  and  P_L  outputs that are carry lookahead signals for the
DO NOT COPY
entire 4-bit group. The  G_L  output is asserted if the ALU generates a carry, that
is, if it will produce a carry-out (COUT  =  1) whether or not there is a carry-in
(CIN  =  1):
G_L  =  (g +  p ⋅  g +  p ⋅  p ⋅  g +  p ⋅  p ⋅  p ⋅  g )′
3  3  2  3  2  1  3  2  1  0
TheDO NOT COPY  P_L  output is asserted if the ALU propagates a carry, that is, if it will
produce a carry-out if there is a carry-in:
P_L  =  (p ⋅  p ⋅  p ⋅  p )′
3  2  1  0
When ALUs are cascaded, the group-carry lookahead outputs may be
combined in just two levels of logic to produce the carry input to each ALU. ADO NOT COPYlookahead carry circuit
lookahead carry circuit, the  74x182  shown in Figure 5-94, performs this opera- 74x182
tion. The ’182 inputs are  C0, the carry input to the least significant ALU
(“ALU 0”), and  G0–G3 and  P0–P3, the generate and propagate outputs of ALUs 74x182
13
0–3. Using these inputs, the ’182 produces carry inputs  C1–C3  for ALUs 1–3. C0
3
Figure 5-95 shows the connections for a 16-bit ALU using four ’381s and aDO NOT COPYG0 12
4 C1
’182. P0
1 
The 182’s carry equations are obtained by “adding out” the basic carry G1 11
2 C2
P1
lookahead equation of Section 5.10.4: 14
G2 9
c =  g +  p ⋅  c 15 C3
DO NOT COPYi+1  i  i  i P2
5 10
=  (gi  +  pi)  ⋅  (gi  +  ci) G3 G
6 7
P3 P 
Expanding for the first three values of  i, we obtain the following equations:
Figure 5-94
C1  =  (G0+P0)  ⋅  (G0 +C0)
Logic symbol for the
C2DO NOT COPY  =  (G1+P1)  ⋅  (G1+G0+P0)  ⋅  (G1+G0+C0)
74x182 lookahead
C3  =  (G2+P2)  ⋅  (G2+G1+P1)  ⋅  (G2+G1+G0 +P0)  ⋅  (G2 +G1 +G0 +C0) carry circuit.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

402  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
74x182
13
Figure 5-95 C0
3
DO NOT COPYA 16-bit ALU using G0
4 12 C4
group-carry lookahead. P0 C1
1
G1
2 11 C8
P1 C2
14
G2
15 9 C12
P2 C3 
DO NOT COPY5 10
G3 G GALL_L
6 7
P3 P  PALL_L
U5
C0
DO NOT COPY
S[2:0]
A[15:0]
B[15:0]
74x381 74x381
S0 5 S0 5
S0 S0
DO NOT COPYS1 6 S1 6
S1 S1
S2 7 13 G0_L S2 7 13 G2_L
S2 G S2 G
15 14 P0_L 15 14 P2_L
CIN P CIN P
A0 3  A8 3 
A0 8 F0 A0 8 F8
B0 4 F0 B8 4 F0
B0 B0
A1 1 A9 1
A1 9 F1 A1 9 F9
DO NOT COPYB1 2 F1 B9 2 F1
B1 B1
A2 19 A10 19
A2 11 F2 A2 11 F10
B2 18 F2 B10 18 F2
B2 B2
A3 17 A11 17
A3 12 F3 A3 12 F11
B3 16  F3 B11 16  F3
B3 B3
U1 U3
DO NOT COPY
ALU0  ALU2
74x381 74x381
S0 5 S0 5
S0 S0
S1 6 S1 6
S1 S1
S2 7 13 G1_L S2 7 13 G3_L
DO NOT COPYS2 G S2 G
15 14 P1_L 15 14 P3_L
CIN P CIN P
A4 3  A12 3 
A0 8 F4 A0 8 F12
B4 4 F0 B12 4 F0
B0 B0
A5 1 A13 1
A1 9 F5 A1 9 F13
B5 2 F1 B13 2 F1
B1 B1
DO NOT COPYA6 19 A14 19
A2 11 F6 A2 11 F14
B6 18 F2 B14 18 F2
B2 B2
A7 17 A15 17
A3 12 F7 A3 12 F15
B7 16  F3 B15 16  F3
B3 B3
U2 U4
ALU1  ALU3
F[15:0]
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  403
The ’182 realizes each of these equations with just one level of delay—an
INVERT-OR-AND  gate.
When more than four ALUs are cascaded, they may be partitioned into
DO NOT COPY
“supergroups,” each with its own ’182. For example, a 64-bit adder would have
four supergroups, each containing four ALUs and a ’182. The  G_L  and  P_L
outputs of each ’182 can be combined in a next-level ’182, since they indicate
whether the supergroup generates or propagates carries:
G_LDO NOT COPY  =  ((G3 +P3)  ⋅  (G3 +G2 +P2)  ⋅  (G3 +G2 +  G1 +P1)  ⋅  (G3+G2 +G1 +G0))′
P_L  =  (P0  ⋅  P1  ⋅  P2  ⋅  P3)′
*5.10.8 Adders in ABEL and PLDs
ABEL supports addition (+) and subtraction (-) operators which can be applied
DO NOT COPY
to sets. Sets are interpreted as unsigned integers; for example, a set with  n  bits
n
represents an integer in the range of 0 to 2 −1. Subtraction is performed by
negating the subtrahend and adding. Negation is performed in two’s comple-
ment; that is, the operand is complemented bit-by-bit and then 1 is added.
DO NOT COPYTable 5-53 shows an example of addition in ABEL. The set definition for
SUM  was made one bit wider than the addends to accommodate the carry out of
the MSB; otherwise this carry would be discarded. The set definitions for the
addends were extended on the left with a 0 bit to match the size of  SUM.
Even though the adder program is extremely small, it takes a long time to
compile and it generates a huge number of terms in the minimal two level sum ofDO NOT COPY
products. While  SUM0  has only two product terms, subsequent terms  SUMi  have
i 8
5⋅2 −4 terms, or 636 terms for  SUM7! And the carry out (SUM8) has 2 −1=255
product terms. Obviously, adders with more than a few bits cannot be practically
realized using two levels of logic.
DO NOT COPY
module add Ta b l e 5 - 5 3
title 'Adder Exercise' ABEL program for
an 8-bit adder.
" Input and output pins
DO NOT COPY
A7..A0, B7..B0  pin;
SUM8..SUM0  pin istype 'com';
" Set definitions
A = [0, A7..A0];
B = [0, B7..B0];
DO NOT COPY
SUM = [SUM8..SUM0];
equations
SUM = A + B;
end addDO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

404  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
CARRYING ON  The carry out (SUM8) in our adder example has the exactly same number of product
terms (255) as the “less-than” or “greater-than” output of an 8-bit comparator. This
DO NOT COPY
is less surprising once you realize that the carry out from the addition  A+B  is
functionally equivalent to the expression  A>B.
DO NOT COPYRecognizing that larger adders and comparators are still needed in PLDs
@CARRY  directive from time to time, ABEL provides an @CARRY  directive  which tells the compiler
to synthesize group-ripple adder with  n  bits per group. For example, if the
statement “@CARRY  1;” were included in Table 5-53, the compiler would create
eight new signals for the carries out of bit positions 0 through 7. The equations
DO NOT COPYfor  SUM1  through  SUM8  would use these internal carries, essentially creating an
8-stage ripple adder with a worst-case delay of eight passes through the PLD.
If the statement “@CARRY  2;” were used, the compiler would compute car-
ries two bits at a time, creating four new signals for carries out of bit positions 1,
3, 5, and 7. In this case, the maximum number of product terms needed for any
DO NOT COPYoutput is still reasonable, only 7, and the worst-case delay path has just four
passes through the PLD. With three bits per group (@CARRY  3;), the maximum
number of product terms balloons to 28, which is impractical.
A special case that is often used in ABEL and PLDs is adding or subtract-
ing a constant 1. This operation is used in the definition of counters, where the
DO NOT COPY
next state of the counter is just the current state plus 1 for an “up” counter or
minus 1 for a “down” counter. The equation for bit  i  of an “up” counter can be
stated very simply in words: “Complement bit  i  if counting is enabled and all of
the bits lower than  i  are 1.” This requires just  i+2 product terms for any value of
i, and can be further reduced to just one product term and an  XOR  gate in some
DO NOT COPY
PLDs, as shown in Sections 10.5.1 and 10.5.3.
*5.10.9 Adders in VHDL
Although VHDL has addition (+) and subtraction (-) operators built in, they
DO NOT COPYonly work with the integer, real, and physical types. They specifically do  not
work with  BIT_VECTOR  types or the IEEE standard type  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR.
Instead, standard packages define these operators.
As we explained in Section 5.9.6, the  IEEE_std_logic_arith  package
defines two new array types,  SIGNED  and  UNSIGNED, and a set of comparison
DO NOT COPYfunctions for operands of type  INTEGER,  SIGNED, or  UNSIGNED. The package
also defines addition and subtraction operations for the same kinds of operands
as well as  STD_LOGIC  and  STD_ULOGIC  for 1-bit operands.
The large number of overlaid addition and subtraction functions may make
it less than obvious what type an addition or subtraction result will have.
DO NOT COPY
Normally, if any of the operands is type  SIGNED, the result is  SIGNED, else the
result is  UNSIGNED. However, if the result is assigned to a signal or variable of
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  405
library IEEE; Ta b l e  5 - 5 4
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; VHDL program for
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all; adding and subtracting
DO NOT COPY
8-bit integers of
entity vadd is various types.
port (
A, B: in UNSIGNED (7 downto 0);
C: in SIGNED (7 downto 0);
D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
DO NOT COPY
S: out UNSIGNED (8 downto 0);
T: out SIGNED (8 downto 0);
U: out SIGNED (7 downto 0);
V: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (8 downto 0)
);
end vadd;DO NOT COPY
architecture vadd_arch of vadd is
begin
S <= ('0' & A) + ('0' & B);
T <= A + C;
DO NOT COPY
U <= C + SIGNED(D);
V <= C - UNSIGNED(D);
end vadd_arch;
type  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, then the  SIGNED  or  UNSIGNED  result is converted to
DO NOT COPY
that type. The length of any result is normally the length of the longest operand.
However, when an  UNSIGNED  operand is combined with a  SIGNED  or  INTEGER
operand, its length is increased by 1 to accommodate a sign bit of 0, and then the
result’s length is determined.
Incorporating these considerations, the VHDL program in Table 5-54
DO NOT COPY
shows 8-bit additions for various operand and result types. The first result,  S, is
declared to be 9 bits long assuming the designer is interested in the carry from
the 8-bit addition of  UNSIGNED  operands  A  and  B. The concatenation operator  &
is used to extend  A  and  B  so that the addition function will return the carry bit in
the MSB of the result.DO NOT COPY
The next result, T, is also 9 bits long, since the addition function extends the
UNSIGNED  operand  A  when combining it with the  SIGNED  operand  C. In the third
addition, an 8-bit  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  D  is type-converted to  SIGNED  and
combined with  C  to obtain an 8-bit  SIGNED  result  U. In the last statement,  D  is
converted toDO NOT COPY  UNSIGNED, automatically extended by one bit, and subtracted from
C  to produce a 9-bit result  V.
Since addition and subtraction are fairly expensive in terms of the number
of gates required, many VHDL synthesis engines will attempt to reuse adder
blocks whenever possible. For example, Table 5-55 is a VHDL program that
DO NOT COPY
includes two different additions. Rather than building two adders and selecting
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

406  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 5 - 5 5 library IEEE;
VHDL program that use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
allows adder sharing. use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
DO NOT COPY
entity vaddshr is
port (
A, B, C, D: in SIGNED (7 downto 0);
SEL: in STD_LOGIC;
S: out SIGNED (7 downto 0)
DO NOT COPY
);
end vaddshr;
architecture vaddshr_arch of vaddshr is
begin
DO NOT COPYS <= A + B when SEL = '1' else C + D;
end vaddshr_arch;
one’s output with a multiplexer, the synthesis engine can build just one adder and
select its inputs using multiplexers, potentially creating a smaller overall circuit.
DO NOT COPY
*5.11 Combinational Multipliers
*5.11.1 Combinational Multiplier Structures
In Section 2.8, we outlined an algorithm that uses  n  shifts and adds to multiply
DO NOT COPY
n-bit binary numbers. Although the shift-and-add algorithm emulates the way
that we do paper-and-pencil multiplication of decimal numbers, there is nothing
inherently “sequential” or “time dependent” about multiplication. That is, given
two  n-bit input words  X  and  Y, it is possible to write a truth table that expresses
combinationalDO NOT COPYthe 2n-bit product  P  =  X⋅Y  as a  combinational  function of  X  and  Y. A  combina-
multiplier tional multiplier  is a logic circuit with such a truth table.
Most approaches to combinational multiplication are based on the paper-
and-pencil shift-and-add algorithm. Figure 5-96 illustrates the basic idea for an
8×8 multiplier for two unsigned integers, multiplicand  X  =  x7x6x5x4x3x2x1x0 and
product componentDO NOT COPYmultiplier Y  =  y y y y y y y y . We call each row a product component, a shifted
7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 
y0x7 y0x6  y0x5  y0x4  y0x3  y0x2  y0x1  y0x0
Figure 5-96
y1x7  y1x6  y1x5  y1x4  y1x3  y1x2  y1x1  y1x0
Partial products in an
8  ×  8 multiplier. y2x7 y2x6  y2x5  y2x4  y2x3  y2x2  y2x1  y2x0
DO NOT COPY
y3x7  y3x6  y3x5  y3x4  y3x3  y3x2  y3x1  y3x0
y4x7 y4x6  y4x5  y4x4  y4x3  y4x2  y4x1  y4x0
y5x7  y5x6  y5x5  y5x4  y5x3  y5x2  y5x1  y5x0
y6x7 y6x6  y6x5  y6x4  y6x3  y6x2  y6x1  y6x0
DO NOT COPYy7x7  y7x6  y7x5  y7x4  y7x3  y7x2  y7x1  y7x0
p15 p14  p13  p12 p11 p10  p9  p8 p7 p6  p5  p4 p3 p2  p1  p0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  407
y0x7 y0x6 y0x5 y0x4 y0x3 y0x2 y0x1 y0x0
Figure 5-97
Interconnections y1x7 y1x6 y1x5 y1x4 y1x3 y1x2 y1x1 y1x0
for an 8DO NOT COPY  ×  8 0
combinational
multiplier.
y2x7 y2x6 y2x5 y2x4 y2x3 y2x2 y2x1 y2x0
0
DO NOT COPY
y3x7 y3x6 y3x5 y3x4 y3x3 y3x2 y3x1 y3x0
0
y x y x y x y x y x y x y x y x
DO NOT COPY4 7 4 6 4 5 4 4 4 3 4 2 4 1 4 0
0
y5x7 y5x6 y5x5 y5x4 y5x3 y5x2 y5x1 y5x0
DO NOT COPY0
y6x7 y6x6 y6x5 y6x4 y6x3 y6x2 y6x1 y6x0
0
DO NOT COPY
y7x7  y7x6 y7x5 y7x4 y7x3 y7x2 y7x1 y7x0
0
p15 p14  p13 p12 p11 p10 p9 p8 p7 p6 p5 p4 p3 p2 p1 p0
DO NOT COPY
multiplicand that is multiplied by 0 or 1 depending on the corresponding multi-
plier bit. Each small box represents one product-component bit  y i x j, the logical
AND  of multiplier bit  y i  and multiplicand bit  x j. The product  P  =  p15p14 . ..p2p1p0
has 16 bits and is obtained by adding together all the product components.DO NOT COPY
Figure 5-97 shows one way to add up the product components. Here, the
product-component bits have been spread out to make space, and each “+” box
is a full adder equivalent to Figure 5-85(c) on page 391. The carries in each row
of full adders are connected to make an 8-bit ripple adder. Thus, the first ripple
adder combines the first two product components to product the first partialDO NOT COPY
product, as defined in Section 2.8. Subsequent adders combine each partial
product with the next product component.
It is interesting to study the propagation delay of the circuit in Figure 5-97.
In the worst case, the inputs to the least significant adder (y0x1  and  y1x0 ) can
DO NOT COPY
affect the MSB of the product (p15). If we assume for simplicity that the delays
from any input to any output of a full adder are equal, say  tpd , then the worst case
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

408  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
y0x7 y0x6 y0x5 y0x4 y0x3 y0x2 y0x1 y0x0
Figure 5-98
Interconnections y1x7 y1x6 y1x5 y1x4 y1x3 y1x2 y1x1 y1x0
for a faster 8DO NOT COPY  ×  8 0 0 0 0 0 0  0
combinational
multiplier.
y2x7 y2x6 y2x5 y2x4 y2x3 y2x2 y2x1 y2x0
DO NOT COPY
y3x7 y3x6 y3x5 y3x4 y3x3 y3x2 y3x1 y3x0
y x y x y x y x y x y x y x y x
DO NOT COPY4 7 4 6 4 5 4 4 4 3 4 2 4 1 4 0
y5x7 y5x6 y5x5 y5x4 y5x3 y5x2 y5x1 y5x0
DO NOT COPY
y6x7 y6x6 y6x5 y6x4 y6x3 y6x2 y6x1 y6x0
DO NOT COPY
y7x7  y7x6 y7x5 y7x4 y7x3 y7x2 y7x1 y7x0
0
DO NOT COPY
p15 p14  p13 p12 p11 p10 p9 p8 p7 p6 p5 p4 p3 p2 p1 p0
path goes through 20 adders and its delay is 20tpd. If the delays are different, then
the answer depends on the relative delays; see Exercise \exref{xxxx}.
DO NOT COPY
sequential multiplier Sequential multipliers  use a single adder and a register to accumulate the
partial products. The partial-product register is initialized to the first product
component, and for an  n×n-bit multiplication,  n−1 steps are taken and the adder
is used  n−1 times, once for each of the remaining  n−1 product components to be
DO NOT COPYadded to the partial-product register.
carry-save addition Some sequential multipliers use a trick called  carry-save addition  to speed
up multiplication. The idea is to break the carry chain of the ripple adder to
shorten the delay of each addition. This is done by applying the carry output
from bit  i  during step  j  to the carry input for bit  i+1 during the  next  step,  j+1.
DO NOT COPYAfter the last product component is added, one more step is needed in which the
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  409
carries are hooked up in the usual way and allowed to ripple from the least to the
most significant bit.
The combinational equivalent of an 8×8 multiplier using carry-save addi-
DO NOT COPY
tion is shown in Figure 5-98. Notice that the carry out of each full adder in the
first seven rows is connected to an input of an adder  below  it. Carries in the
eighth row of full adders are connected to create a conventional ripple adder.
Although this adder uses exactly the same amount of logic as the previous one
(64 2-input  AND  gates and 56 full adders), its propagation delay is substantially
DO NOT COPY
shorter. Its worst-case delay path goes through only 14 full adders. The delay can
be further improved by using a carry lookahead adder for the last row.
The regular structure of combinational multipliers make them ideal for
VLSI and ASIC realization. The importance of fast multiplication in micro-
processors, digital video, and many other applications has led to much study andDO NOT COPY
development of even better structures and circuits for combinational multipliers;
see the References.
*5.11.2 Multiplication in ABEL and PLDs
ABEL provides a multiplication operatorDO NOT COPY  *, but it can be used only with individ-
ual signals, numbers, or special constants, not with sets. Thus, ABEL cannot
synthesize a multiplier circuit from a single equation like “P  =  X*Y.”
Still, you can use ABEL to specify a combinational multiplier if you break
it down into smaller pieces. For example, Table 5-56 shows the design of a 4 ×4
DO NOT COPY
unsigned multiplier following the same general structure as Figure 5-96 on page
page 406. Expressions are used to define the four product components,  PC1,
PC2,  PC3, and  PC4, which are then added in the  equations  section of the pro-
gram. This does not generate an array of full adders as in Figure 5-97 or 5-98.
Rather, the ABEL compiler will dutifully crunch the addition equation to pro-
DO NOT COPY
module mul4x4 Ta b l e 5 - 5 6
title '4x4 Combinational Multiplier' ABEL program for a
4×4 combinational
X3..X0, Y3..Y0 pin;  " multiplicand, multiplier multiplier.
DO NOT COPY
P7..P0  pin istype 'com';  " product
P = [P7..P0];
PC1 = Y0 & [0, 0, 0, 0,X3,X2,X1,X0];
PC2 = Y1 & [0, 0, 0,X3,X2,X1,X0, 0];
PC3 = Y2 & [0, 0,X3,X2,X1,X0, 0, 0];DO NOT COPY
PC4 = Y3 & [0,X3,X2,X1,X0, 0, 0, 0];
equations
P = PC1 + PC2 + PC3 + PC4;
DO NOT COPY
end mul4x4
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

410  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
duce a minimal sum for each of the eight product output bits. Surprisingly, the
worst-case output,  P4, has only 36 product terms, a little high but certainly real-
izable in two passes through a PLD.
DO NOT COPY
*5.11.3 Multiplication in VHDL
VHDL is rich enough to express multiplication in a number of different ways;
we’ll save the best for last.
Table 5-57 is a behavioral VHDL program that mimics the multiplier
DO NOT COPY
structure of Figure 5-98. In order to represent the internal signals in the figure,
the program defines a new data type,  array8x8, which is a two-dimensional
array of  STD_LOGIC  (recall that  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  is a one-dimensional array
of  STD_LOGIC). Variable  PC  is declared as a such an array to hold the product-
DO NOT COPYcomponent bits, and variables  PCS and PCC  are similar arrays to hold the sum and
carry outputs of the main array of full adders. One-dimensional arrays  RAS  and
RAC  hold the sum and carry outputs of the ripple adder. Figure 5-99 shows the
variable naming and numbering scheme. Integer variables  i  and  j  are used as
loop indices for rows and columns, respectively.
DO NOT COPYThe program attempts to illustrate the logic gates that would be used in a
faithful realization of Figure 5-98, even though a synthesizer could legitimately
create quite a different structure from this behavioral program. If you want to
control the structure, then you must use structural VHDL, as we’ll show later.
In the program, the first, nested  for  statement performs 64  AND  operations
DO NOT COPY
to obtain the product-component bits. The next  for  loop initializes boundary
conditions at the top of the multiplier, using the notion of row-0 “virtual” full
adders, not shown in the figure, whose sum outputs equal the first row of  PC  bits
PCS(0)(j) y0x7 y0x6 y0x5 y0x4 y0x3 y0x2 y0x1  y0x0
Figure 5-99DO NOT COPY
VHDL variable names y1x7 y1x6 y1x5 y1x4 y1x3 y1x2 y1x1 y1x0
0
for the 8  ×  8 multiplier. PCS(1)(7) 0 0 0 0 0 0 
PCC(1)(6)
PCS(1)(6)
PCC
y2x7 y2x6 y2x5 y2x4 y2x3 y2x2 y2x1 y2x0 (0)(0)
DO NOT COPY
PCS(2)(7) PCS
y6x7 (0)(0)
PCS(6)(7) PCC PCS
(1)(0) (2)(0)
y3x2 y3x1 y3x0
y3x7  y3x6 y3x5 y3x4 y3x3
y7x7  y7x6 y7x5 y7x4 y7x3 y7x2 y7x1 y7x0
DO NOT COPY
PCS(7)(7)
PCS PCS
0 PCS (3)(0) (2)(0)
(7)(0)
p DO NOT COPYp p p p p p p p p p p p p p p
15 14  13 12 11 10 9 8 7  6  5  4  3  2  1  0
RAC(7) RAC(6)  RAC(5) RAS(3) RAS(2) RAS(1) RAC(1)  RAC(0)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  411
library IEEE; Ta b l e 5 - 5 7
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; Behavioral VHDL
program for an 8×8
DO NOT COPY
entity vmul8x8p is combinational
port ( X: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); multiplier.
Y: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
P: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (15 downto 0) );
end vmul8x8p;
DO NOT COPY
architecture vmul8x8p_arch of vmul8x8p is
function MAJ (I1, I2, I3: STD_LOGIC) return STD_LOGIC is
begin
return ((I1 and I2) or (I1 and I3) or (I2 and I3));
end MAJ;
beginDO NOT COPY
process (X, Y)
type array8x8 is array (0 to 7) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
variable PC: array8x8;  -- product component bits
variable PCS: array8x8;  -- full-adder sum bits
variable PCC: array8x8;  -- full-adder carry output bits
DO NOT COPY
variable RAS, RAC: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); -- ripple adder sum
begin  --  and carry bits
for i in 0 to 7 loop for j in 0 to 7 loop
PC(i)(j) := Y(i) and X(j); -- compute product component bits
end loop;  end loop;
DO NOT COPYfor j in 0 to 7 loop
PCS(0)(j) := PC(0)(j);  -- initialize first-row "virtual"
PCC(0)(j) := '0';  --  adders (not shown in figure)
end loop;
for i in 1 to 7 loop  -- do all full adders except last row
for j in 0 to 6 loop
DO NOT COPYPCS(i)(j) := PC(i)(j) xor PCS(i-1)(j+1) xor PCC(i-1)(j);
PCC(i)(j) := MAJ(PC(i)(j), PCS(i-1)(j+1), PCC(i-1)(j));
PCS(i)(7) := PC(i)(7); -- leftmost "virtual" adder sum output
end loop;
end loop;
RAC(0) := '0';
DO NOT COPY
for i in 0 to 6 loop  -- final ripple adder
RAS(i) := PCS(7)(i+1) xor PCC(7)(i) xor RAC(i);
RAC(i+1) := MAJ(PCS(7)(i+1), PCC(7)(i), RAC(i));
end loop;
for i in 0 to 7 loop
DO NOT COPYP(i) <= PCS(i)(0);  -- first 8 product bits from full-adder sums
end loop;
for i in 8 to 14 loop
P(i) <= RAS(i-8);  -- next 7 bits from ripple-adder sums
end loop;
P(15) <= RAC(7);  -- last bit from ripple-adder carry
end process;DO NOT COPY
end vmul8x8p_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

412  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
SIGNALS VS. Variables are used rather than signals in the process in Table 5-57 to make simula-
VARIABLES tion run faster. Variables are faster because the simulator keeps track of their values
DO NOT COPY
only when the process is running. Because variable values are assigned sequentially,
the process in Table 5-57 is carefully written to compute values in the proper order.
That is, a variable cannot be used until a value has been assigned to it.
Signals, on the other hand, have a value at all times. When a signal value is
changed in a process, the simulator schedules a future event in its event list for the
DO NOT COPY
value change. If the signal appears on the right-hand side of an assignment statement
in the process, then the signal must also be included in the process’ sensitivity list. If
a signal value changes, the process will then execute again, and keep repeating until
all of the signals in the sensitivity list are stable.
In Table 5-57, if you wanted to observe internal values or timing during
DO NOT COPY
simulation, you could change all the variables (except i and j) to signals and include
them in the sensitivity list. To make the program syntactically correct, you would
also have to move the  type  and  signal  declarations to just after the architecture
statement, and change all of the “:=” assignments to “<=”.
Suppose that after making the changes above, you also reversed the order of
DO NOT COPY
the indices in the  for  loops (e.g., “7  downto  0” instead of “0  to  7”).  The program
would still work. However, dozens of repetitions of the process would be required
for each input change in  X  or  Y, because the signal changes in this circuit propagate
from the lowest index to the highest.
While the choice of signals vs. variables affects the speed of simulation, with
DO NOT COPY
most VHDL synthesis engines it does not affect the results of synthesis.
and whose carry outputs are 0. The third, nested  for  loop corresponds to the
main array of adders in Figure 5-98, all except the last row, which is handled by
DO NOT COPY
the fourth  for  loop. The last two  for  loops assign the appropriate adder outputs
to the multiplier output signals.
ON THE A three-input “majority function,” MAJ, is defined at the beginning of Table 5-57 and
DO NOT COPY
THRESHOLD OF A is subsequently used to compute carry outputs. An  n-input  majority function
DREAM produces a 1 output if the majority of its inputs are 1, two out of three in the case of
a 3-input majority function. (If  n  is even,  n/2+1 inputs must be 1.)
Over thirty years ago, there was substantial academic interest in a more general
class of  n-input  threshold functions  which produce a 1 output if  k  or more of their
DO NOT COPY
inputs are 1. Besides providing full employment for logic theoreticians, threshold
functions could realize many logic functions with a smaller number of elements than
could a conventional  AND/OR  realization. For example, an adder’s carry function
requires three  AND  gates and one  OR  gate, but just one three-input threshold gate.
(Un)fortunately, an economical technology never emerged for threshold gates,
DO NOT COPY
and they remain, for now, an academic curiosity.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *5.10  Adders, Subtractors, and ALUs  413
architecture vmul8x8s_arch of vmul8x8s is Ta b l e 5 - 5 8
component AND2 Structural VHDL
port( I0, I1: in STD_LOGIC; architecture for an
DO NOT COPY
O: out STD_LOGIC ); 8×8 combinational
end component; multiplier.
component XOR3
port( I0, I1, I2: in STD_LOGIC;
O: out STD_LOGIC );
end component;
DO NOT COPY
component MAJ  -- Majority function, O = I0*I1 + I0*I2 + I1*I2
port( I0, I1, I2: in STD_LOGIC;
O: out STD_LOGIC );
end component;
type array8x8 is array (0 to 7) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);DO NOT COPY
signal PC: array8x8;  -- product-component bits
signal PCS: array8x8;  -- full-adder sum bits
signal PCC: array8x8;  -- full-adder carry output bits
signal RAS, RAC: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); -- sum, carry
begin
DO NOT COPY
g1: for i in 0 to 7 generate  -- product-component bits
g2: for j in 0 to 7 generate
U1: AND2 port map (Y(i), X(j), PC(i)(j));
end generate;
end generate;
g3: for j in 0 to 7 generateDO NOT COPY
PCS(0)(j) <= PC(0)(j);  -- initialize first-row "virtual" adders
PCC(0)(j) <= '0';
end generate;
g4: for i in 1 to 7 generate  -- do full adders except the last row
g5: for j in 0 to 6 generate
DO NOT COPYU2: XOR3 port map (PC(i)(j),PCS(i-1)(j+1),PCC(i-1)(j),PCS(i)(j));
U3: MAJ  port map (PC(i)(j),PCS(i-1)(j+1),PCC(i-1)(j),PCC(i)(j));
PCS(i)(7) <= PC(i)(7); -- leftmost "virtual" adder sum output
end generate;
end generate;
RAC(0) <= '0';
DO NOT COPY
g6: for i in 0 to 6 generate  -- final ripple adder
U7: XOR3 port map (PCS(7)(i+1), PCC(7)(i), RAC(i), RAS(i));
U3: MAJ  port map (PCS(7)(i+1), PCC(7)(i), RAC(i), RAC(i+1));
end generate;
g7: for i in 0 to 7 generate
DO NOT COPYP(i) <= PCS(i)(0);  -- get first 8 product bits from full-adder sums
end generate;
g8: for i in 8 to 14 generate
P(i) <= RAS(i-8);  -- get next 7 bits from ripple-adder sums
end generate;
P(15) <= RAC(7);  -- get last bit from ripple-adder carry
end vmul8x8s_arch;DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

414  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
The program in Table 5-57 can be modified to use structural VHDL as
shown in Table 5-58. This approach gives the designer complete control over the
circuit structure that is synthesized, as might be desired in an ASIC realization.
DO NOT COPY
The program assumes that the architectures for  AND2,  XOR3, and  MAJ3  have been
defined elsewhere, for example, in an ASIC library.
generate  statement This program makes good use of the generate  statement  to create the
arrays of components used in the multiplier. The  generate  statement must have
a label, and similar to a  for-loop  statement, it specifies an iteration scheme to
DO NOT COPY
control the repetition of the enclosed statements. Within  for-generate, the
enclosed statements can include any concurrent statements,  IF-THEN-ELSE
statements, and additional levels of looping constructs. Sometimes  generate
statements are combined with  IF-THEN-ELSE  to produce a kind of conditional
DO NOT COPYcompilation capability
Well, we said we’d save the best for last, and here it is. The IEEE
std_logic_arith  library that we introduced in Section 5.9.6 defines multipli-
cation functions for  SIGNED  and  UNSIGNED  types, and overlays these functions
onto the “*” operator. Thus, the program in Table 5-59 can multiply unsigned
DO NOT COPYnumbers with a simple one-line assignment statement. Within the IEEE library,
the multiplication function is defined behaviorally, using the shift-and-add algo-
rithm. We could have showed you this approach at the beginning of this
subsection, but then you wouldn’t have read the rest of it, would you?
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 5 - 5 9
library IEEE;
Truly behavioral VHDL use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
program for an 8×8 use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
combinational multiplier.
entity vmul8x8i is
port (
DO NOT COPY
X: in UNSIGNED (7 downto 0);
Y: in UNSIGNED (7 downto 0);
P: out UNSIGNED (15 downto 0)
);
end vmul8x8i;
DO NOT COPY
architecture vmul8x8i_arch of vmul8x8i is
begin
P <= X * Y;
end vmul8x8i_arch;
DO NOT COPY
References
Digital designers who want to write better should start by reading the classic
Elements of Style,  3rd ed., by William Strunk, Jr. and E. B. White (Allyn &
DO NOT COPYBacon, 1979). Another book on writing style, especially for nerds, is  Effective
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

References  415
SYNTHESIS OF You’ve probably heard that compilers for high-level programming languages like C
BEHAVIORAL usually generate better code than people do writing in assembly language, even with
DO NOT COPY
DESIGNS “hand-tweaking.” Most digital designers hope that compilers for behavioral HDLs
will also some day produce results superior to a typical hand-tweaked design, be it a
schematic or structural VHDL. Better compilers won’t put the designers out of work,
they will simply allow them to tackle bigger designs.
We’re not quite there yet. However, the more advanced synthesis engines do
DO NOT COPY
include some nice optimizations for commonly used behavioral structures. For
example, I have to admit that the FPGA synthesis engine that I used to test the VHDL
programs in this subsection produced just as fast a multiplier from Table 5-59 as it
did from any of the more detailed architectures!
DO NOT COPY
Writing for Engineers, Managers, and Scientists,  2nd ed., by H. J. Tichy (Wiley,
1988). Plus two new books from Amazon.
The ANSIIEEE standard for logic symbols is Std 91-1984,  IEEE Standard
Graphic Symbols for Logic Functions. Another standard of interest to logic
DO NOT COPY
designers is ANSI/IEEE 991-1986,  Logic Circuit Diagrams.  These two stan-
dards and ten others, including standard symbols for 10-inch gongs and maid’s-
signal plugs, can be found in one handy, five-pound reference,  Electrical and
Electronics Graphic and Letter Symbols and Reference Designations Standards
CollectionDO NOT COPY  Electrical and Electronics Graphics Symbols and Reference Desig-
nations  published by the IEEE in 1996 (www.ieee.org).
Real logic devices are described in data sheets and data books published by
the manufacturers. Updated editions of data books used to be published every
few years, but in recent years the trend has been to minimize or eliminate the
hardcopy editions and instead to publish up-to-date information on the web. TwoDO NOT COPY
of the largest suppliers with the most comprehensive sites are Texas Instruments
(www.ti.com) and Motorola (www.mot.com).
For a given logic family such as 74ALS, all manufacturers list generally
equivalent specifications, so you can get by with just one data book per family.
DO NOT COPY
Some specifications, especially timing, may vary slightly between manufactur-
ers, so when timing is tight it’s best to check a couple of different sources and use
the worst case. That’s a  lot  easier than convincing your manufacturing depart-
ment to buy a component only from a single supplier.
The first PAL devices were invented in 1978 by John Birkner at Monolithic
DO NOT COPY
Memories, Inc. (MMI). Birkner earned U.S. patent number 4,124,899 for his
invention, and MMI rewarded him by buying him a brand new Porsche! Seeing
the value in this technology (PALs, not Porsches), Advanced Micro Devices
(AMD) acquired MMI in the early 1980s and remained a leading developer and
supplier of new PLDs and CPLDs. In 1997, AMD spun off its PLD operations toDO NOT COPY
form Vantis Corporation.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

416  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
Some of the best resources for learning about PLD-based design are pro-
vided the PLD manufacturers. For example, Vantis publishes the  1999 Vantis
Data Book (Sunnyvale, CA 94088, 1999), which contains information on their
DO NOT COPY
PLDs, CPLDs, and FPGAs. Individual data sheets and application notes are
readily downloadable from their web site (www.vantis.com). Similarly, GAL
inventor Lattice Semiconductor has a comprehensive  Lattice Data Book  (Hills-
boro, OR 97124, 1999) and web site (www.latticesemi.com).
A much more detailed discussion of the internal operation of LSI and VLSI
DO NOT COPY
devices, including PLDs, ROMs, and RAMs, can be found in electronics texts
such as  Microelectronics, 2nd ed., by J.Millman and A.Grabel (McGraw-Hill,
1987) and  VLSI Engineering  by Thomas E. Dillinger (Prentice Hall, 1988).
Additional PLD references are cited at the end of \chapref{SeqPLDs}.
DO NOT COPYOn the technical side of digital design, lots of textbooks cover digital
design principles, but only a few cover practical aspects of design. A classic is
Digital Design with Standard MSI and LSI  by Thomas R. Blakeslee, 2nd ed.
(Wiley, 1979), which includes chapters on everything from structured combina-
tional design with MSI and LSI to “the social consequences of engineering.” A
DO NOT COPYmore recent, excellent short book focusing on digital design practices is  The
Well-Tempered Digital Design  by Robert B. Seidensticker (Addison-Wesley,
1986). It contains hundreds of readily accessible digital-design “proverbs” in
areas ranging from high-level design philosophy to manufacturability. Another
easy-reading, practical, and “fun” book on analog and digital design is Clive
DO NOT COPY
Maxfield’s  Bebop to the Boolean Boogie  (LLH Technology Publishing, 1997;
for a good time, also visit  www.maxmon.com).
Drill Problems
DO NOT COPY5.1  Give three examples of combinational logic circuits that require  billions and bil-
lions  of rows to describe in a truth table. For each circuit, describe the circuit’s
inputs and output(s), and indicate exactly how many rows the truth table contains;
you need not write out the truth table. (Hint:  You can find several such circuits
right in this chapter.)
DO NOT COPY5.2  Draw the DeMorgan equivalent symbol for a 74x30 8-input  NAND  gate.
5.3  Draw the DeMorgan equivalent symbol for a 74x27 3-input  NOR  gate.
5.4  What’s wrong with the signal name “READY′ ”?
5.5  You may find it annoying to have to keep track of the active levels of all the sig-
nals in a logic circuit. Why not use only noninverting gates, so all signals are
DO NOT COPY
active high?
5.6  True or false: In bubble-to-bubble logic design, outputs with a bubble can be con-
nected only to inputs with a bubble.
5.7  A digital communication system is being designed with twelve identical network
ports. Which type of schematic structure is probably most appropriate for the
DO NOT COPY
design?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Drill Problems  417
5.8  Determine the exact maximum propagation delay from  IN  to  OUT  of the circuit
in Figure X5.8 for both  LOW-to-HIGH  and  HIGH-to-LOW  transitions, using the
timing information given in Table 5-2. Repeat, using a single worst-case delay
DO NOT COPYnumber for each gate and compare and comment on your results.
74LS00
74LS00  4
74LS00  1 1  6
74LS00  12 1 3 5  OUT
74LS00  9 1 11 2 
74LS00  4 1 8 13 
1 1 6 10  U2
1 3 5  U2
2  U1
IN DO NOT COPYU1
U1
U1 Figure X5.8
5.9  Repeat Drill 5.8, substituting 74HCT00s for the 74LS00s.
5.10  Repeat Drill 5.8, substituting 74LS08s for the 74LS00s.
5.11  Repeat Drill 5.8, substituting 74AHCT02s for the 74LS00s, using constant 0
DO NOT COPY
instead of constant 1 inputs, and using typical rather than maximum timing.
5.12  Estimate the minimum propagation delay from IN  to OUT for the circuit shown in
Figure X5.12. Justify your answer.
74LS86
74LS86  12
74LS86 9 1  11
DO NOT COPY74LS86  4 0 8 13  OUT
1 0 6 10 
1 3 5 
U1
2 
IN U1 Figure X5.12
U1
U1
5.13  Determine the exact maximum propagation delay from  IN  to  OUT  of the circuit
DO NOT COPYin Figure X5.12 for both  LOW-to-HIGH  and  HIGH-to-LOW  transitions, using the
timing information given in Table 5-2. Repeat, using a single worst-case delay
number for each gate and compare and comment on your results.
5.14  Repeat Drill 5.13, substituting 74HCT86s for the 74LS86s.
5.15  Which would expect to be faster, a decoder with active-high outputs or one with
DO NOT COPYactive-low outputs?
5.16  Using the information in Table 5-3 for 74LS components, determine the maxi-
mum propagation delay from any input to any output in the 5-to-32 decoder
circuit of Figure 5-39. You may use the “worst-case” analysis method.
5.17  Repeat Drill 5.16, performing a detailed analysis for each transition direction,
DO NOT COPY
and compare your results.
5.18  Show how to build each of the following single- or multiple-output logic func-
tions using one or more 74x138 or 74x139 binary decoders and  NAND  gates.
(Hint: Each realization should be equivalent to a sum of minterms.)
DO NOT COPY(a)  F  =  ΣX,Y,Z(2,4,7)  (b)  F  =∏A,B,C(3,4,5,6,7)
(c)  F  =  ΣA,B,C,D(2,4,6,14)  (d)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y,Z(0,1,2,3,5,7,11,13)
(e)  F  =  ΣW,X,Y(1,3,5,6)  (f)  F  =  ΣA,B,C(0,4,6)
G  =  ΣW,X,Y(2,3,4,7)  G  =  ΣC,D,E(1,2)
DO NOT COPY
5.19  Draw the digits created by a 74x49 seven-segment decoder for the nondecimal
inputs 1010 through 1111.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

418  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
5.20  Starting with the logic diagram for the 74x148 priority encoder, write logic equa-
tions for its A2_L, A1_L, and A0_L outputs. How do they differ from the “generic”
equations given in Section 5.5.1?
DO NOT COPY
5.21  What’s terribly wrong with the circuit in Figure X5.21? Suggest a change that
eliminates the terrible problem.
74x139
1-bit party-line
1  4 SELP_L
EN_L 1G 1Y0
5 SELQ_L
1Y1
DO NOT COPY2 6 SELR_L P
ASRC0 1A 1Y2
3 7 SELS_L
ASRC1 1B 1Y3
15  12 SELT_L Q
2G 2Y0
11 SELU_L
2Y1
14 10 SELV_L
DO NOT COPYBSRC0 2A 2Y2
13 9 SELW_L R
BSRC1 2B 2Y3
S
DO NOT COPY
T
U
Figure X5.21
DO NOT COPY
V
W
SDATA
DO NOT COPY
5.22  Using the information in Tables 5-2 and 5-3 for 74LS components, determine the
maximum propagation delay from any input to any output in the 32-to-1 multi-
plexer circuit of Figure 5-65. You may use the “worst-case” analysis method.
5.23  Repeat Exercise 5.22 using 74HCT components.
DO NOT COPY5.24  An  n-input parity tree can be built with  XOR  gates in the style of Figure 5-73(a).
Under what circumstances does a similar  n-input parity tree built using  XNOR
gates perform exactly the same function?
5.25  Using the information in Tables 5-2 and 5-3 for 74LS components, determine the
maximum propagation delay from the  DU  bus to the  DC  bus in the error-correc-
DO NOT COPYtion circuit of Figure 5-76. You may use the “worst-case” analysis method.
5.26  Repeat Exercise 5.25 using 74HCT components.
5.27  Starting with the equations given in Section 5.9.4, write a complete logic expres-
sion for the  ALTBOUT  output of the 74x85.
5.28  Starting with the logic diagram for the 74x682, write a logic expression for the
DO NOT COPYPGTQ_L  output in terms of the inputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  419
5.29  Write an algebraic expression for s2, the third sum bit of a binary adder, as a func-
tion of inputs  x0,  x1,  x2,  y0,  y1 , and  y2. Assume that  c0 =  0, and do not attempt to
“multiply out” or minimize the expression.
DO NOT COPY
5.30  Using the information in Table 5-3 for 74LS components, determine the maxi-
mum propagation delay from any input to any output of the 16-bit group ripple
adder of Figure 5-91. You may use the “worst-case” analysis method.
Exercises
DO NOT COPY
5.31  A possible definition of a  BUT  gate (Exercise 4.45) is “Y1  is 1 if  A1  and  B1  are 1
but  either  A2  or  B2  is 0;  Y2  is defined symmetrically.” Write the truth table and
find minimal sum-of-products expressions for the  BUT-gate outputs. Draw the
logic diagram for a  NAND-NAND  circuit for the expressions, assuming that only
DO NOT COPYuncomplemented inputs are available. You may use gates from 74HCT00, ’04,
’10, ’20, and ’30 packages.
5.32  Find a gate-level design for the BUT gate defined in Exercise 5.31 that uses a min-
imum number of transistors when realized in CMOS. You may use gates from
74HCT00, ’02, ’04, ’10, ’20, and ’30 packages. Write the output expressions
DO NOT COPY(which need not be two-level sums-of-products), and draw the logic diagram.
5.33  For each circuit in the two preceding exercises, compute the worst-case delay
from input to output, using the delay numbers for 74HCT components in
Table 5-2. Compare the cost (number of transistors), speed, and input loading of
the two designs. Which is better?
5.34DO NOT COPY  Butify the function  F  = ΣW,X,Y,Z(3,7,11,12,13,14). That is, show how to perform  F butification
with a single  BUT  gate as defined in Exercise 5.31 and a single 2-input  OR gate.
5.35  Design a 1-out-of-4 checker with four inputs, A, B, C, D, and a single output ERR.
The output should be 1 if two or more of the inputs are 1, and 0 if no input or one
input is 1. Use SSI parts from Figure 5-18, and try to minimize the number of
DO NOT COPYgates required. (Hint:  It can be done with seven two-input inverting gates.)
5.36  Suppose that a 74LS138 decoder is connected so that all enable inputs are assert-
ed and C B A = 101. Using the information in Table 5-3 and the ’138 internal logic
diagram, determine the propagation delay from input to all relevant outputs for
each possible single-input change. (Hint: There are a total of nine delay numbers,
DO NOT COPYsince a change on  A,  B, or  C affects two outputs, and a change on any of the three
enable inputs affects one output.)
5.37  Suppose that you are asked to design a new component, a decimal decoder that is
optimized for applications in which only decimal input combinations are expect-
ed to occur. How can the cost of such a decoder be minimized compared to one
DO NOT COPYthat is simply a 4-to-16 decoder with six outputs removed? Write the logic equa-
tions for all ten outputs of the minimized decoder, assuming active-high inputs
and outputs and no enable inputs.
5.38  How many Karnaugh maps would be required to work Exercise 5.37 using the
formal multiple-output minimization procedure described in Section 4.3.8?
5.39DO NOT COPY  Suppose that a system requires a 5-to-32 binary decoder with a single active-low
enable input, a design similar to Figure 5-39. With the  EN1  input pulled  HIGH,
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

420  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
either the  EN2_L  or the  EN3_L  input in the figure could be used as the enable,
with the other input grounded. Discuss the pros and cons of using  EN2_L  versus
EN3_L.
DO NOT COPY
5.40  Determine whether the circuits driving the  a, b, and c  outputs of the 74x49 seven-
segment decoder correspond to minimal product-of-sums expressions for these
segments, assuming that the nondecimal input combinations are “don’t cares”
and  BI  = 1.
5.41  Redesign the MSI 74x49 seven-segment decoder so that the digits 6 and 9 have
DO NOT COPY
tails as shown in Figure X5.41. Are any of the digit patterns for nondecimal
inputs 1010 through 1111 affected by your redesign?
Figure X5.41
DO NOT COPY
5.42  Starting with the ABEL program in Table 5-21, write a program for a seven-seg-
ment decoder with the following enhancements:
• The outputs are all active low.
DO NOT COPY• Two new inputs,  ENHEX and  ERRDET, control the decoding of the segment outputs.
• If  ENHEX = 0, the outputs match the behavior of a 74x49.
• If  ENHEX = 1, then the outputs for digits 6 and 9 have tails, and the outputs for digits
A–F are controlled by  ERRDET.
• If  ENHEX = 1 and  ERRDET = 0, then the outputs for digits A–F look like the letters
A–F, as in the original program.
DO NOT COPY
• If ENHEX = 1 and ERRDET = 1, then the output for digits A–F looks like the letter S.
5.43  A famous logic designer decided to quit teaching and make a fortune by fabricat-
ing huge quantities of the MSI circuit shown in Figure X5.47.
5-44  (a)Label the inputs and outputs of the circuit with appropriate signal names, including
DO NOT COPYactive-level indications.
5-45  (b)What does the circuit do? Be specific and account for all inputs and outputs.
5-46  (c)Draw the MSI logic symbol that would go on the data sheet of this wonderful
device.
5-47  (d)With what standard MSI parts does the new part compete? Do you think it would
be successful in the MSI marketplace?
DO NOT COPY
5.48  An FCT three-state buffer drives ten FCT inputs and a 4.7-KΩ  pull-up resistor to
5.0 V. When the output changes from  LOW to Hi-Z, estimate how long it takes for
the FCT inputs to see the output as  HIGH. State any assumptions that you make.
5.49  On a three-state bus, ten FCT three-state buffers are driving ten FCT inputs and a
DO NOT COPY4.7-KΩ  pull-up resistor to 5.0 V. Assuming that no other devices are driving the
bus, estimate how long the bus signal remains at a valid logic level when an active
output enters the Hi-Z state. State any assumptions that you make.
5.50  Design a 10-to-4 encoder with inputs in the 1-out-of-10 code and outputs in BCD.
5.51  Draw the logic diagram for a 16-to-4 encoder using just four 8-input NAND gates.
DO NOT COPYWhat are the active levels of the inputs and outputs in your design?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  421
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Figure X5.47
DO NOT COPY
5.52  Draw the logic diagram for a circuit that uses the 74x148 to resolve priority
among eight active-high inputs,  I0–I7, where  I7  has the highest priority. The cir-
cuit should produce active-high address outputs  A2–A0 to indicate the number of
the highest-priority asserted input. If no input is asserted, then  A2–A0  should be
DO NOT COPY
111 and an IDLE output should be asserted. You may use discrete gates in addition
to the ’148. Be sure to name all signals with the proper active levels.
5.53  Draw the logic diagram for a circuit that resolves priority among eight active-low
inputs, I0_L–I7_L, where I0_L has the highest priority. The circuit should produce
active-high address outputs  A2–A0 to indicate the number of the highest-priority
DO NOT COPY
asserted input. If at least one input is asserted, then an  AVALID  output should be
asserted. Be sure to name all signals with the proper active levels. This circuit can
be built with a single 74x148 and no other gates.
5.54  A purpose of Exercise 5.53 was to demonstrate that it is not always possible to
maintain consistency in active-level notation unless you are willing to define
DO NOT COPY
alternate logic symbols for MSI parts that can be used in different ways. Define
an  alternate  symbol  for  the  74x148  that  provides  this  consistency  in
Exercise 5.53.
5.55  Design a combinational circuit with eight active-low request inputs,  R0_L–R7_L,
and eight outputs,  A2–A0,  AVALID,  B2–B0, and  BVALID. The  R0_L–R7_L  inputs
DO NOT COPY
and  A2–A0  and  AVALID  outputs are defined as in Exercise 5.53. The  B2–B0  and
BVALID outputs identify the second-highest priority request input that is asserted.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

422  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
A
DO NOT COPY
Figure X5.59 Z
B
DO NOT COPY
S
You should be able to design this circuit with no more than six SSI and MSI pack-
ages, but don’t use more than 10 in any case.
DO NOT COPY
5.56  Repeat Exercise 5.55 using ABEL. Does the design fit into a single GAL20V8?
5.57  Repeat Exercise 5.55 using VHDL.
5.58  Design a 3-input, 5-bit multiplexer that fits in a 24-pin IC package. Write the truth
table and draw a logic diagram and logic symbol for your multiplexer.
DO NOT COPY5.59  Write the truth table and a logic diagram for the logic function performed by the
CMOS circuit in Figure X5.59. (The circuit contains transmission gates, which
were introduced in Section 3.7.1.)
5.60  A famous logic designer decided to quit teaching and make a fortune by fabricat-
ing huge quantities of the MSI circuit shown in Figure X5.64.
DO NOT COPY5-61  (a)Label the inputs and outputs of the circuit with appropriate signal names, including
active-level indications.
5-62  (b)What does the circuit do? Be specific and account for all inputs and outputs.
5-63  (c)Draw the MSI logic symbol that would go on the data sheet of this wonderful
device.
DO NOT COPY5-64  (d)With what standard MSI parts does the new part compete? Do you think it would
be successful in the MSI marketplace?
barrel shifter 5.65  A 16-bit barrel shifter is a combinational logic circuit with 16 data inputs, 16 data
outputs, and 4 control inputs. The output word equals the input word, rotated by
a number of bit positions specified by the control inputs. For example, if the input
DO NOT COPYword equals  ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOP (each letter represents one bit), and the con-
trol inputs are 0101 (5), then the output word is  FGHIJKLMNOPABCDE. Design
a 16-bit barrel shifter using combinational MSI parts discussed in this chapter.
Your design should contain 20 or fewer ICs. Do not draw a complete schematic,
but sketch and describe your design in general terms and indicate the types and
total number of ICs required.
DO NOT COPY
5.66  Write an ABEL program for the barrel shifter in Exercise 5.65.
5.67  Write a VHDL program for the barrel shifter in Exercise 5.65.
5.68  Show how to realize the 4-input, 18-bit multiplexer with the functionality
described in Table 5-39 using 18 74x151s.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  423
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Figure X5.64
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
5.69  Show how to realize the 4-input, 18-bit multiplexer with the functionality of
DO NOT COPYTable 5-39 using 9 74x153s and a “code converter” with inputs  S2–S0  and
outputs  C1,C0  such that  [C1,C0]  = 00–11 when  S2–S0  selects  A–D, respectively.
5.70  Design a 3-input, 2-output combinational circuit that performs the code conver-
sion specified in the previous exercise, using discrete gates.
5.71  Add a three-state-output control input  OE  to the VHDL multiplexer program in
DO NOT COPY
Table 5-42. Your solution should have only one process.
5.72  A digital designer who built the circuit in Figure 5-75 accidentally used 74x00s
instead of ’08s in the circuit, and found that the circuit still worked, except for a
change in the active level of the  ERROR  signal. How was this possible?
5.73  What logic function is performed by the CMOS circuit shown in Figure X5.73?
DO NOT COPY
A Figure X5.73
DO NOT COPY
Z
DO NOT COPY
B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

424  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
A
DO NOT COPY
Figure X5.75DO NOT COPY
Z
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
B
C
n  n
DO NOT COPY5.74  An odd-parity circuit with 2 inputs can be built with 2 -1  XOR  gates. Describe
two different structures for this circuit, one of which gives a minimum worst-case
input to output propagation delay and the other of which gives a maximum. For
each structure, state the worst-case number of  XOR-gate delays, and describe a
situation where that structure might be preferred over the other.
DO NOT COPY5.75  Write the truth table and a logic diagram for the logic function performed by the
CMOS circuit in Figure X5.75.
5.76  Write a 4-step iterative algorithm corresponding to the iterative comparator cir-
cuit of Figure 5-79.
5.77  Design a 16-bit comparator using five 74x85s in a tree-like structure, such that
DO NOT COPYthe maximum delay for a comparison equals twice the delay of one 74x85.
5.78  Starting with a manufacturer’s logic diagram for the 74x85, write a logic expres-
sion for the ALTBOUT output, and prove that it algebraically equals the expression
derived in Drill 5.27.
5.79  Design a comparator similar to the 74x85 that uses the opposite cascading order.
DO NOT COPYThat is, to perform a 12-bit comparison, the cascading outputs of the high-order
comparator would drive the cascading inputs of the mid-order comparator, and
the mid-order outputs would drive the low-order inputs. You needn’t do a com-
plete logic design and schematic; a truth table and an application note showing
the interconnection for a 12-bit comparison are sufficient.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  425
5.80  Design a 24-bit comparator using three 74x682s and additional gates as required.
Your circuit should compare two 24-bit unsigned numbers  P  and  Q  and produce
two output bits that indicate whether  P  =  Q  or  P  >  Q.
DO NOT COPY
5.81  Draw a 6-variable Karnaugh map for the  s2  function of Drill 5.29, and find all of
its prime implicants. Using the 6-variable map format of Exercise 4.66, label the
variables in the order  x0 ,  y0,  x2 ,  y2 ,  x1,  y1  instead of  U,  V,  W,  X,  Y,  Z. You need not
write out the algebraic product corresponding to each prime implicant; simply
identify each one with a number (1, 2, 3,  …) on the map. Then make a list that
DO NOT COPYshows for each prime implicant whether or not it is essential and how many inputs
are needed on the corresponding  AND  gate.
5.82  Starting with the logic diagram for the 74x283 in Figure 5-90, write a logic
expression for the  S2  output in terms of the inputs, and prove that it does indeed
equal the third sum bit in a binary addition as advertised. You may assume that  c0
DO NOT COPY=  0 (i.e., ignore  c ).
0
5.83  Using the information in Table 5-3, determine the maximum propagation delay
from any  A or  B bus input to any  F  bus output of the 16-bit carry lookahead adder
of Figure 5-95. You may use the “worst-case” analysis method.
5.84  Referring to the data sheet of a 74S182 carry lookahead circuit, determine wheth-
DO NOT COPY
er or not its outputs match the equations given in Section 5.10.7.
5.85  Estimate the number of product terms in a minimal sum-of-products expression
for the  c32 output of a 32-bit binary adder. Be more specific than “billions and bil-
lions,” and justify your answer.
5.86  Draw the logic diagram for a 64-bit ALU using sixteen 74x181s and five 74S182s
DO NOT COPY
for full carry lookahead (two levels of ’182s). For the ’181s, you need only show
the  CIN  inputs and  G_L  and  P_L  outputs.
5.87  Show how to build all four of the following functions using one SSI package and
one 74x138.
DO NOT COPYF1 =  X′ ⋅  Y′ ⋅  Z′ +X ⋅  Y ⋅ Z  F2 =  X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z + X ⋅ Y ⋅ Z′
F3 = X′ ⋅ Y ⋅ Z′ + X ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z  F4 =  X ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′ + X′ ⋅ Y ⋅ Z
5.88  Design a customized decoder with the function table in Table X5.88 using MSI
and SSI parts. Minimize the number of IC packages in your design.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e X 5 . 8 8
CS_L  A2  A1  A0 Output to assert 
1  x  x  x  none
0  0  0  x  BILL_L
0  0  x  0  MARY_L
DO NOT COPY
0  0  1  x  JOAN_L
0  0  x  1  PAUL_L
0  1  0  x  ANNA_L
0  1  x  0  FRED_L
0  1  1  x  DAVE_L
DO NOT COPY0  1  x  1  KATE_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

426  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices
5.89  Repeat Exercise 5.88 using ABEL and a single GAL16V8.
5.90  Repeat Exercise 5.88 using VHDL.
5.91  Using ABEL and a single GAL16V8, design a customized multiplexer with four
DO NOT COPY
3-bit input buses  P,  Q,  R,  T, and three select inputs  S2–S0  that choose one of the
buses to drive a 3-bit output bus  Y  according to Table X5.91.
Ta b l e X 5 . 9 1 
S2  S1  S0 Input to select
P
DO NOT COPY0  0  0 
0  0  1  P
0  1  0  P
0  1  1  Q
1  0  0  P
1  0  1  P
DO NOT COPY
1  1  0  R
1  1  1  T
5.92  Design a customized multiplexer with four 8-bit input buses P, Q, R, and T, select-
DO NOT COPYing one of the buses to drive a 8-bit output bus  Y  according to Table X5.91. Use
two 74x153s and a code converter that maps the eight possible values on  S2–S0
to four select codes for the ‘153. Choose a code that minimizes the size and prop-
agation delay of the code converter.
5.93  Design a customized multiplexer with five 4-bit input buses  A,  B,  C,  D, and  E,
DO NOT COPYselecting one of the buses to drive a 4-bit output bus  T  according to Table X5.93.
You may use no more than three MSI and SSI ICs.
Ta b l e X 5 . 9 3
S2  S1  S0 Input to select 
0  0  0  A
DO NOT COPY0  0  1  B
0  1  0  A
0  1  1  C
1  0  0  A
1  0  1  D
DO NOT COPY1  1  0  A
1  1  1  E
5.94  Repeat Exercise 5.93 using ABEL and one or more PAL/GAL devices from this
chapter. Minimize the number and size of the GAL devices.
DO NOT COPY
5.95  Design a 3-bit equality checker with six inputs,  SLOT[2–0] and  GRANT[2–0], and
one active-low output,  MATCH_L. The  SLOT inputs are connected to fixed values
when the circuit installed in the system, but the  GRANT  values are changed on a
cycle-by-cycle basis during normal operation of the system. Using only SSI and
MSI parts that appear in Tables 5-2 and 5-3, design a comparator with the shortest
DO NOT COPYpossible maximum propagation delay from  GRANT[2–0]  to  MATCH_L. (Note:
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  427
The author had to solve this problem “in real life” to shave 2 ns off the critical-
path delay in a 25-MHz system design.)
5.96  Design a combinational circuit whose inputs are two 8-bit unsigned binary inte-
DO NOT COPY
gers,  X  and  Y, and a control signal  MIN/MAX. The output of the circuit is an 8-bit
unsigned binary integer  Z  such that  Z  =  0 if  X =  Y; otherwise, Z  =  min(X,Y)  if  MIN/
MAX  =  1, and  Z  =  max(X,Y)  if  MIN/MAX  =  0.
5.97  Design a combinational circuit whose inputs are two 8-bit unsigned binary inte-
gers,  X and  Y, and whose output is an 8-bit unsigned binary integer  Z = max(X,Y).
DO NOT COPY
For this exercise, you may use any of the 74x SSI and MSI components intro-
duced in this chapter  except  the 74x682.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

428  Chapter 5  Combinational Logic Design Practices

--- Page Break ---

comparator
c h a p t e r
DO NOT
X > Y
6
max (X, Y)
mux
mux COPY
mux
min (X, Y)
DO NOT
Combinational Design Examples
COPY
o far, we have looked at basic principles in several areas—number
systems, digital circuits, and combinational logic—and we have
DO NOT
described many of the basic building blocks of combinational
S
design—decoders, multiplexers, and the like. All of that is a needed
foundation, but the ultimate goal of studying digital design is eventually to
be able to solve real problems by designing digital systems (well, duh …).
That usually requires experience beyond what you can get by reading aCOPY
textbook. We’ll try to get you started by presenting a number of larger
combinational design examples in this chapter.
The chapter is divided into three sections. The first section gives
design examples using combinational building blocks. While the examples
are written in terms of MSI functions, the same functions are widely used inDO NOT
ASIC and schematic-based FPGA design. The idea of these examples is to
show that you can often express a combinational function using a collection
of smaller building blocks. This is important for a couple of reasons: a
hierarchical approach usually simplifies the overall design task, and the
COPY
smaller building blocks often have a more efficient, optimized realization in
FPGA and ASIC cells than what you’d get if you wrote a larger, monolithic
description in an HDL and then just hit the “synthesize” button.
The second section gives design examples using ABEL. These designs
are all targeted to small PLDs such as 16V8s and 20V8s. Besides the general
DO NOT
use of the ABEL language, some of the examples illustrate the partitioning
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 463
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

464  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
decisions that a designer must make when an entire circuit does not fit into a
single component.
A VHDL-based approach is especially appropriate for larger designs that
DO NOT COPY
will be realized in a single CPLD, FPGA or ASIC, as described in the third sec-
tion. You may notice that these examples do not target a specific CPLD or
FPGA. Indeed, this is one of the benefits of HDL-based design; most or all of the
design effort is “portable” and can be targeted to any of a variety of technologies.
The only prerequisites for this chapter are the chapters that precede it. The
DO NOT COPY
three sections are written to be pretty much independent of each other, so you
don’t have to read about ABEL if you’re only interested in VHDL, or vice versa.
Also, the rest of the book is written so that you can read this chapter now or skip
it and come back later.
DO NOT COPY
6.1 Building-Block Design Examples
6.1.1 Barrel Shifter
barrel shifter A  barrel shifter  is a combinational logic circuit with  n  data inputs,  n  data
DO NOT COPYoutputs, and a set of control inputs that specify how to shift the data between
input and output. A barrel shifter that is part of a microprocessor CPU can
typically specify the direction of shift (left or right), the type of shift (circular,
arithmetic, or logical), and the amount of shift (typically 0 to  n–1 bits, but
sometimes 1 to  n  bits).
DO NOT COPY
In this subsection, we’ll look at the design of a simple 16-bit barrel shifter
that does left circular shifts only, using a 4-bit control input  S[3:0]  to specify the
amount of shift. For example, if the input word is  ABCDEFGHGIHKLMNOP
(where each letter represents one bit), and the control input is 0101 (5), then the
output word is  FGHGIHKLMNOPABCDE.
DO NOT COPY
From one point of view, this problem is deceptively simple. Each output bit
can be obtained from a 16-input multiplexer controlled by the shift-control
inputs, which each multiplexer data input connected to the appropriate On the
other hand, when you look at the details of the design, you’ll see that there are
trade-offs in the speed and size of the circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Let us first consider a design that uses off-the-shelf MSI multiplexers. A
16-input, one-bit multiplexer can be built using two 74x151s, by applying  S3
and its complement to the  EN_L inputs and combining the  Y_L  data outputs with
a  NAND  gate, as we showed in Figure 5-66 for a 32-input multiplexer. The low-
DO NOT COPYorder shift-control inputs,  S2–S0. connect to the like-named select inputs of the
’151s.
We complete the design by replicating this 16-input multiplexer 16 times
and hooking up the data inputs appropriately, as shown in Figure 6-1. The top
’151 of each pair is enabled by  S3_L, and the bottom one by  S3; the remaining
DO NOT COPYselect bits are connected to all 32 ’151s. Data inputs  D0–D7  of each ’151 are
connected to the  DIN  inputs in the listed order from left to right.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.1  Building-Block Design Examples  465
DIN[15:8]
74x151 DOUT[15]
DIN[7:0]
74x151
DO NOT COPY
DIN[14:7]
74x151 DOUT[14]
DIN[6:0,15]
74x151
DIN[13:6]
74x151 DOUT[13]
DO NOT COPYDIN[5:0,15:14]
74x151
DIN[1:0,15:10]
74x151 DOUT[1]
DIN[9:2]
DO NOT COPY74x151
DIN[0,15:9]
74x151 DOUT[0] Figure 6-1
DIN[8:1] One approach to
74x151
DIN[15:0] building a 16-bit
S3_L  DOUT[15:0]
barrel shifter.
DO NOT COPY
S3 S[2-0]
S[3:0] 
The first row of Table 6-1 shows the characteristics of this first approach.
DO NOT COPY
About 36 chips (32 74x151s, 4 74x00s, and 1/6 74x04) are used in the MSI/SSI
realization. We can reduce this to 32 chips by replacing the 74x151s with
74x251s and tying their three-state  Y  outputs together, as tabulated in the second
row. Both of these designs have very heavy loading on the control inputs; each of
the control bits  S[2:0]  must be connected to the like-named select input of all 32
DO NOT COPY
multiplexers. The data inputs are also fairly heavily loaded; each data bit must
connect to 16 different multiplexer data inputs, corresponding to the 16 possible
shift amounts. However, assuming that the heavy control and data loads don’t
slow things down too much, the 74x251-based approach yields the shortest data
delay, with each data bit passing through just one multiplexer.
DO NOT COPY
Alternatively, we could build the barrel shifter using 16 74x157 2-input,
4-bit multiplexers, as tabulated in the last row of the table. We start by using four
74x157s to make a 2-input, 16-bit multiplexer. Then, we can hook up a first set
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 6 - 1
Multiplexer Data Data Control Total
Component Loading Delay Loading ICs Properties of four
different barrel-shifter
74x151  16  2  32  36
design approaches.
74x251  16  1  32  32
DO NOT COPY74x153  4  2  8  16
74x157  2  4  4  16
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

466  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
DIN[15:12] X[15:12] Y[15:12] Z[15:12]
X[15:12] Y[15:12] Z[15:12] DOUT[15:12]
DIN[14:11] 74x157  X[13:10] 74x157 Y[11:8] 74x157 Z[7:4] 74x157
DO NOT COPYDIN[11:8] X[11:8] Y[11:8] Z[11:8]
X[11:8] Y[11:8] Z[11:8] DOUT[11:8]
DIN[10:7] 74x157 X[9:6] 74x157 Y[7:4] 74x157 Z[3:0] 74x157
DIN[7:4] X[7:4] Y[7:4] Z[7:4]
X[7:4] Y[7:4] Z[7:4] DOUT[7:4]
DIN[6:3] 74x157 X[5:2] 74x157 Y[3:0] 74x157 Z[15:12] 74x157
DO NOT COPY
DIN[3:0] X[3:0] Y[3:0] Z[3:0]
X[3:0] Y[3:0] Z[3:0] DOUT[3:0]
DIN[2:0,15] 74x157 X[1:0,15:14] 74x157 Y[15:12] 74x157 Z[11:8] 74x157
DIN[15:0] 
S0 S1 S2 S3 DOUT[15:0]
DO NOT COPYS[3:0]
Figure 6-2  A second approach to building a 16-bit barrel shifter.
of four ’157s controlled by  S0  to shift the input word left by 0 or 1 bit. The data
outputs of this set are connected to the inputs of a second set, controlled by  S1,
DO NOT COPYwhich shifts its input word left by 0 or 2 bits. Continuing the cascade, a third and
fourth set are controlled by  S2  and  S3  to shift selectively by 4 and 8 bits, as
shown in Figure 6-2. Here, the  1A-4A  and 1B-4B inputs and the 1Y-4Y outputs of
each ’157 are connected to the indicated signals in the listed order from left to
right.
DO NOT COPY
The ’157-based approach requires only half as many MSI packages and
has far less loading on the control and data inputs. On the other hand, it has the
longest data-path delay, since each data bit must pass through four 74x157s.
Halfway between the two approaches, we can use eight 74x153 4-input,
2-bit multiplexers two build a 4-input, 16-bit multiplexer. Cascading two sets of
DO NOT COPY
these, we can use  S[3:2]  to shift selectively by 0, 4, 8, or 12 bits, and  S[1:0]  to
shift by 0–3 bits. This approach has the performance characteristics shown in the
third row of Table 6-1, and would appear to be the best compromise if you don’t
need to have the absolutely shortest possible data delay.
DO NOT COPYThe same kind of considerations would apply if you were building the
barrel shifter out of ASIC cells instead of MSI parts, except you’d be counting
chip area instead of MSI/SSI packages.
Typical ASIC cell libraries have 1-bit-wide multiplexers, usually realized
with CMOS transmission gates, with 2 to 8 inputs. To build a larger multiplexer,
DO NOT COPYyou have to put together the appropriate combination of smaller cells. Besides
the kind of choices we encountered in the MSI example, you have the further
complication that CMOS delays are highly dependent on loading. Thus, depend-
ing on the approach, you must decide where to add buffers to the control lines,
the data lines, or both to minimize loading-related delays. An approach that
DO NOT COPY
looks good on paper, before analyzing these delays and adding buffers, may
actually turn out to have poorer delay or more chip area than another approach.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.1  Building-Block Design Examples  467
6.1.2 Simple Floating-Point Encoder
The previous example used multiple copies of a single building block, a multi-
plexer, and it was pretty obvious from the problem statement that a multiplexer
DO NOT COPY
was the appropriate building block. The next example shows that you sometimes
have to look a little harder to see the solution in terms of known building blocks.
Now let’s look at a design problem whose MSI solution is not quite so
obvious, a “fixed-point to floating-point encoder.” An unsigned binary integer  B
11 
in the range 0  ≤  B < 2  can be represented by 11 bits in “fixed-point” format,
DO NOT COPY
B  =  b10b9…b1b0. We can represent numbers in the same range with less preci-
E
sion using only 7 bits in a floating-point notation,  F  =  M ⋅ 2 , where  M  is a 4-bit
mantissa  m3m2m1m0  and E  is a 3-bit exponent e2e1e0 . The smallest integer in this
0  4 7
format is 0⋅2  and the largest is (2  −1)  ⋅  2 .
DO NOT COPYGiven an 11-bit fixed-point integer B, we can convert it to our 7-bit float-
ing-point notation by “picking off” four high-order bits beginning with the most
significant 1, for example,
7 
11010110100  =  1101  ⋅  2  +  0110100
5 
DO NOT COPY00100101111  =  1001  ⋅  2  +  01111
2 
00000111110  =  1111  ⋅  2  +  10
0 
00000001011  =  1011  ⋅  2  +  0
0 
00000000010  =  0010  ⋅  2  +  0
DO NOT COPY
The last term in each equation is a truncation error that results from the loss of
precision in the conversion. Corresponding to this conversion operation, we can
write the specification for a fixed-point to floating-point encoder circuit:
•  A combinational circuit is to convert an 11-bit unsigned binary integer B into
DO NOT COPYa 7-bit floating-point number  M,E, where M  and  E  have 4 and 3 bits, respec-
E 
tively. The numbers have the relationship  B  =  M⋅2 +  T, where  T  is the
E
truncation error, 0  ≤ T < 2 .
Starting with a problem statement like the one above, it takes some
creativity to come up with an efficient circuit design—the specification gives no
DO NOT COPY
clue. However, we can get some ideas by looking at how we converted numbers
by hand earlier. We basically scanned each input number from left to right to find
the first position containing a 1, stopping at the  b3  position if no 1 was found. We
picked off four bits starting at that position to use as the mantissa, and the start-
ing position number determined the exponent. These operations are beginning toDO NOT COPY
sound like MSI building blocks.
“Scanning for the first 1” is what a generic priority encoder does. The out-
put of the priority encoder is a number that tells us the position of the first 1. The
position number determines the exponent; first-1 positions of  b10  −  b3  imply
DO NOT COPY
exponents of 7–0, and positions of  b2  −  b0 or no-1-found imply an exponent of 0.
Therefore, we can scan for the first 1 with an 8-input priority encoder with inputs
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

468  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
E2_L
E1_L
E0_L
DO NOT COPYM3_L
74x151
7
EN
11
A
74x148 10 
B
5
DO NOT COPYEI 9  C
B10_L 4 9 B9_L  4
I7 A0 D0
B9_L 3 7 B8_L  3
I6 A1 D1
B8_L 2 6 B7_L  2
I5 A2 D2
B7_L 1 B6_L  1
I4 D3 5
B6_L 13 14 B5_L  15 Y M2_L
DO NOT COPYI3 GS D4 6
B5_L 12 15 B4_L 14 Y
I2 EO  D5
B4_L 11 B3_L 13
I1 D6
B3_L 10 B2_L 12
I0 D7
U1  U2
74x151
DO NOT COPY
B_L[10:0] 7
EN
11
A
10 
B
9 
C
B8_L 4
DO NOT COPYD0
B7_L 3
D1
B6_L 2
D2
B5_L 1
D3 5
B4_L 15 Y  M1_L
D4 6
B3_L 14 Y 
D5
DO NOT COPY
B2_L 13
D6
B1_L 12
D7
U3
74x151
7
DO NOT COPYEN
11
A
10
B
9 
C
B7_L 4
D0
B6_L 3
D1
Figure 6-3DO NOT COPY
B5_L 2
D2
A combinational B4_L 1
D3 5
fixed-point to floating- B3_L 15 Y  M0_L
D4 6
point encoder. B2_L 14 Y 
D5
B1_L 13
D6
DO NOT COPYB0_L 12
D7
U4
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.1  Building-Block Design Examples  469
I7  (highest priority) through  I0  connected to  b10  −  b3. We can use the priority
encoder’s  A2  –  A0  outputs directly as the exponent, as long as the no-1-found
case produces  A2  –  A0  =  000.
DO NOT COPY
“Picking off four bits” sounds like a “selecting” or multiplexing operation.
The 3-bit exponent determines which four bits of  B  we pick off, so we can use
the exponent bits to control an 8-input, 4-bit multiplexer that selects the appro-
priate four bits of  B  to form  M.
An MSI circuit that results from these ideas is shown in Figure 6-3. It con-
DO NOT COPY
tains several optimizations:
•  Since the available MSI priority encoder, the 74x148, has active-low
inputs, the input number  B  is assumed to be available on an active-low bus
B_L[10:0]. If only an active-high version of  B  is available, then eight
DO NOT COPY
inverters can be used to obtain the active-low version.
•  If you think about the conversion operation a while, you’ll realize that the
most significant bit of the mantissa,  m3, is always 1, except in the no-1-
found case. The ’148 has a  GS_L  output that indicates this case, allowing
us to eliminate the multiplexer for  m .
DO NOT COPY3
•  The ’148 has active-low outputs, so the exponent bits (E0_L–E2_L) are
produced in active-low form. Naturally, three inverters could be used to
produce an active-high version.
•  Since everything else is active-low, active-low mantissa bits are used too.
DO NOT COPY
Active-high bits are also readily available on the ’148  EO_L  and the ’151
Y_L  outputs.
Strictly speaking, the multiplexers in Figure 6-3 are drawn incorrectly. The
74x151 symbol can be drawn alternatively as shown in Figure 6-4. In words, if
the multiplexer’s data inputs are active low, then the data outputs have an activeDO NOT COPY
level opposite that shown in the original symbol. The “active-low-data” symbol
74x151
Figure 6-4
7
EN Alternate logic symbol
DO NOT COPY
11
A for the 74x151 8-input
10
B multiplexer.
9
C
4 5
D0 Y
3 6
D1 Y
DO NOT COPY2
D2
1
D3
15
D4
14
D5
13
D6
DO NOT COPY12
D7
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

470  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
should be preferred in Figure 6-3, since the active levels of the ’151 inputs and
outputs would then match their signal names. However, in data transfer and
storage applications, designers (and the book) don’t always “go by the book.” It
DO NOT COPY
is usually clear from the context that a multiplexer (or a multibit register, in
Section 8.2.5) does not alter the active level of its data.
6.1.3 Dual-Priority Encoder
Quite often MSI building blocks need a little help from their friends—ordinary
DO NOT COPY
gates— to get the job done. In this example, we’d like to build a priority encoder
that identifies not only the highest but also the second-highest priority asserted
signal among a set of eight request inputs.
We’ll assume for this example that the request inputs are active low and are
DO NOT COPYnamed  R0_L–R7_L, where  R0_L  has the highest priority. We’ll use  A2–A0  and
AVALID  to identify the highest-priority request, where  AVALID  is asserted only
if at least one request input is asserted. We’ll use  B2–B0  and  BVALID  to identify
the second-highest-priority request, where  BVALID  is asserted only if at least
two request inputs are asserted.
DO NOT COPYFinding the highest-priority request is easy enough, we can just use a
74x148. To find the second highest-priority request, we can use another ’148,
but only if we first “knock out” the highest-priority request before applying the
request inputs. This can be done using a decoder to select a signal to knock out,
based on  A2–A0  and  AVALID  from the first ’148. These ideas are combined in
DO NOT COPY
the solution shown in Figure 6-6. A 74x138 decoder asserts at most one of its
eight outputs, corresponding to the highest-priority request input. The outputs
are fed to a rank of  NAND  gates to “turn off” the highest-priority request.
A trick is used in this solution is to get active-high outputs from the ’148s,
as shown in Figure 6-5. We can rename the address outputs  A2_L–A0_L  to be
DO NOT COPY
active high if we also change the name of the request input that is associated with
each output combination. In particular, we complement the bits of the request
number. In the redrawn symbol, request input  I0  has the highest priority.
74x148 74x148
DO NOT COPY
Figure 6-5 5 5
EI DI
Alternate logic symbols 4 4
I7 I0
for the 74x148 8-input 3 6 3 6
I6 A2 I1 A2
priority encoder. 2 7 2 7
I5 A1 I2 A1
1 9 1 9
I4 A0 I3 A0
DO NOT COPY13 13
I3 I4
12 14 12 14
I2 GS I5 IDLE
11 15 11 15
I1 EO I6 AVALID
10 10
I0 I7
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.1  Building-Block Design Examples  471
R[7:0]_L
74LS148 74LS138
DO NOT COPY
5 15 D0_L
EI 6  Y0
R0_L 4 9 A0 G1 14 D1_L
I7 A0 4 Y1
R1_L 3 7 A1 G2A 13 D2_L
I6 A1 5 Y2
R2_L 2 6 A2 G2B 12 D3_L
I5 A2 Y3
R3_L 1 A[2–0] 11 D4_L
DO NOT COPYI4 A0 1 Y4
R4_L 13 14 A 10 D5_L
I3 GS A1 2 Y5
R5_L 12 15 AVALID B 9 D6_L
I2 EO  A2 3 Y6
R6_L 11 C 7 D7_L
I1 Y7
R7_L 10
I0
U2
DO NOT COPY
A[2:0]
U1
AVALID
D_L[0-7]
74LS04
74LS00
R0_L 1  2 R0 1
RD0_L
DO NOT COPYD0_L 3
2 
U4
U6
R1_L 3  4 R1 4
6 RD1_L
D1_L 5 
U4
U6
74LS148
R2_LDO NOT COPY 5  6 R2 9
8 RD2_L 5
D2_L 10  EI
U4 4 9 B0
U6 I7 A0
3 7 B1
R3_L 9  8 R3 12 I6 A1
11 RD3_L 2 6 B2
D3_L 13  I5 A2
U4 1
DO NOT COPYU6 I4 B[2:0]
13 14
R4_L 11  10 R4 1 I3 GS
3 RD4_L 12 15
D4_L 2  I2 EO  BVALID
U4 11
U7 I1
10
R5_L 13  12 R5 4 I0
6 RD5_L
D5_L
DO NOT COPY5 
U4
U7 U3
R6_L 1  2 R6 9
8 RD6_L
D6_L 10 
U5
U7
R7_L 3  4 R7 12
DO NOT COPY11 RD7_L
D7_L 13 
U5
U7
Figure 6-6  First-and second-highest priority encoder circuit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

472  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
6.1.4 Cascading Comparators
In Section 5.9.4, we showed how 74x85 4-bit comparators can be cascaded to
create larger comparators. Since the 74x85 uses a serial cascading scheme, it can
DO NOT COPY
be used to build arbitrarily large comparators. The 74x682 8-bit comparator, on
the other hand, doesn’t have any cascading inputs and outputs at all. Thus, at first
glance, you might think that it can’t be used to build larger comparators. But
that’s not true.
If you think about the nature of a large comparison, it is clear that two wide
DO NOT COPY
inputs, say 32 bits (four bytes) each, are equal only if their corresponding bytes
are equal. If we’re trying to do a greater-than or less-than comparison, then the
corresponding most-significant that are not equal determine the result of the
comparison.
DO NOT COPYUsing these ideas, Figure 6-7 uses three 74x682 8-bit comparators to do
equality and greater-than comparison on two 24-bit operands. The 24-bit results
are derived from the individual 8-bit results using combinational logic for the
following equations:
PEQQ  =  EQ2  ⋅  EQ1  ⋅  EQ0
DO NOT COPY
PGTQ  =  GT2  +  EQ2  ⋅  GT1  +  EQ2  ⋅  EQ1  ⋅  GT0
This “parallel” expansion approach is actually faster than the 74x85’s
serial cascading scheme, because it does not suffer the delay of propagating the
cascading signals through a cascade of comparators. The parallel approach can
DO NOT COPYbe used to build very wide comparators using two-level  AND-OR  logic to
combine the 8-bit results, limited only by the fan-in constraints of the  AND-OR
logic. Arbitrary large comparators can be made if you use additional levels of
logic to do the combining.
DO NOT COPY
6.1.5 Mode-Dependent Comparator
Quite often, the requirements for a digital-circuit application are specified in a
way that makes an MSI or other building-block solution obvious. For example,
consider the following problem:
DO NOT COPY•  Design a combinational circuit whose inputs are two 8-bit unsigned binary
integers,  X  and Y, and a control signal  MIN/MAX. The output of the circuit is
an 8-bit unsigned binary integer  Z  such that  Z  =  min(X,Y)  if  MIN/MAX  =  1,
and  Z  =  max(X,Y)  if  MIN/MAX  =  0.
DO NOT COPYThis circuit is fairly easy to visualize in terms of MSI functions. Clearly, we can
use a comparator to determine whether  X > Y. We can use the comparator’s
output to control multiplexers that produce  min(X,Y)  and  max(X,Y), and we can
use another multiplexer to select one of these results depending on  MIN/MAX.
Figure 6-8(a) is the block diagram of a circuit corresponding to this approach.
DO NOT COPYOur first solution approach works, but it’s more expensive than it needs to
be. Although it has three two-input multiplexers, there are only two input words,
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.1  Building-Block Design Examples  473
P[23:0]
Q[23:0]
74x682 74x682
DO NOT COPY
P0 2 P16 2
P0 P0
Q0 3 Q16 3
Q0 Q0
P1 4 P17 4
P1 P1
Q1 5 Q17 5
Q1 Q1
P2 6 P18 6
P2 P2
DO NOT COPY
Q2 7 Q18 7
Q2 19 EQ0_L Q2 19 EQ2_L
P3 8 P EQ Q P19 8 P EQ Q
P3 P3
Q3 9 Q19 9
Q3 Q3
P4 11 P20 11
P4 P4
Q4 12 Q20 12
Q4 1 GT0_L Q4 1 GT2_L
DO NOT COPYP5 13 P GT Q P21 13 P GT Q
P5 P5
Q5 14 Q21 14
Q5 Q5
P6 15 P22 15
P6 P6
Q6 16 Q22 16
Q6 Q6
P7 17 P23 17
P7 P7
DO NOT COPYQ7 18 Q23 18
Q7 Q7
U1 U3
74x682
P8 2
P0
DO NOT COPYQ8 3
Q0 74x27
1
P9 4
P1
2  12
Q9 5 PEQQ
Q1
13
P10 6
P2 U4
Q10 7
Q2 19 EQ1_L 3 74x27
DO NOT COPYP11 8 P3 P EQ Q
4  6
Q11 9
Q3
5
P12 11
P4 U4
Q12 12 74x02
Q4 1 GT1_L 74x02 74x27 8
P13 13 P GT Q 2 11 10
P5 PGTQ
1 10  8 9 
Q13 14
DO NOT COPYQ5 3  9
P14 15 U5
P6 U5 U4
Q14 16
Q6 74x02
P15 17
P7 5
4
Q15 18
Q7 6  Figure 6-7
U2
24-bit comparator
DO NOT COPYU5
circuit.
X  and  Y, that may ultimately be selected and produced at the output of the cir-
cuit. Therefore, we should be able to use just a single two-input mux, and use
some other logic to figure out which input to tell it to select. This approach is
shown in Figure 6-8(b) and (c). The “other logic” is very simple indeed, just aDO NOT COPY
single  XOR  gate.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

474  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
MIN/MAX
X 
comparator MIN/MAX
DO NOT COPYY 
other
X 
X > Y X > Y logic
comparator
Y
max (X, Y) SELECT
mux
DO NOT COPYmux  z mux
Z
mux
(a)  (b)
min (X, Y)
DO NOT COPY
74LS682 74x157
X0 2 15
(c) P0 G
Y0 3 1
Q0 S
X1 4 2 
P1 1A 4
DO NOT COPYY1 5 3 1Y
Q1 1B
X2 6 5
P2 2A 7
Y2 7 6 2Y
Q2 19 2B
X3 8 P EQ Q 11
P3 3A 9
Y3 9 10 3Y
Q3 3B
DO NOT COPYX4 11 14
P4 4A 12
Y4 12 74x86 13 4Y
Q4 1 1 4B
P GT Q 3
X5 13 P5 2  U2
Y5 14 Q5 U4 74x157 Z[7:0]
X6 15
P6 15
G
DO NOT COPYY6 16 Q6 1
U1 S
X7 17
P7 2 
1A 4
Y7 18
Q7 3 1Y
1B
5
2A 7
U1 6 2Y
2B
MIN/MAX
DO NOT COPY11
3A 9
10 3Y
3B
X[7:0] 14
4A 12
Y[7:0] 13 4Y
4B
U3
DO NOT COPY
Figure 6-8  Mode-dependent comparator circuit: (a) block diagram of a
“first-cut” solution; (b) block diagram of a more cost-effective
solution; (c) logic diagram for the second solution.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  475
DON’T BE A The wastefulness of our original design approach in Figure 6-8(a) may have been
BLOCKHEAD obvious to you from the beginning, but it demonstrates an important approach to
DO NOT COPY
designing with building blocks:
•  Use standard building blocks to handle data, and look for ways that a single
block can perform different functions at different times or in different modes.
Design control circuits to select the appropriate functions as needed, to reduce
the total parts count of the design.
DO NOT COPY
As Figure 6-8(c) dramatically shows, this approach can save a lot of chips. When
designing with IC chips, you should  not  heed the slogan, “Have all you want, we’ll
make more”!
DO NOT COPY
6.2 Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs
6.2.1 Barrel Shifter
A barrel shifter, defined on page 464, is good example of something  not  to
design using PLDs. However, we can put ABEL to good use to describe a barrelDO NOT COPY
shifter’s function, and we’ll also see why a typical barrel shifter is not a good fit
for a PLD.
Table 6-2 shows the equations for a 16-bit barrel shifter with the same
functionality as the example on page 464—it does left circular shifts only, using
DO NOT COPY
a 4-bit control input  S[3..0]  to specify the amount of shift. ABEL makes it easy
to specify the functionality of the overall circuit without worrying about how the
circuit might be partitioned into multiple chips. Also, ABEL dutifully generates
a minimal sum-of-products expression for each output bit. In this case, each out-
put requires 16 product terms.
DO NOT COPY
Partitioning the 16-bit barrel shifter into multiple PLDs is a difficult task in
two different ways. First, it should be obvious that the nature of the function is
such that every output bit depends on every input bit. A PLD that produces, say,
the  DOUT0  output must have all 16  DIN  inputs and all four  S  inputs available to
it. So, a GAL16V8 definitely cannot be used; it has only 16 inputs.
DO NOT COPY
The GAL20V8 is similar to the GAL16V8, with the addition of four input-
only pins. If we use all 20 available inputs, we are left with two output-only pins
(corresponding to the top and bottom outputs in Figure 5-27 on page 341). Thus,
it seems possible that we could realize the barrel shifter using eight 20V8 chips,
producing two output bits per chip.DO NOT COPY
No, we still have a problem. The second dimension of difficulty in a PLD-
based barrel shifter is the number of product terms per output. The barrel shifter
requires 16, and the 20V8 provides only 7. We’re stuck—any realization of the
barrel shifter in 20V8s is going to require multiple-pass logic. At this point, we
would be best advised to look at partitioning options along the lines that we didDO NOT COPY
in Section 6.1.1.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

476  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 2 module barrel16
ABEL program for a title '16-bit Barrel Shifter'
16-bit barrel shifter.
DO NOT COPY
" Inputs and Outputs
DIN15..DIN0, S3..S0  pin;
DOUT15..DOUT0  pin istype 'com';
S = [S3..S0];
DO NOT COPYequations
[DOUT15..DOUT0] = (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
# (S==1) & [DIN14..DIN0,DIN15]
# (S==2) & [DIN13..DIN0,DIN15..DIN14]
# (S==3) & [DIN12..DIN0,DIN15..DIN13]
DO NOT COPY...
# (S==12) & [DIN3..DIN0,DIN15..DIN4]
# (S==13) & [DIN2..DIN0,DIN15..DIN3]
# (S==14) & [DIN1..DIN0,DIN15..DIN2]
# (S==15) & [DIN0,DIN15..DIN1];
DO NOT COPY
end barrel16
The 16-bit barrel shifter can be realized without much difficulty in a larger
programmable device, that is, in a CPLD or an FPGA with enough I/O pins.
DO NOT COPY
However, imagine that we were trying to design a 32-bit or 64-bit barrel shifter.
Clearly, we would need to use a device with even more I/O pins, but that’s not
all. The number of product terms and the large amount of connectivity (all the
inputs connect to all the outputs) would still be challenging.
Indeed, a typical CPLD or FPGA fitter could have difficulty realizing a
DO NOT COPY
large barrel shifter with small delay or even at all. There is a critical resource that
we took for granted in the partitioned, building-block barrel-shifter designs of
Section 6.1.1—wires! An FPGA is somewhat limited in its internal connectivity,
and a CPLD is even more so. Thus, even with modern FPGA and CPLD design
tools, you may still have to “use your head” to partition the design in a way that
DO NOT COPY
helps the tools do their job.
Barrel shifters can be even more complex than what we’ve shown so far.
Just for fun, Table 6-3 shows the design for a barrel shifter that supports six
different kinds of shifting. This requires even more product terms, up to 40 per
DO NOT COPYoutput! Although you’d never build this device in a PLD, CPLD, or small FPGA,
the minimized ABEL equations are useful because they can help you understand
the effects of some of your design choices. For example, by changing the coding
of  SLA  and  SRA  to  [1,.X.,0]  and  [1,.X.,1], you can reduce the total number
of product terms in the design from 624 to 608. You can save more product terms
DO NOT COPYby changing the coding of the shift amount for some shifts (see Exercise 6.3).
The savings from these changes may carry over to other design approaches.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  477
Ta b l e 6 - 3  ABEL program for a multi-mode 16-bit barrel shifter.
module barrl16f
Title 'Multi-mode 16-bit Barrel Shifter'DO NOT COPY
" Inputs and Outputs
DIN15..DIN0, S3..S0, C2..C0  pin;
DOUT15..DOUT0  pin istype 'com';
S = [S3..S0]; C = [C2..C0]; " Shift amount and modeDO NOT COPY
L = DIN15; R = DIN0;  " MSB and LSB
ROL = (C == [0,0,0]); " Rotate (circular shift) left
ROR = (C == [0,0,1]); " Rotate (circular shift) right
SLL = (C == [0,1,0]); " Shift logical left (shift in 0s)
SRL = (C == [0,1,1]); " Shift logical right (shift in 0s)DO NOT COPY
SLA = (C == [1,0,0]); " Shift left arithmetic (replicate LSB)
SRA = (C == [1,0,1]); " Shift right arithmetic (replicate MSB)
equations
[DOUT15..DOUT0] = ROL & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
DO NOT COPY
# ROL & (S==1) & [DIN14..DIN0,DIN15]
# ROL & (S==2) & [DIN13..DIN0,DIN15..DIN14]
...
# ROL & (S==15) & [DIN0,DIN15..DIN1]
# ROR & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
DO NOT COPY# ROR & (S==1) & [DIN0,DIN15..DIN1]
...
# ROR & (S==14) & [DIN13..DIN0,DIN15..DIN14]
# ROR & (S==15) & [DIN14..DIN0,DIN15]
# SLL & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
# SLL & (S==1) & [DIN14..DIN0,0]
DO NOT COPY...
# SLL & (S==14) & [DIN1..DIN0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
# SLL & (S==15) & [DIN0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0]
# SRL & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
# SRL & (S==1) & [0,DIN15..DIN1]
...
DO NOT COPY
# SRL & (S==14) & [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,DIN15..DIN14]
# SRL & (S==15) & [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,DIN15]
# SLA & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
# SLA & (S==1) & [DIN14..DIN0,R]
...
# SLA & (S==14) & [DIN1..DIN0,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R]
DO NOT COPY
# SLA & (S==15) & [DIN0,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R,R]
# SRA & (S==0) & [DIN15..DIN0]
# SRA & (S==1) & [L,DIN15..DIN1]
...
# SRA & (S==14) & [L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,DIN15..DIN14]
DO NOT COPY# SRA & (S==15) & [L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,L,DIN15];
end barrl16f
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

478  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
6.2.2 Simple Floating-Point Encoder
We defined a simple floating-point number format on page 467, and posed the
design problem of converting a number from fixed-point to this floating point
DO NOT COPY
format. The I/O-pin requirements of this design are limited—11 inputs and 7
outputs—so we can potentially use a single PLD to replace the four parts that
were used in the MSI solution.
An ABEL program for the fixed-to-floating-point converter is given in
Table 6-4. The  WHEN  statement expresses the operation of determining the expo-
DO NOT COPY
nent value  E  in a very natural way. Then E  is used to select the appropriate bits of
B  to use as the mantissa  M.
Despite the deep nesting of the WHEN  statement, only four product terms are
needed in the minimal sum for each bit of  E. The equations for the M bits are not
DO NOT COPYtoo bad either, requiring only eight product terms each. Unfortunately, the
Ta b l e 6 - 4 module fpenc
An ABEL program title 'Fixed-point to Floating-point Encoder'
for the fixed-point to FPENC device 'P20L8';
DO NOT COPYfloating-point PLD.
" Input and output pins
B10..B0  pin 1..11;
E2..E0, M3..M0  pin 21..15 istype 'com';
" Constant expressions
DO NOT COPYB = [B10..B0];
E = [E2..E0];
M = [M3..M0];
equations
DO NOT COPYWHEN B < 16 THEN E = 0;
ELSE WHEN B < 32 THEN E = 1;
ELSE WHEN B < 64 THEN E = 2;
ELSE WHEN B < 128 THEN E = 3;
ELSE WHEN B < 256 THEN E = 4;
ELSE WHEN B < 512 THEN E = 5;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN B < 1024 THEN E = 6;
ELSE E = 7;
M = (E==0) & [B3..B0]
# (E==1) & [B4..B1]
DO NOT COPY# (E==2) & [B5..B2]
# (E==3) & [B6..B3]
# (E==4) & [B7..B4]
# (E==5) & [B8..B5]
# (E==6) & [B9..B6]
# (E==7) & [B10..B7];
DO NOT COPY
end fpenc
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  479
GAL20V8 has available only seven product terms per output. However, the
GAL22V10 (Figure 8-22 on page 684) has more product terms available, so we
can use that if we like.
DO NOT COPY
One drawback of the design in Table 6-4 is that the  [M3..M0]  outputs
are slow; since they use  [E2..E0], they take two passes through the PLD. A
faster approach, if it fits, would be to rewrite the “select” terms (E==0, etc.) as
intermediate equations before the equations section, and let ABEL expand the
resulting  M  equations in a single level of logic. Unfortunately, ABEL does not
DO NOT COPY
allow  WHEN  statements outside of the  equations section, so we’ll have to roll up
our sleeves and write our own logic expressions in the intermediate equations.
Table 6-5 shows the modified approach. The expressions for  S7–S0 are just
mutually-exclusive  AND-terms that indicate exponent values of 7–0 depending
on the location of the most significant 1 bit in the fixed-point input number. TheDO NOT COPY
exponent  [E2..E0]  is a binary encoding of the select terms, and the mantissa
bits  [M3..M0]  are generated using a select term for each case. It turns out that
these  M  equations still require 8 product terms per output bit, but at least they’re
a lot faster since they use just one level of logic.
DO NOT COPY
module fpence Ta b l e 6 - 5
title 'Fixed-point to Floating-point Encoder' Alternative ABEL
FPENCE device 'P20L8'; program for the
fixed-point to
DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins floating-point PLD.
B10..B0  pin 1..11;
E2..E0, M3..M0  pin 21..15 istype 'com';
" Intermediate equations
S7 = B10;
DO NOT COPY
S6 = !B10 & B9;
S5 = !B10 & !B9 & B8;
S4 = !B10 & !B9 & !B8 & B7;
S3 = !B10 & !B9 & !B8 & !B7 & B6;
S2 = !B10 & !B9 & !B8 & !B7 & !B6 & B5;
S1 = !B10 & !B9 & !B8 & !B7 & !B6 & !B5 & B4;DO NOT COPY
S0 = !B10 & !B9 & !B8 & !B7 & !B6 & !B5 & !B4;
equations
E2 = S7 # S6 # S5 # S4;
E1 = S7 # S6 # S3 # S2;DO NOT COPY
E0 = S7 # S5 # S3 # S1;
[M3..M0] = S0 & [B3..B0] # S1 & [B4..B1] # S2 & [B5..B2]
# S3 & [B6..B3] # S4 & [B7..B4] # S5 & [B8..B5]
# S6 & [B9..B6] # S7 & [B10..B7];
DO NOT COPY
end fpenc
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

480  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
6.2.3 Dual-Priority Encoder
In this example, we’ll design a PLD-based priority encoder that identifies both
the highest-priority and the second-highest-priority asserted signal among a set
DO NOT COPY
of eight active-high request inputs named  [R0..R7], where  R0  has the highest
priority. We’ll use  [A2..A0] and  AVALID  to identify the highest-priority request,
asserting  AVALID  only if a highest-priority request is present. Similarly, we’ll
use  [B2:B0]  and  BVALID  to identify the second-highest-priority request.
Table 6-6 shows an ABEL program for the priority encoder. As usual, a
DO NOT COPY
nested  WHEN  statement is perfect for expressing priority behavior. To find the
Ta b l e 6 - 6 title 'Dual Priority Encoder'
ABEL program for a PRIORTWO device 'P16V8';
dual priority encoder.DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins
R7..R0  pin 1..8;
AVALID, A2..A0, BVALID, B2..B0  pin 19..12 istype 'com';
" Set definitions
DO NOT COPY
A = [A2..A0]; B = [B2..B0];
equations
WHEN R0==1 THEN A=0;
ELSE WHEN R1==1 THEN A=1;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN R2==1 THEN A=2;
ELSE WHEN R3==1 THEN A=3;
ELSE WHEN R4==1 THEN A=4;
ELSE WHEN R5==1 THEN A=5;
ELSE WHEN R6==1 THEN A=6;
DO NOT COPYELSE WHEN R7==1 THEN A=7;
AVALID = ([R7..R0] != 0);
WHEN (R0==1) & (A!=0) THEN B=0;
ELSE WHEN (R1==1) & (A!=1) THEN B=1;
DO NOT COPYELSE WHEN (R2==1) & (A!=2) THEN B=2;
ELSE WHEN (R3==1) & (A!=3) THEN B=3;
ELSE WHEN (R4==1) & (A!=4) THEN B=4;
ELSE WHEN (R5==1) & (A!=5) THEN B=5;
ELSE WHEN (R6==1) & (A!=6) THEN B=6;
ELSE WHEN (R7==1) & (A!=7) THEN B=7;
DO NOT COPY
BVALID = (R0==1) & (A!=0) # (R1==1) & (A!=1)
# (R2==1) & (A!=2) # (R3==1) & (A!=3)
# (R4==1) & (A!=4) # (R5==1) & (A!=5)
# (R6==1) & (A!=6) # (R7==1) & (A!=7);
DO NOT COPY
end priortwo
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  481
P-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name Ta b l e 6 - 7
---------  ------  -------  ----  ---------- Product-term usage
8/1  8  1  Pin  AVALID in the dual priority
DO NOT COPY
4/5  8  1  Pin  A2 encoder PLD.
4/5  8  1  Pin  A1
4/5  8  1  Pin  A0
24/8  11  1  Pin  BVALID
24/17  11  1  Pin  B2
20/21  11  1  Pin  B1
DO NOT COPY
18/22  11  1  Pin  B0
=========
106/84  Best P-Term Total: 76
Total Pins: 16
Average P-Term/Output: 9
DO NOT COPY
second-highest priority input, we exclude an input if its input number matches
the highest-priority input number, which is  A. Thus, we’re using two-pass logic
to compute the  B  outputs. The equation for  AVALID  is easy;  AVALID  is 1 if the
request inputs are not all 0. To computeDO NOT COPY BVALID, we  OR  all of the conditions that
set  B  in the  WHEN  statement.
Even with two-pass logic, the B  outputs use too many product terms to fit in
a 16V8; Table 6-7 shows the product-term usage. The  B  outputs use too many
terms even for a 22V10, which has 16 terms for two of its output pins, and 8–14
for the others. Sometimes you just have to work harder to make things fit!DO NOT COPY
So, how can we save some product terms? One important thing to notice is
that  R0  can never be the second-highest priority asserted input, and therefore  B
can never be valid and 0. Thus, we can eliminate the  WHEN  clause for the  R0==1
case. Making this change reduces the minimum number of terms for  B2–B0  to
DO NOT COPY
14, 17, and 15, respectively. We can almost fit the design in a 22V10, if we can
just know one term out of the  B1  equation.
Well let’s try something else. The second  WHEN  clause, for the  R0==2  case,
also fails to make use of everything we know. We don’t need the full generality
DO NOT COPY
SUMS OF You may recall from Section 4.3.6 that the minimal sum-of-products expression for
PRODUCTS AND the complement of a function can be manipulated through DeMorgan’s theorem to
PRODUCTS OF obtain a minimal product-of-sums expression for the original function. You may also
DO NOT COPYSUMS recall that the number of product terms in the minimal sum of products may differ
(SAY THAT 5 from the number of sum terms in the minimal product of sums. The “P-terms”
TIMES FAST) column in Table 6-7 lists the number of terms in both minimal forms (product/sum
terms). If  either  minimal form has less than or equal to the number of product terms
available in a 22V10’s  AND-OR  array, then the function can be made to fit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

482  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
of  A!=0; this case is only important when  R0  is 1. So, let us replace the first two
lines of the original  WHEN statement with
WHEN (R1==1) & (R0==1) THEN B=1;
DO NOT COPY
This subtle change reduces the minimum number of terms for  B2–B0  to 12, 16,
and 13, respectively. We made it! Can the number of product terms be reduced
further, enough to fit into a 16V8 while maintaining the same functionality? It’s
not likely, but we’ll leave that as an exercise (6.4) for the reader!
DO NOT COPY
6.2.4 Cascading Comparators
We showed in Section 5.9.5 that equality comparisons are easy to realize in
PLDs, but that magnitude comparisons (greater-than or less-than) of more than
a few bits are not good candidates for PLD realization due to the large number
DO NOT COPY
of product terms required. Thus, comparators are best realized using discrete
MSI comparator components or as specialized cells within an FPGA or ASIC
library. However, PLDs are quite suitable for realizing the combinational logic
used in “parallel expansion” schemes that construct wider comparators from
smaller ones, as we’ll show here.
DO NOT COPY
In Section 5.9.4, we showed how to connect 74x85 4-bit comparators in
series to create larger comparators. Although a serial cascading scheme requires
no extra logic to build arbitrarily large comparators, it has the major drawback
that the delay increases linearly with the length of the cascade.
DO NOT COPYIn Section 6.1.4, on the other hand, we showed how multiple copies of the
74x682 8-bit comparator could be used in parallel along with combinational
logic to perform a 24-bit comparison. This scheme can be generalized for com-
parisons of arbitrary width.
Table 6-8 is an ABEL program that uses a GAL22V10 to perform a 64-bit
DO NOT COPYcomparison using eight 74x682s to combine the equal (EQ) and greater-than
(GT) outputs from the individual byte to produce all six possible relations of the
two 64-bit input values (=,  ≠,  >,  ≥,  <,  ≤).
In this program, the  PEQQ  and  PNEQ  outputs can be realized with one
product term each. The remaining eight outputs use eight product terms each. As
DO NOT COPY
we’ve mentioned previously, the 22V10 provides 8-16 product terms per output,
so the design fits.
HAVE IT Early PLDs such as the PAL16L8s did not have output-polarity control. Designers
DO NOT COPY
YOUR WAY who used these devices were forced to choose a particular polarity, active high or
active low, for some outputs in order to obtain reduced equations that would fit.
When a 16V8, 20V8, 22V10, or any of a plethora of modern CPLDs is used, no such
restriction exists. If an equation  or its complement  can be reduced to the number of
product terms available, then the corresponding output can be made active high or
DO NOT COPY
active low by programming the output-polarity fuse appropriately.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  483
module compexp Ta b l e 6 - 8
title 'Expansion logic for 64-bit comparator' ABEL program for
COMPEXP device 'P22V10'; combining eight
DO NOT COPY
74x682s into a
" Inputs from the individual comparators, active-low, 7 = MSByte
64-bit comparator.
EQ_L7..EQ_L0, GT_L7..GT_L0  pin 1..11, 13..14, 21..23;
" Comparison outputs
PEQQ, PNEQ, PGTQ, PGEQ, PLTQ, PLEQ  pin 15..20 istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
" Active-level conversions
EQ7 = !EQ_L7; EQ6 = !EQ_L6; EQ5 = !EQ_L5; EQ4 = !EQ_L4;
EQ3 = !EQ_L3; EQ2 = !EQ_L2; EQ1 = !EQ_L1; EQ0 = !EQ_L0;
GT7 = !GT_L7; GT6 = !GT_L6; GT5 = !GT_L5; GT4 = !GT_L4;
GT3 = !GT_L3; GT2 = !GT_L2; GT1 = !GT_L1; GT0 = !GT_L0;
DO NOT COPY
" Less-than terms
LT7 = !(EQ7 # GT7); LT6 = !(EQ6 # GT6); LT5 = !(EQ5 # GT5);
LT4 = !(EQ4 # GT4); LT3 = !(EQ3 # GT3); LT2 = !(EQ2 # GT2);
LT1 = !(EQ1 # GT1); LT0 = !(EQ0 # GT0);
equationsDO NOT COPY
PEQQ = EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & EQ0;
PNEQ = !(EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & EQ0);
DO NOT COPY
PGTQ = GT7  #  EQ7 & GT6  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & GT5
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & GT4  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & GT3
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & GT2
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & GT1
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & GT0;
DO NOT COPY
PLEQ = !(GT7  #  EQ7 & GT6  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & GT5
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & GT4  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & GT3
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & GT2
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & GT1
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & GT0);
DO NOT COPY
PLTQ = LT7  #  EQ7 & LT6  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & LT5
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & LT4  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & LT3
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & LT2
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & LT1
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & LT0;
DO NOT COPY
PGEQ = !(LT7  #  EQ7 & LT6  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & LT5
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & LT4  #  EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & LT3
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & LT2
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & LT1
# EQ7 & EQ6 & EQ5 & EQ4 & EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & LT0);
DO NOT COPY
end compexp
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

484  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e  6 - 9
M1  M0  Comparison
Mode-control bits for
the mode-dependent 0  0  32-bit
DO NOT COPYcomparator.
0  1  31-bit
1  0  30-bit
1  1  not used
DO NOT COPY
6.2.5 Mode-Dependent Comparator
For the next example, let us suppose we have a system in which we need to
compare two 32-bit words under normal circumstances, but where we must
sometimes ignore one or two low-order bits of the input words. The operating
mode is specified by two mode-control bits,  M1  and  M0, as shown in Table 6-9.
DO NOT COPY
As we’ve noted previously, comparing, adding, and other “iterative” oper-
ations are usually poor candidates for PLD-based design, because an equivalent
two-level sum-of-products expression has far too many product terms. In
Section 5.9.5, we calculated how many product terms are needed for an  n-bit
comparator. Based on these results, we certainly wouldn’t be able to build the
DO NOT COPY
32-bit mode-dependent comparator or even an 8-bit slice of it with a PLD; the
74x682 8-bit comparator is just about the most efficient possible single chip we
can use to perform an 8-bit comparison. However, a PLD-based design is quite
reasonable for handling the mode-control logic and the part of the comparison
DO NOT COPYthat is dependent on mode (the two low-order bits).
Figure 6-9 shows a complete circuit design resulting from this idea, and
Table 6-11 is the ABEL program for a 16V8  MODECOMP  PLD that handles the
“random logic.” Four ’682s are used to compare most of the bits, and the 16V8
combines the ’682 outputs and handles the two low-order bits as a function of
DO NOT COPY
the mode. Intermediate expressions  EQ30  and  GT30  are defined to save typing in
the  equations  section of the program.
As shown in Table 6-10, the  XEQY  and  XGTY  outputs use 7 and 11 product
terms, respectively. Thus,  XGTY  does not fit into the 7 product terms available on
a 16V8 output. However, this is another example where we have some flexibility
DO NOT COPY
in our coding choices. By changing the coding of  MODE30  to  [1,.X.], we can
reduce the product-term requirements for  XGTY  to 7/12, and thereby fit the
design into a 16V8.
Ta b l e 6 - 1 0
DO NOT COPYP-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name
Product-term usage ---------  ------  -------  ----  --------
for the  MODECOMP 7/9  10  1  Pin  XEQY
PLD. 11/13  14  1  Pin  XGTY
=========
18/22  Best P-Term Total: 18
Total Pins: 16
DO NOT COPY
Average P-Term/Output: 9
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  485
M0
M1
X
Y DO NOT COPY
74x682 74x682
2 X16 2
P0 P0
3 Y16 3
Q0 Q0
4 X17 4
P1 P1
DO NOT COPY5 Y17 5
Q1 Q1
X2 6 X18 6
P2 P2
Y2 7 Y18 7
Q2 19 EQ0_L Q2 19 EQ2_L
X3 8 P EQ Q X19 8 P EQ Q X0
P3 P3
Y3 9 Y19 9 X1
Q3 Q3
X4 11 X20 11 Y0
DO NOT COPYP4 P4
Y4 12 Y20 12 Y1
Q4 1 GT0_L Q4 1 GT2_L
X5 13 P GT Q X21 13 P GT Q
P5 P5
Y5 14 Y21 14
Q5 Q5
PAL16V8
X6 15 X22 15
P6 P6
Y6 16 Y22 16 1
Q6 Q6 I1
DO NOT COPYX7 17 X23 17 2 19
P7 P7 I2 O1 XEQY
Y7 18 Y23 18 3 18
Q7 Q7 I3 IO2
U1 U3 4 17
I4 IO3
5 16
I5 IO4
6 15
I6 IO5
7 14
DO NOT COPYI7 IO6
8 13
I8 IO7
9 12
74x682 74x682 I9 O8 XGTY
11
X8 2 X24 2 I10
P0 P0 U5
Y8 3 Y24 3
Q0 Q0 MODECOMP
DO NOT COPYX9 4 X25 4
P1 P1
Y9 5 Y25 5
Q1 Q1
X10 6 X26 6
P2 EQ1_L P2
Y10 7 Y26 7
Q2 19 Q2 19 EQ3_L
X11 8 P EQ Q X27 8 P EQ Q
P3  P3
Y11 9 Y27 9
DO NOT COPYQ3 Q3
X12 11 X28 11
P4  P4
Y12 12 Y28 12
Q4 1 GT1_L Q4 1 GT3_L
X13 13 P GT Q X29 13 P GT Q
P5 P5
Y13 14 Y29 14
Q5 Q5
X14 15 X30 15
P6 P6
DO NOT COPYY14 16 Y30 16
Q6 Q6
X15 17 X31 17
P7 P7
Y15 18 Y31 18
Q7 Q7
U2 U4
Figure 6-9DO NOT COPY  A 32-bit mode-dependent comparator.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

486  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 1 1 module modecomp
ABEL program for title 'Control PLD for Mode-Dependent Comparator'
combining eight MODECOMP device 'P16V8';
DO NOT COPY
74x682s into a
64-bit comparator. " Input and output pins
M0, M1, EQ2_L, GT2_L, EQ0_L, GT0_L  pin 1..6;
EQ1_L, GT1_L, EQ3_L, GT3_L, X0, X1, Y0, Y1  pin 7..9, 10, 15..18;
XEQY, XGTY  pin 19, 12 istype 'com';
DO NOT COPY
" Active-level conversions
EQ3 = !EQ3_L; EQ2 = !EQ2_L; EQ1 = !EQ1_L; EQ0 = !EQ0_L;
GT3 = !GT3_L; GT2 = !GT2_L; GT1 = !GT1_L; GT0 = !GT0_L;
" Mode definitions
DO NOT COPYMODE32 = ([M1,M0] == [0,0]); " 32-bit comparison
MODE31 = ([M1,M0] == [0,1]); " 31-bit comparison
MODE30 = ([M1,M0] == [1,0]); " 30-bit comparison
MODEXX = ([M1,M0] == [1,1]); " Unused
" Expressions for 30-bit equal and greater-than
DO NOT COPYEQ30 = EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & EQ0;
GT30 = GT3 # (EQ3 & GT2) # (EQ3 & EQ2 & GT1) # (EQ3 & EQ2 & EQ1 & GT0);
equations
WHEN MODE32 THEN {
DO NOT COPY
XEQY = EQ30 & (X1==Y1) & (X0==Y0);
XGTY = GT30 # (EQ30 & (X1>Y1)) # (EQ30 & (X1==Y1) & (X0>Y0));
}
ELSE WHEN MODE31 THEN {
XEQY = EQ30 & (X1==Y1);
XGTY = GT30 # (EQ30 & (X1>Y1));
DO NOT COPY
}
ELSE WHEN MODE30 THEN {
XEQY = EQ30;
XGTY = GT30;
}
DO NOT COPY
end modecomp
6.2.6 Ones Counter
DO NOT COPYThere are several important algorithms that include the step of counting the
number of “1” bits in a data word. In fact, some microprocessor instruction sets
have been extended recently to include ones counting as a basic instruction.
Counting the ones in a data word can be done easily as an iterative process,
where you scan the word from one end to the other and increment a counter each
DO NOT COPYtime a “1” is encountered. However, this operation must be done more quickly
inside the arithmetic and logic unit of a microprocessor. Ideally, we would like
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  487
D[31:0] ONESCNT1
D[14:0]
D[14:0] ONESCNT2
DO NOT COPYA[3:0]
SUM[3:0] A[3:0]
U1
ONESCNT1 SUM[4:0] SUM[4:0]
DO NOT COPYD[29:15]
D[14:0]
B[3:0]
SUM[3:0] B[3:0] Figure 6-10
Possible partitioning
U2
D30 for the ones-counting
D1
circuit.
DO NOT COPYD31 D0
U3
ones counting to run as fast as any other arithmetic operation, such as adding two
words. Therefore, a combinational circuit is required.
In this example, let us suppose that we have a requirement to build a 32-bit
DO NOT COPY
ones counter as part of a larger system. Based on the number of inputs and
outputs required, we obviously can’t fit the design into a single 22V10-class
PLD, but we might be able to partition the design into a reasonably small
number of PLDs.
DO NOT COPYFigure 6-10  shows  such  a  partition.  Two  copies  of  a  first  22V10,
ONESCNT1, are used to count the ones in two 15-bit chunks of the 32-bit input
word  D[31:0], each producing a 4-bit sum output. A second 22V10, ONESCNT2,
is used to add the two four bit sums and the last two input bits.
The  program  for  ONESCNT1  is  deceptively  simple,  as  shown  in
Table 6-12. The statement “DO NOT COPY@CARRY  1” is included to limit the carry chain to one
stage; as explained in Section 5.10.8, this reduces product-term requirements at
the expense of helper outputs and increased delay.
module onescnt1 Ta b l e 6 - 1 2
DO NOT COPY
title 'Count the ones in a 15-bit word' ABEL program for
ONESCNT1 device 'P22V10'; counting the 1 bits
in a 15-bit word.
" Input and output pins
D14..D0  pin 1..11, 13..15, 23;
SUM3..SUM0DO NOT COPY  pin 17..20 istype 'com';
equations
@CARRY 1;
[SUM3..SUM0] = D0 + D1 + D2 + D3 + D4 + D5 + D6 + D7
+ D8 + D9 + D10 + D11 + D12 + D13 + D14;
DO NOT COPY
end onescnt1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

488  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Unfortunately, when I compiled this program, my computer just sat there,
CPU-bound, for an hour without producing any results. That gave me time to use
my brain, a good exercise for those of us who have become too dependent on
DO NOT COPY
CAD tools. I then realized that I could write the logic function for the  SUM0
output by hand in just a few seconds,
SUM0 = D0  ⊕  D1  ⊕  D2  ⊕  D3  ⊕  D4  ⊕  D5  ⊕  D6  ⊕  D7  ⊕  …  ⊕  D13  ⊕  D14
The Karnaugh map for this function is a checkerboard, and the minimal sum-of-
DO NOT COPY14 
products expression has 2  product terms. Obviously this is not going to fit in
one or a few passes through a 22V10! So, anyway, I killed the ABEL compiler
process, and rebooted Windows just in case the compiler had gone awry.
Obviously, a partitioning into smaller chunks is required to design the
ones-counting circuit. Although we could pursue this further using ABEL and
DO NOT COPY
PLDs, it’s more interesting to do a structural design using VHDL, as we will in
Section 6.3.6. The ABEL and PLD version is left as an exercise (6.6).
DO NOT COPY6.2.7 Tic-Tac-Toe
In this example, we’ll design a combinational circuit that picks a player’s next
move in the game of Tic-Tac-Toe. The first thing we’ll do is decide on a strategy
for picking the next move. Let us try to emulate the typical human’s strategy, by
following the decision steps below:
DO NOT COPY
1.  Look for a row, column, or diagonal that has two of my marks (X  or  O,
depending on which player I am) and one empty cell. If one exists, place
my mark in the empty cell; I win!
2.  Else, look for a row, column, or diagonal that has two of my opponent’s
DO NOT COPY
marks and one empty cell. If one exists, place my mark in the empty cell
to block a potential win by my opponent.
3.  Else, pick a cell based on experience. For example, if the middle cell is
open, it’s usually a good bet to take it. Otherwise, the corner cells are good
DO NOT COPYbets. Intelligent players can also notice and block a developing pattern by
the opponent or “look ahead” to pick a good move.
TIC-TAC-TOE, The game of Tic-Tac-Toe is played by two players on a 3  ×  3 grid of cells that are
DO NOT COPY
IN CASE YOU initially empty. One player is “X” and the other is “O”. The players alternate in
DIDN’T KNOW placing their mark in an empty cell; “X” always goes first. The first player to get three
of his or her own marks in the same row, column, or diagonal wins. Although the first
player to move (X) has a slight advantage, it can be shown that a game between two
intelligent players will always end in a draw; neither player will get three in a row
DO NOT COPY
before the grid fills up.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  489
1 2 3 column
row
1 X11,Y11  X13,Y12  X13,Y13
DO NOT COPY
2 X21,Y21  X23,Y22  X23,Y23
DO NOT COPY
Figure 6-11
3 X21,Y21  X23,Y22  X23,Y23 Tic-Tac-Toe grid and
ABEL signal names.
Planning ahead, we’ll call the second player “Y” to avoid confusion
DO NOT COPY
between “O” and “0” in our programs. The next thing to think about is how we
might encode the inputs and outputs of the circuit. There are only nine possible
moves that a player can make, so the output can be encoded in just four bits. The
circuit’s input is the current state of the playing grid. There are nine cells, and
each cell has one of three possible states (empty, occupied by  X, occupied by  Y).
DO NOT COPY
There are several choices of how to code the state of one cell. Because the
game is symmetric, we’ll choose a symmetric encoding that may help us later:
00  Cell is empty.
10  Cell is occupied by  X.
DO NOT COPY
01  Cell is occupied by  Y.
So, we can encode the 3  ×  3 grid’s state in 18 bits. As shown in Figure 6-11,
we’ll number the grid with row and column numbers, and use ABEL signals  Xij
and  Yij  to denote the presence of  X  or  Y in cell  i,j. We’ll look at the output cod-
DO NOT COPY
ing later.
With a total of 18 inputs and 4 outputs, the Tic-Tac-Toe circuit could
conceivably fit in just one 22V10. However, experience suggests that there’s just
no way. We’re going to have to find a partitioning of the function, and partition-
ing along the lines of the decision steps on the preceding page seems like a good
DO NOT COPY
idea.
In fact, steps 1 and 2 are very similar; they differ only in reversing the roles
of the player and the opponent. Here’s where our symmetric encoding can pay
DO NOT COPY
COMPACT Since each cell in the Tic-Tac-Toe grid can have only three states, not four, the total
9 15 
ENCODING number of board configurations is 3 , or 19,683. This is less than 2  , so the board
state can be encoded in only 15 bits. However, such an encoding would lead to much
larger circuits for picking a move, unless the move-picking circuit was a read-only
DO NOT COPYmemory (see Exercise 11.26).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

490  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
TWOINROW
9
X11-X33 X11-X33 PICK
4
DO NOT COPYMOVE[3:0] XMOVE[3:0]
9
Y11-Y33 Y11-Y33
U1
4
MOVE[3:0] MOVE[3:0]
TWOINROW
X11-X33
DO NOT COPY4
MOVE[3:0] YMOVE[3:0]
Figure 6-12
Y11-Y33
Preliminary PLD U2
9
partitioning for the
X11-X33
Tic-Tac-Toe game. 9
DO NOT COPYY11-Y33 U3
off. A PLD that finds me two of my marks in a row along with one empty cell for
a winning move (step 1) can find two of my opponent’s marks in a row plus an
empty for a blocking move (step 2). All we have to do is swap the encodings for
DO NOT COPY
X  and  Y. With out selected coding, that doesn’t require any logic, just physically
swapping the  Xij  and  Yij  signals for each cell. With this in mind, we can use
two copies of the same PLD,  TWOINROW, to perform steps 1 and 2 as shown in
Figure 6-12. Notice that the  X11–X33  signals are connected to the top inputs of
DO NOT COPYthe first  TWOINROW  PLD, but to the bottom inputs of the second.
The moves from the two  TWOINROW  PLDs can be examined in another
PLD,  PICK. This device picks a move from the first two PLDs if either found
one; else it performs step 3. It looks like  PICK  has too many inputs and outputs
to fit in a 22V10, but we’ll come back to that later.
DO NOT COPYTable 6-13 is a program for the  TWOINROW  PLD. It looks at the grid’s
state from the point of view of X, that is, it looks for a move where X  can get three
in a row. The program makes extensive use of intermediate equations to define
Ta b l e 6 - 1 3
DO NOT COPYmodule twoinrow
ABEL program to find Title 'Find Two Xs and an empty cell in a row, column, or diagonal'
two in a row in TWOINROW device 'P22V10';
Tic-Tac-Toe.
" Inputs and Outputs
X11, X12, X13, X21, X22, X23, X31, X32, X33 pin 1..9;
Y11, Y12, Y13, Y21, Y22, Y23, Y31, Y32, Y33 pin 10,11,13..15,20..23;
DO NOT COPY
MOVE3..MOVE0  pin 16..19 istype 'com';
" MOVE output encodings
MOVE  = [MOVE3..MOVE0];
MOVE11 = [1,0,0,0]; MOVE12 = [0,1,0,0]; MOVE13 = [0,0,1,0];
MOVE21 = [0,0,0,1]; MOVE22 = [1,1,0,0]; MOVE23 = [0,1,1,1];
DO NOT COPYMOVE31 = [1,0,1,1]; MOVE32 = [1,1,0,1]; MOVE33 = [1,1,1,0];
NONE  = [0,0,0,0];
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  491
" Find moves in rows.  Rxy ==> a move exists in cell xy Ta b l e 6 - 1 3
R11 = X12 & X13 & !X11 & !Y11; (continued)
R12 = X11 & X13 & !X12 & !Y12;
R13 = X11 & X12 & !X13 & !Y13;DO NOT COPY
R21 = X22 & X23 & !X21 & !Y21;
R22 = X21 & X23 & !X22 & !Y22;
R23 = X21 & X22 & !X23 & !Y23;
R31 = X32 & X33 & !X31 & !Y31;
R32 = X31 & X33 & !X32 & !Y32;
R33 = X31 & X32 & !X33 & !Y33;DO NOT COPY
" Find moves in columns.  Cxy ==> a move exists in cell xy
C11 = X21 & X31 & !X11 & !Y11;
C12 = X22 & X32 & !X12 & !Y12;
C13 = X23 & X33 & !X13 & !Y13;
C21 = X11 & X31 & !X21 & !Y21;DO NOT COPY
C22 = X12 & X32 & !X22 & !Y22;
C23 = X13 & X33 & !X23 & !Y23;
C31 = X11 & X21 & !X31 & !Y31;
C32 = X12 & X22 & !X32 & !Y32;
C33 = X13 & X23 & !X33 & !Y33;
DO NOT COPY
" Find moves in diagonals.  Dxy or Exy ==> a move exists in cell xy
D11 = X22 & X33 & !X11 & !Y11;
D22 = X11 & X33 & !X22 & !Y22;
D33 = X11 & X22 & !X33 & !Y33;
E13 = X22 & X31 & !X13 & !Y13;
E22 = X13 & X31 & !X22 & !Y22;
DO NOT COPY
E31 = X13 & X22 & !X31 & !Y31;
" Combine moves for each cell.  Gxy ==> a move exists in cell xy
G11 = R11 # C11 # D11;
G12 = R12 # C12;
G13 = R13 # C13 # E13;
G21 = R21 # C21;DO NOT COPY
G22 = R22 # C22 # D22 # E22;
G23 = R23 # C23;
G31 = R31 # C31 # E31;
G32 = R32 # C32;
G33 = R33 # C33 # D33;
DO NOT COPY
equations
WHEN G22 THEN MOVE= MOVE22;
ELSE WHEN G11 THEN MOVE = MOVE11;
ELSE WHEN G13 THEN MOVE = MOVE13;
ELSE WHEN G31 THEN MOVE = MOVE31;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN G33 THEN MOVE = MOVE33;
ELSE WHEN G12 THEN MOVE = MOVE12;
ELSE WHEN G21 THEN MOVE = MOVE21;
ELSE WHEN G23 THEN MOVE = MOVE23;
ELSE WHEN G32 THEN MOVE = MOVE32;
ELSE MOVE = NONE;
DO NOT COPY
end twoinrow
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

492  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
all possible row, column, and diagonal moves. It combines all of the moves for a
cell  i,j  in an expression for  Gij, and finally the  equations section uses a  WHEN
statement to select a move.
DO NOT COPY
Note that a nested  WHEN  statement must be used rather than nine parallel
WHEN  statements or assignments, because we can only select one move even if
multiple moves are available. Also note that  G22, the center cell, is checked first,
followed by the corners. This was done hoping that we could minimize the
number of terms by putting the most common moves early in the nested  WHEN.
DO NOT COPY
Alas, the design still requires a ton of product terms, as shown in Table 6-14.
By the way, we still haven’t explained why we chose the output coding that
we did (as defined by  MOVE11,  MOVE22, etc. in the program). It’s pretty clear that
changing the encoding is never going to save us enough product terms to fit the
DO NOT COPYdesign into a 22V10. But there’s still method to this madness, as we’ll now show.
Clearly we’ll have to split  TWOINROW  into two or more pieces. As in any
design problem, several different strategies are possible. The first strategy I tried
was to use two different PLDs, one to find moves in all the rows and one of the
diagonals, and the other to work on all the columns and the remaining diagonal.
DO NOT COPYThat helped, but not nearly enough to fit each half into a 22V10.
With the second strategy, I tried slicing the problem a different way. The
first PLD finds all the moves in cells 11, 12, 13, 21, and 22, and the second PLD
finds all the moves in the remaining cells. That worked! The first PLD, named
TWOINHAF, is obtained from Table 6-13  simply by commenting out the four
DO NOT COPY
lines of the  WHEN  statement for the moves to cells 23, 31, 32, and 33.
We could obtain the second PLD from  TWOINROW  in a similar way, but
let’s wait a minute. In the manufacture of real digital systems, it is always
desirable to minimize the number of distinct parts that are used; this saves on
inventory costs and complexity. With programmable parts, it is desirable to min-
DO NOT COPY
imize the number of distinct programs that are used. Even though the physical
parts are identical, a different set of test vectors must be devised at some cost for
each different program. Also, it’s possible that the product will be successful
enough for us to save money by converting the PLDs into hard-coded devices, a
different one for each program, again encouraging us to minimize programs.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 6 - 1 4 P-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name
Product-term usage ---------  ------  -------  ----  -----------
for the  TWOINROW 61/142  18  1  Pin  MOVE3
DO NOT COPYPLD. 107/129  18  1  Pin  MOVE2
77/88  17  1  Pin  MOVE1
133/87  18  1  Pin  MOVE0
=========
378/446  Best P-Term Total: 332
Total Pins: 22
DO NOT COPY
Average P-Term/Output: 83
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  493
The Tic-Tac-Toe game is the same game even if we rotate the grid 90°  or
180°. Thus, the  TWOINHAF  PLD can find moves for cells 33, 32, 31, 23, and 22
if we rotate the grid 180°. Because of the way we defined the grid state, with a
DO NOT COPY
separate pair of inputs for each cell, we can “rotate the grid” simply by shuffling
the input pairs appropriately. That is, we swap 33↔11, 32↔12, 31↔13, and
23↔21.
Of course, once we rearrange inputs,  TWOINHAF  will still produce output
move codes corresponding to cells in the top half of the grid. To keep things
DO NOT COPY
straight, we should transform these into codes for the proper cells in the bottom
half of the grid. We would like this transformation to take a minimum of logic.
This is where our choice of output code comes in. If you look carefully at the
MOVE  coding defined at the beginning of Table 6-13, you’ll see that the code for
a given position in the 180DO NOT COPY°  rotated grid is obtained by complementing and
reversing the order of the code bits for the same position in the unrotated grid. In
other words, the code transformation can be done with four inverters and a
rearrangement of wires. This can be done “for free” in the PLD that looks at the
TWOINHAF  outputs.
DO NOT COPYYou probably never thought that Tic-Tac-Toe could be so tricky. Well,
we’re halfway there. Figure 6-13 shows the partitioning of the design as we’ll
now continue it. Each  TWOINROW  PLD from our original partition is replaced
TWOINHAF
DO NOT COPY9 PICK1
X11-X33 X11-X33
4 Figure 6-13
MOVE[3:0] WINA[3:0] Final PLD partitioning
9
Y11-Y33 Y11-Y33 for the Tic-Tac-Toe
U1
game.
TWOINHAF
DO NOT COPY
P X11-X33
4
MOVE[3:0] T WINB[3:0]
Y11-Y33 PICK2
P U2
4
MOVE[3:0] PICK[3:0]
TWOINHAF
DO NOT COPY
X11-X33
4
MOVE[3:0] BLKA[3:0]
Y11-Y33
U3
4 
DO NOT COPYTWOINHAF MOVE[3:0] MOVE[3:0]
BLKB[3:0]
P X11-X33 T
4
MOVE[3:0] X22
P Y11-Y33 Y22
U4 U5
9 X22
DO NOT COPYother 14
9 Y22
logic
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

494  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
by a pair of  TWOINHALF  PLDs. The bottom PLD of each pair is preceded by a
box labeled “P”, which permutes the inputs to rotate the grid 180°  as discussed
previously. Likewise, it is followed by a box labeled “T”, which compensates for
DO NOT COPY
the rotation by transforming the output code; this box will actually be absorbed
into the PLD that follows it,  PICK1.
The function of  PICK1 is pretty straightforward. As shown in Table 6-15, it
is simply picks a winning move or a blocking move if one is available. Since
there are two extra input pins available on the 22V10, we use them to input the
DO NOT COPY
state of the center cell. In this way, we can perform the first part of step 3 of the
“human” algorithm on page 488, to pick the center cell if no winning or blocking
move is available. The  PICK1  PLD uses at most 9 product terms per output.
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 6 - 1 5  ABEL program to pick one move based on four inputs.
module pick1
Title 'Pick One Move from Four Possible'
PICK1 device 'P22V10';
DO NOT COPY
" Inputs from TWOINHAF PLDs
WINA3..WINA0  pin 1..4;  "Winning moves in cells 11,12,13,21,22
WINB3..WINB0  pin 5..8;  "Winning moves in cells 11,12,13,21,22 of rotated grid
BLKA3..BLKA0  pin 9..11, 13;  "Blocking moves in cells 11,12,13,21,22
BLKB3..BLKB0  pin 14..16, 21; "Blocking moves in cells 11,12,13,21,22 of rotated grid
" Inputs from gridDO NOT COPY
X22, Y22  pin 22..23;  "Center cell; pick if no other moves
" Move outputs to PICK2 PLD
MOVE3..MOVE0  pin 17..20 istype 'com';
" Sets
WINA = [WINA3..WINA0];DO NOT COPY  WINB = [WINB3..WINB0];
BLKA = [BLKA3..BLKA0];  BLKB = [BLKB3..BLKB0];
MOVE = [MOVE3..MOVE0];
" Non-rotated move input and output encoding
MOVE11 = [1,0,0,0]; MOVE12 = [0,1,0,0]; MOVE13 = [0,0,1,0];
MOVE21 = [0,0,0,1]; MOVE22 = [1,1,0,0]; MOVE23 = [0,1,1,1];DO NOT COPY
MOVE31 = [1,0,1,1]; MOVE32 = [1,1,0,1]; MOVE33 = [1,1,1,0];
NONE  = [0,0,0,0];
equations
WHEN WINA != NONE THEN MOVE = WINA;DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN WINB != NONE THEN MOVE = ![WINB0..WINB3];  " Map rotated coding
ELSE WHEN BLKA != NONE THEN MOVE = BLKA;
ELSE WHEN BLKB != NONE THEN MOVE = ![BLKB0..BLKB3];  " Map rotated coding
ELSE WHEN !X22 & !Y22 THEN MOVE = MOVE22;  " Pick center cell if it’s empty
ELSE MOVE = NONE;
DO NOT COPY
end pick1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  495
The final part of the design in Figure 6-13 is the  PICK2  PLD. This PLD
must provide most of the “experience” in step 3 of the human algorithm if PICK1
does not find a move.
DO NOT COPY
We have a little problem with  PICK2  in that a 22V10 does not have enough
pins to accommodate the 4-bit input from  PICK1, its own 4-bit output, and all 18
bits of grid state; it has only 22 I/O pins. Actually, we don’t need to connect  X22
and  Y22, since they were already examined in  PICK1, but that still leaves us two
pins short. So, the purpose of the “other logic” block in Figure 6-13 is to encode
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 6 - 1 6  ABEL program to pick one move using “experience.”
module pick2
Title 'Pick a move using experience'DO NOT COPY
PICK2 device 'P22V10';
" Inputs from PICK1 PLD
PICK3..PICK0  pin 1..4;  " Move, if any, from PICK1 PLD
" Inputs from Tic-Tac-Toe grid corners
X11, Y11, X13, Y13, X31, Y31, X33, Y33DO NOT COPY  pin 5..11, 13;
" Combined inputs from external NOR gates; 1 ==> corresponding cell is empty
E12, E21, E23, E32  pin 14..15, 22..23;
" Move output
MOVE3..MOVE0  pin 17..20 istype 'com';
PICK = [PICK3..PICK0];DO NOT COPY  " Set definition
" Non-rotated move input and output encoding
MOVE = [MOVE3..MOVE0];
MOVE11 = [1,0,0,0]; MOVE12 = [0,1,0,0]; MOVE13 = [0,0,1,0];
MOVE21 = [0,0,0,1]; MOVE22 = [1,1,0,0]; MOVE23 = [0,1,1,1];
MOVE31 = [1,0,1,1]; MOVE32 = [1,1,0,1]; MOVE33 = [1,1,1,0];
DO NOT COPY
NONE  = [0,0,0,0];
" Intermediate equations for empty corner cells
E11 = !X11 & !Y11;  E13 = !X13 & !Y13;  E31 = !X31 & !Y31;  E33 = !X33 & !Y33;
equations
DO NOT COPY
"Simplest approach -- pick corner if available, else side
WHEN PICK != NONE THEN MOVE = PICK;
ELSE WHEN E11 THEN MOVE = MOVE11;
ELSE WHEN E13 THEN MOVE = MOVE13;
ELSE WHEN E31 THEN MOVE = MOVE31;
ELSE WHEN E33 THEN MOVE = MOVE33;DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN E12 THEN MOVE = MOVE12;
ELSE WHEN E21 THEN MOVE = MOVE21;
ELSE WHEN E23 THEN MOVE = MOVE23;
ELSE WHEN E32 THEN MOVE = MOVE32;
ELSE MOVE = NONE;
DO NOT COPY
end pick2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

496  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
some of the information to save two pins. The method that we’ll use here is to
combine the signals for the middle edge cells 12, 21, 23, and 32 to produce four
signals  E12,  E21,  E23, and  E32 that are asserted if and only if the corresponding
DO NOT COPY
cells are empty. This can be done with four 2-input  NOR  gates, and actually
leaves two spare inputs or outputs on the 22V10.
Assuming the four  NOR  gates as “other logic,” Table 6-16 on the preced-
ing page gives a program for the  PICK2  PLD. When it must pick a move, this
program uses the simplest heuristic possible—it picks a corner cell if one is
DO NOT COPY
empty, else it picks a middle edge cell. This program could use some improve-
ment, because it will sometimes lose (see Exercise 6.8). Luckily, the equations
resulting from Table 6-16 require only 8 to 10 terms per output, so it’s possible
to put in more intelligence (see Exercises 6.9 and 6.10).
DO NOT COPY
6.3 Design Examples Using VHDL
6.3.1 Barrel Shifter
On page 464, we defined a barrel shifter as a combinational logic circuit with  n
DO NOT COPYdata inputs,  n  data outputs, and a set of control inputs that specify how to shift
the data between input and output. We showed in Section 6.1.1 how to build a
simple barrel shifter that performs only left circular shifts using MSI building
blocks. Later, in Section 6.2.1, we showed how to define a more capable barrel
shifter using ABEL, but we also pointed out that PLDs are normally unsuitable
DO NOT COPY
for realizing barrel shifters. In this subsection, we’ll show how VHDL can be
used to describe both the behavior and structure of barrel shifters for FPGA or
ASIC realization.
Table 6-17 is a behavioral VHDL program for a 16-bit barrel shifter that
performs any of six different combinations of shift type and direction. The shift
DO NOT COPY
types are circular, logical, and arithmetic, as defined previously in Table 6-3, and
the directions are of course left and right. As shown in the entity declaration, a
4-bit control input  S  gives the shift amount, and a 3-bit control input  C  gives the
shift mode (type and direction). We used the IEEE  std_logic_arith  package
and defined the shift amount  S  to be type  UNSIGNED  so we could later use the
DO NOT COPY
CONV_INTEGER  function in that package.
Notice that the entity declaration includes six constant definitions that
establish the correspondence between shift modes and the value of  C. Although
we didn’t discuss it in Section 4.7, VHDL allows you to put constant, type,
DO NOT COPYsignal, and other declarations within an entity declaration. It makes sense to
define such items within the entity declaration only if they must be the same in
any architecture. In this case, we are pinning down the shift-mode encodings, so
they should go here. Other items should go in the architecture definition.
In the architecture part of the program, we define six functions, one for
DO NOT COPYeach kind of shift on a 16-bit  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR. We defined the subtype
DATAWORD  to save typing in the function definitions.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  497
Ta b l e 6 - 1 7  VHDL behavioral description of a 6-function barrel shifter.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
entity barrel16 is
port (
DIN: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (15 downto 0);  -- Data inputs
DO NOT COPYS: in UNSIGNED (3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
C: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);  -- Mode control
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (15 downto 0) -- Data bus output
);
constant Lrotate:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "000";  -- Define the coding of
constant Rrotate:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "001";  -- the different shift modes
DO NOT COPY
constant Llogical: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "010";
constant Rlogical: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "011";
constant Larith:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "100";
constant Rarith:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR := "101";
end barrel16;
DO NOT COPY
architecture barrel16_behavioral of barrel16 is
subtype DATAWORD is STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);
function Vrol (D: DATAWORD; S: UNSIGNED)
return DATAWORD is
variable N: INTEGER;
DO NOT COPY
variable TMPD: DATAWORD;
begin
N := CONV_INTEGER(S); TMPD := D;
for i in 1 to N loop
TMPD := TMPD(14 downto 0) & TMPD(15);
DO NOT COPYend loop;
return TMPD;
end Vrol;
...
begin
DO NOT COPY
process(DIN, S, C)
begin
case C is
when Lrotate  => DOUT <= Vrol(DIN,S);
when Rrotate  => DOUT <= Vror(DIN,S);
when Llogical => DOUT <= Vsll(DIN,S);
DO NOT COPY
when Rlogical => DOUT <= Vsrl(DIN,S);
when Larith  => DOUT <= Vsla(DIN,S);
when Rarith  => DOUT <= Vsra(DIN,S);
when others  => null;
end case;
end process;DO NOT COPY
end barrel16_behavioral;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

498  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
ROLLING VHDL-93 actually has built-in array operators,  rol,  ror,  sll,  srl,  sla, and  sra,
YOUR OWN corresponding to the shift operations that we defined in Table 6-3. Since these oper-
DO NOT COPY
ations are not provided in VHDL-87, we’ve defined our own functions in Table 6-17.
Well, actually we’ve only defined one of them (Vrol); the rest are left as an exercise
for the reader (Exercise 6.11).
DO NOT COPY
Table 6-17 shows the details of only the first function (Vrol); the rest are
similar with only a one-line change. We define a variable  N  for converting the
shift amount  S  into an integer for the  for loop. We also assign the input vector  D
to a local variable  TMPD  which is shifted  N  times in the  for  loop. In the body of
DO NOT COPY
the  for  loop, a single assignment statement takes a 15-bit slice of the data word
(TMPD  14  downto  0)) and uses concatenation (&) to put it back together with the
bit that “falls off” the left end (TMPD(15)). Other shift types can be described
with similar operations. Note that the shift functions might not be defined in
other, nonbehavioral descriptions of the  barrel16  entity, for example in struc-
DO NOT COPY
tural architectures.
The “concurrent statements” part of the architecture is a single process that
has all of the entity’s inputs in its sensitivity list. Within this process, a  case
statement assigns a result to  DOUT  by calling the appropriate function based on
the value of the mode-control input  C.
DO NOT COPY
The process in Table 6-17 is a nice behavioral description of the barrel
shifter, but most synthesis tools cannot synthesize a circuit from it. The problem
is that most tools require the range of a  for  loop to be static at the time it is
analyzed. The range of the  for  loop in the  Vrol  function is dynamic; it depends
DO NOT COPYon the value of input signal  S  when the circuit is operating.
Well, that’s OK, it’s hard to predict what kind of circuit the synthesis tool
would come up with even if it could handle a dynamic  for  range. This is an
example where as designers we should take little more control over the circuit
structure to obtain a reasonably fast, efficient synthesis result.
DO NOT COPYIn Figure 6-2 on page 466, we showed how to design a 16-bit barrel shifter
for left circular shifts using MSI building blocks. We used a cascade of four
16-bit, 2-input multiplexers to shift their inputs by 0 or 1, 2, 4, or 8 positions
depending of the values of S0 through  S3, respectively. We can express the same
kind behavior and structure using the VHDL program shown in Table 6-18.
DO NOT COPY
Even though the program uses a process and is therefore “behavioral” in style,
we can be pretty sure that most synthesis engines will generate a 1-input
multiplexer for each “if” statement in the program, thereby creating a cascade
similar to Figure 6-2.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  499
Ta b l e 6 - 1 8  VHDL program for a 16-bit barrel shifter for left circular shifts only.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity rol16 is
port (
DIN: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);  -- Data inputs
S: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
DO NOT COPY
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0) -- Data bus output
);
end rol16;
architecture rol16_arch of rol16 is
beginDO NOT COPY
process(DIN, S)
variable X, Y, Z: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);
begin
if S(0)='1' then X := DIN(14 downto 0) & DIN(15); else X := DIN; end if;
if S(1)='1' then Y := X(13 downto 0) & X(15 downto 14); else Y := X; end if;
DO NOT COPYif S(2)='1' then Z := Y(11 downto 0) & Y(15 downto 12); else Z := Y; end if;
if S(3)='1' then DOUT <= Z(7 downto 0) & Z(15 downto 8); else DOUT <= Z; end if;
end process;
end rol16_arch;
DO NOT COPY
Of course, our problem statement requires a barrel shifter that can shift
both left and right. Table 6-19 revises the previous program to do circular shifts
in either direction. An additional input,  DIR, specifies the shift direction, 0 for
left, 1 for right. Each rank of shifting is specified by a  case statement that picks
one of four possibilities based on the values ofDO NOT COPY  DIR  and the bit of  S  that controls
that rank. Notice that we created local 2-bit variables  CTRLi  to hold the pair of
values  DIR  and  S(i); each  case  statement is controlled by one of these vari-
ables. You might like to eliminate these variables and simply control each case
statement with a concatenation “DIR  &  S(i)”, but VHDL syntax doesn’t allow
that because the type of this concatenation would be unknown.DO NOT COPY
A typical VHDL synthesis tool will generate a 3- or 4-input multiplexer for
each of the  case  statements in Table 6-19. A good synthesis tool will generate
only a 2-input multiplexer for the last  case  statement.
So, now we have a barrel shifter that will do left or right circular shifts, but
DO NOT COPY
we’re not done yet—we need to take care of the logical and arithmetic shifts in
both directions. Figure 6-14 shows our strategy for completing the design. We
start out with the  ROLR16  component that we just completed, and use other logic
to control the shift direction as a function of  C.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

500  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 1 9  VHDL program for a 16-bit barrel shifter for left and right circular shifts.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity rolr16 is
port (
DIN:  in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);  -- Data inputs
S:  in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
DO NOT COPY
DIR:  in STD_LOGIC;  -- Shift direction, 0=>L, 1=>R
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0)  -- Data bus output
);
end rolr16;
architecture rol16r_arch of rolr16 isDO NOT COPY
begin
process(DIN, S, DIR)
variable X, Y, Z: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);
variable CTRL0, CTRL1, CTRL2, CTRL3: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 downto 0);
begin
DO NOT COPYCTRL0 := S(0) & DIR; CTRL1 := S(1) & DIR; CTRL2 := S(2) & DIR; CTRL3 := S(3) & DIR;
case CTRL0 is
when "00" | "01" => X := DIN;
when "10" => X := DIN(14 downto 0) & DIN(15);
when "11" => X := DIN(0) & DIN(15 downto 1);
when others => null;  end case;
DO NOT COPY
case CTRL1 is
when "00" | "01" => Y := X;
when "10" => Y := X(13 downto 0) & X(15 downto 14);
when "11" => Y := X(1 downto 0) & X(15 downto 2);
when others => null;  end case;
DO NOT COPYcase CTRL2 is
when "00" | "01" => Z := Y;
when "10" => Z := Y(11 downto 0) & Y(15 downto 12);
when "11" => Z := Y(3 downto 0) & Y(15 downto 4);
when others => null;  end case;
case CTRL3 is
DO NOT COPY
when "00" | "01" => DOUT <= Z;
when "10" | "11" => DOUT <= Z(7 downto 0) & Z(15 downto 8);
when others => null;  end case;
end process;
end rol16r_arch;
DO NOT COPY
Next we must “fix up” some of the result bits if we are doing a logical or
arithmetic shift. For a left logical or arithmetic  n-bit shift, we must set the
rightmost  n–1 bits to 0 or the original rightmost bit value, respectively. For a
DO NOT COPYright logical or arithmetic  n-bit shift, we must set the leftmost  n–1 bits to 0 or the
original leftmost bit value, respectively.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  501
ROUT(15:0)  FOUT(15:0) 
FIXUP FIXUP
DIN(15:0) ROLR16 DOUT(15:0)
(left) (right)
DO NOT COPY
ROUT(0)  FOUT(15)
S(3:0) Figure 6-14
Barrel-shifter
C(2:0) other logic components.
DO NOT COPY
As shown in Figure 6-14, our strategy is to follow the circular shifter
(ROLR16) with a fix-up circuit (FIXUP) that plugs in appropriate low-order bits
for a left logical or arithmetic shift, and follow that with another fix-up circuit
that plugs in high-order bits for a right logical or arithmetic shift.
Table 6-20 is a behavioral VHDL program for the left-shift fix-up circuit.
DO NOT COPY
The circuit has 16 bits of data input and output,  DIN  and  DOUT. Its control inputs
are the shift amount  S, an enable input  FEN, and the new value  FDAT  to be
plugged into the fixed-up data bits. For each output bit  DOUT(i), the circuit puts
out the fixed-up bit value if  i  is less than  S  and the circuit is enabled; else it puts
out the unmodified data inputDO NOT COPY  DIN(i).
The  for  loop in Table 6-20 is readily synthesizable, but you can’t really be
sure what kind of logic the synthesis tool will generate. In particular, the “>”
Ta b l e 6 - 2 0  Behavioral VHDL program for left-shift fix-ups.
DO NOT COPY
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
entity fixup is
DO NOT COPYport (
DIN:  in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0); -- Data inputs
S:  in UNSIGNED(3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
FEN:  in STD_LOGIC;  -- Fixup enable
FDAT: in STD_LOGIC;  -- Fixup data
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0) -- Data bus output
DO NOT COPY
);
end fixup;
architecture fixup_arch of fixup is
begin
process(DIN, S, FEN, FDAT)
DO NOT COPY
begin
for i in 0 to 15 loop
if (i < CONV_INTEGER(S)) and (FEN = '1') then DOUT(i) <= FDAT;
else DOUT(i) <= DIN(i);  end if;
end loop;
end process;DO NOT COPY
end fixup_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

502  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
A SERIAL FIX-UP A structural architecture for the fix-up logic is shown in Table 6-21. Here, we have
STRUCTURE defined what is in effect an iterative circuit to create a 16-bit vector  FSEL, where
DO NOT COPY
FSEL(i)  is 1 if bit  i  needs fixing up. We start by setting  FSEL(15)  to 0, since that
bit never needs fixing up. Then we note that for the remaining values of  i,  FSEL(i)
should be 1 if  S  equals  i+1 or if  FSEL(i+1)  is already asserted. Thus, the  FSEL
assignment within the generate statement creates a serial chain of 2-input  OR  gates,
where one input is asserted if  S=i  (decoded with a 4-input  AND  gate), and the other
DO NOT COPY
input is connected to the previous  OR  gate’s output. The  DOUT(i)  assignment
statement creates 16 2-input multiplexers that select either  DIN(i)  or the fix-up data
(FDAT) depending of the value of  FSEL(i).
Although the serial realization is compact, it is very slow compared to a one
that realizes each  FSEL  output as a 2-level sum-of-products circuit. However, the
DO NOT COPY
long delay may not matter because the fix-up circuit appears near the end of the data
path. If speed is still a problem, there is a zero-cost trick that cuts the delay in half
(see Exercise 6.12).
DO NOT COPY
operation in each step of the loop may cause the synthesis of a general-purpose
magnitude comparator, even though one of the operands is a constant and each
output could therefore be generated with no more than a handful of gates. (In
fact, the logic for “7  <  CONV_INTEGER(S)” is just a wire,  S(3)!) For a structural
DO NOT COPYversion of this function, see the box on this page.
For right shifts, fix-ups start from the opposite end of the data word, so it
would appear that we need a second version of the fix-up circuit. However, we
can use the original version if we just reverse the order of its input and output
bits, as we’ll soon see.
DO NOT COPYTable 6-22 puts together a structural architecture for the complete, 16-bit,
6-function barrel shifter using the design approach of Figure 6-14 on page 501.
The entity declaration for barrel16 is unchanged from the original in Table 6-17
on page 497. The architecture declares two components,  rolr16  and  fixup;
these use our previous entity definitions. The statement part of the architecture
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 6 - 2 1  Structural VHDL architecture for left-shift fix-ups.
architecture fixup_struc of fixup is
signal FSEL: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);  -- Fixup select
beginDO NOT COPY
FSEL(15) <= '0'; DOUT(15) <= DIN(15);
U1: for i in 14 downto 0 generate
FSEL(i) <= '1' when CONV_INTEGER(S) = i+1 else FSEL(i+1);
DOUT(i) <= FDAT when (FSEL(i) = '1' and FEN = '1') else DIN(i);
end generate;
DO NOT COPY
end fixup_struc;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  503
instantiates  rolr16  and fixup and has several assignment statements that create
needed control signals (the “other logic” in Figure 6-14).
For example, the first assignment statement asserts  DIR_RIGHT  if  C  speci-
DO NOT COPY
fies one of the right shifts. The enable inputs for the left and right fix-up circuits
are  FIX_LEFT  and  FIX_RIGHT, asserted for left and right logical and arithmetic
shifts. The fix-up data values are  FIX_LEFT_DAT  and  FIX_RIGHT_DAT.
While all the statements in the architecture execute concurrently, they are
listed in Table 6-22 in the order of the actual dataflow to improve readability.
DO NOT COPY
First,  rolr16  is instantiated to perform the basic left or right circular shift as
specified. Its outputs are hooked up to the inputs of the first  fixup  component
(U2) to handle fix-ups for left logical and arithmetic shifts. Next comes  U3, a
generate  statement that reverses the order of the data inputs for the next  fixup
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 6 - 2 2  VHDL structural architecture for the 6-function barrel shifter.
architecture barrel16_struc of barrel16 is
component rolr16 port (DO NOT COPY
DIN:  in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0); -- Data inputs
S:  in UNSIGNED(3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
DIR:  in STD_LOGIC;  -- Shift direction, 0=>L, 1=>R
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0) -- Data bus output
);  end component;
DO NOT COPY
component fixup port (
DIN:  in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0); -- Data inputs
S:  in UNSIGNED(3 downto 0);  -- Shift amount, 0-15
FEN:  in STD_LOGIC;  -- Fixup enable
FDAT: in STD_LOGIC;  -- Fixup data
DO NOT COPY
DOUT: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0) -- Data bus output
);  end component;
signal DIR_RIGHT, FIX_RIGHT, FIX_RIGHT_DAT, FIX_LEFT, FIX_LEFT_DAT: STD_LOGIC;
signal ROUT, FOUT, RFIXIN, RFIXOUT: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(15 downto 0);
DO NOT COPY
begin
DIR_RIGHT <= '1' when C = Rrotate or C = Rlogical or C = Rarith else '0';
FIX_LEFT <= '1' when DIR_RIGHT='0' and (C = Llogical or C = Larith) else '0';
FIX_RIGHT <= '1' when DIR_RIGHT='1' and (C = Rlogical or C = Rarith) else '0';
FIX_LEFT_DAT <= DIN(0) when C = Larith else '0';
FIX_RIGHT_DAT <= DIN(15) when C = Rarith else '0';DO NOT COPY
U1: rolr16 port map (DIN, S, DIR_RIGHT, ROUT);
U2: fixup port map (ROUT, S, FIX_LEFT, FIX_LEFT_DAT, FOUT);
U3: for i in 0 to 15 generate RFIXIN(i) <= FOUT(15-i); end generate;
U4: fixup port map (RFIXIN, S, FIX_RIGHT, FIX_RIGHT_DAT, RFIXOUT);
U5: for i in 0 to 15 generate DOUT(i) <= RFIXOUT(15-i); end generate;
DO NOT COPY
end barrel16_struc;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

504  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
INFORMATION- Based on the encoding of C, you might like to replace the first assignment statement
HIDING STYLE in Table 6-21 with “DIR_RIGHT  <=  C(0)”, which would be guaranteed to lead to a
DO NOT COPY
more efficient realization for that control bit—just a wire! However, this would vio-
late a programming principle of information hiding and lead to possible bugs.
We explicitly wrote the shift encodings using  constant  definitions in the
barrel16  entity declaration. The architecture does not need to be aware of the
encoding details. Suppose that we nevertheless made the architecture change sug-
DO NOT COPY
gested above. If somebody else (or we!) came along later and changed the constant
definitions in the  barrel16  entity to make a different encoding, the architecture
would not use the new encodings! Exercise 6.13 asks you to change the definitions
so that the cost savings of our suggested change are enabled by the entity definition.
DO NOT COPY
component (U4), which handles fix-ups for right logical and arithmetic shifts.
Finally  U5, another  generate  statement, undoes the bit reversing of  U3. Note
that in synthesis,  U3  and  U5  are merely permutations of wires.
DO NOT COPYMany other architectures are possible for the original  barrel16  entity. In
Exercise 6.14, we suggest an architecture that enables the circular shifting to be
done by the  rol16  entity, which uses only 2-input multiplexers, rather than the
more expensive  rolr16.
DO NOT COPY6.3.2 Simple Floating-Point Encoder
We defined a simple floating-point number format on page 467, and posed the
design problem of converting a number from fixed-point to this floating point
format. The problem of determining the exponent of the floating-point number
mapped nicely into an MSI priority encoder. In an HDL, the same problem maps
DO NOT COPY
into nested “if” statements.
Table 6-23 is a behavioral VHDL program for the floating-point encoder.
Within the  fpenc_arch  architecture, a nested “if” statement checks the range
of the input  B  and sets  M  and  E  appropriately. Notice that the program uses the
IEEE  std_logic_arith  package; this is done to get the  UNSIGNED  type and the
DO NOT COPY
comparison operations that go along with it, as we described in Section 5.9.6.
Just to save typing, a variable  BU  is defined to hold the value of B as converted to
the  UNSIGNED type; alternatively, we could have written “UNSIGNED(B)” in each
nested “if” clause.
DO NOT COPYAlthough the code in Table 6-23 is fully synthesizable, some synthesis
tools may not be smart enough to recognize that the nested comparisons require
just one bit to be checked at each level, and might instead generate a full 11-bit
comparator at each level. Such logic would be a lot bigger and slower than what
would be otherwise possible. If faced with this problem, we can always write the
DO NOT COPYarchitecture a little differently and more explicitly to help out the tool, as shown
in Table 6-24.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  505
library IEEE; Ta b l e 6 - 2 3
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; Behavioral VHDL
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all; program for fixed-
DO NOT COPY
point to floating-point
entity fpenc is conversion.
port (
B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(10 downto 0); -- fixed-point number
M: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0); -- floating-point mantissa
E: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(2 downto 0)  -- floating-point exponent
DO NOT COPY
);
end fpenc;
architecture fpenc_arch of fpenc is
begin
process(B)DO NOT COPY
variable BU: UNSIGNED(10 downto 0);
begin
BU := UNSIGNED(B);
if  BU < 16  then M <= B( 3 downto 0); E <= "000";
elsif BU < 32  then M <= B( 4 downto 1); E <= "001";
DO NOT COPY
elsif BU < 64  then M <= B( 5 downto 2); E <= "010";
elsif BU < 128  then M <= B( 6 downto 3); E <= "011";
elsif BU < 256  then M <= B( 7 downto 4); E <= "100";
elsif BU < 512  then M <= B( 8 downto 5); E <= "101";
elsif BU < 1024 then M <= B( 9 downto 6); E <= "110";
DO NOT COPYelse  M <= B(10 downto 7); E <= "111";
end if;
end process;
end fpenc_arch;
DO NOT COPY
architecture fpence_arch of fpenc is Ta b l e 6 - 2 4
begin Alternative VHDL
process(B) architecture for
begin fixed-point to floating-
DO NOT COPY
if  B(10) = '1' then M <= B(10 downto 7); E <= "111"; point conversion.
elsif B(9) = '1' then M <= B( 9 downto 6); E <= "110";
elsif B(8) = '1' then M <= B( 8 downto 5); E <= "101";
elsif B(7) = '1' then M <= B( 7 downto 4); E <= "100";
elsif B(6) = '1' then M <= B( 6 downto 3); E <= "011";
DO NOT COPYelsif B(5) = '1' then M <= B( 5 downto 2); E <= "010";
elsif B(4) = '1' then M <= B( 4 downto 1); E <= "001";
else  M <= B( 3 downto 0); E <= "000";
end if;
end process;
end fpence_arch;
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

506  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
B’S NOT MY TYPE  In Table 6-23, we used the expression  UNSIGNED(B)  to convert  B, an array of type
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, into an array of type  UNSIGNED. This is called an  explicit type
DO NOT COPY
conversion. VHDL lets you convert between related closely related types by writing
the desired type followed by the value to be converted in parentheses. Two array
types are “closely related” if they have the same element type, the same number of
dimensions, and the same index types (typically  INTEGER) or ones that can be type
converted. The values in the old array are placed in corresponding positions, left to
DO NOT COPY
right, in the new array.
On the other hand, we might like to use the real comparators and spend
even more gates to improve the functionality of our design. In particular, the
DO NOT COPY
present design performs truncation rather than rounding when generating the
mantissa bits. A more accurate result is achieved with rounding, but this is a
much more complicated design. First, we will need an adder to add 1 to the
selected mantissa bits when we round up. However, adding 1 when the mantissa
DO NOT COPYis already 1111 will bump us into the next exponent range, so we need to watch
out for this case. Finally, we can never round up if the unrounded mantissa and
exponent are 1111 and 111, because there’s no higher value in our floating-point
representation to round to.
The program in Table 6-25 performs rounding as desired. The function
DO NOT COPYround  takes a selected 5-bit slice from the fixed-point number and returns the
four high-order bits, adding 1 if the LSB is 1. Thus, if we think of the binary
point as being just to the left of the LSB, rounding occurs if the truncated part of
the mantissa is 1/2 or more. In each clause in the nested “if” statement in the
process, the comparison value is selected so that rounding up will occur only if it
DO NOT COPY
does not “overflow,” pushing the result into the next exponent range. Otherwise,
conversion and rounding occurs in the next clause. In the last clause, we ensure
that we do not round up when we’re at the end of the floating-point range.
DO NOT COPY
GOBBLE, GOBBLE  The rounding operation does not require a 4-bit adder, only an “incrementer,” since
one of the addends is always 1. Some VHDL tools may synthesize the complete
adder, while others may be smart enough to use an incrementer with far fewer gates.
In some cases, it may not matter. The most sophisticated tools for FPGA and
ASIC design include  gate gobblers. These programs look for gates with constant
DO NOT COPYinputs and eliminate gates or gate inputs as a result. For example, an AND-gate input
with a constant 1 applied to it can be eliminated, and an AND gate with a constant-0
input can be replaced with a constant-0 signal.
A gate-gobbler program propagates the effects of constant inputs as far as pos-
sible in a circuit. Thus, it can transform a 4-bit adder with a constant-1 input into a
DO NOT COPYmore economical 4-bit incrementer.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  507
architecture fpencr_arch of fpenc is Ta b l e 6 - 2 5
function round (BSLICE: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(4 downto 0)) Behavioral VHDL
return STD_LOGIC_VECTOR is architecture for fixed-
DO NOT COPY
variable BSU: UNSIGNED(3 downto 0); point to floating-point
begin conversion with
if BSLICE(0) = '0' then return BSLICE(4 downto 1); rounding.
else null;
BSU := UNSIGNED(BSLICE(4 downto 1)) + 1;
return STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(BSU);
DO NOT COPY
end if;
end;
begin
process(B)
variable BU: UNSIGNED(10 downto 0);
beginDO NOT COPY
BU := UNSIGNED(B);
if  BU < 16  then M <= B( 3 downto 0); E <= "000";
elsif BU < 32-1  then M <= round(B( 4 downto 0)); E <= "001";
elsif BU < 64-2  then M <= round(B( 5 downto 1)); E <= "010";
elsif BU < 128-4  then M <= round(B( 6 downto 2)); E <= "011";
DO NOT COPY
elsif BU < 256-8  then M <= round(B( 7 downto 3)); E <= "100";
elsif BU < 512-16  then M <= round(B( 8 downto 4)); E <= "101";
elsif BU < 1024-32 then M <= round(B( 9 downto 5)); E <= "110";
elsif BU < 2048-64 then M <= round(B(10 downto 6)); E <= "111";
else  M <= "1111";  E <= "111";
DO NOT COPYend if;
end process;
end fpencr_arch;
Once again, synthesis results for this behavioral program may or may not
DO NOT COPY
be efficient. Besides the multiple comparison statements, we now must worry
about the multiple 4-bit adders that might be synthesized as a result of the multi-
ple calls to the round  function. Restructuring the architecture so that only a
single adder is synthesized is left as an exercise (6.15).
DO NOT COPY
6.3.3 Dual-Priority Encoder
In this example, we’ll use VHDL to create a behavioral description of a PLD
DO NOT COPY
priority encoder that identifies both the highest-priority and the second-highest-
priority asserted signal among a set of request inputs  R(0  to  7), where  R(0)  has
the highest priority. We’ll use  A(2  downto  0)  and  AVALID  to identify the
highest-priority request, asserting  AVALID  only if a highest-priority request is
present. Similarly, we’ll use  B(2  downto  0)  and  BVALID  to identify the second-
DO NOT COPY
highest-priority request.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

508  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 2 6 library IEEE;
Behavioral VHDL use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
program for a dual use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
DO NOT COPY
priority encoder.
entity Vprior2 is
port (
R: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (0 to 7);
A, B: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0);
AVALID, BVALID: buffer STD_LOGIC
DO NOT COPY
);
end Vprior2;
architecture Vprior2_arch of Vprior2 is
begin
DO NOT COPYprocess(R, AVALID, BVALID)
begin
AVALID <= '0'; BVALID <= '0'; A <= "000"; B <= "000";
for i in 0 to 7 loop
if R(i) = '1' and AVALID = '0' then
A <= CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(i,3); AVALID <= '1';
DO NOT COPY
elsif R(i) = '1' and BVALID = '0' then
B <= CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(i,3); BVALID <= '1';
end if;
end loop;
end process;
DO NOT COPYend Vprior2_arch;
Table 6-26 shows a behavioral VHDL program for the priority encoder.
Instead of the nested “if” approach of the previous example, we’ve used a
DO NOT COPY“for” loop. This approach allows us to take care of both the first and the second
priorities within the same loop, working our way from highest to lowest priority.
Besides  std_logic_1164, the program uses the IEEE  std_logic_arith
package in order to get the  CONV_STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  function. We also wrote
this function explicitly in Table 4-39 on page 275.
DO NOT COPYNotice in the table that ports  AVALID  and  BVALID  are declared as mode
buffer, because they are read within the architecture. If you were stuck with an
entity definition that declared  AVALID  and  BVALID  as mode  out, you could still
use the same architecture approach, but you would have to declare local
variables corresponding to  AVALID  and  BVALID  within the process. Notice also
DO NOT COPY
that we included  AVALID  and  BVALID  in the process sensitivity list. Although
this is not strictly necessary, it prevents warnings that the compiler otherwise
would give about using the value of a signal that is not on the sensitivity list.
The nested “if” approach can also be used for the dual-priority encoder,
but it yields a longer program with more accidents waiting to happen, as shown
DO NOT COPY
in Table 6-27. On the other hand, it may yield a better synthesis result; the only
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  509
architecture Vprior2i_arch of Vprior2 is Ta b l e 6 - 2 7
begin Alternative VHDL
process(R, A, AVALID, BVALID) architecture for a
DO NOT COPY
begin dual priority encoder.
if  R(0) = '1' then A <= "000"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(1) = '1' then A <= "001"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(2) = '1' then A <= "010"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(3) = '1' then A <= "011"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(4) = '1' then A <= "100"; AVALID <= '1';
DO NOT COPY
elsif R(5) = '1' then A <= "101"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(6) = '1' then A <= "110"; AVALID <= '1';
elsif R(7) = '1' then A <= "111"; AVALID <= '1';
else  A <= "000"; AVALID <= '0';
end if;
DO NOT COPYif  R(1) = '1' and A /= "001" then B <= "001"; BVALID <= '1';
elsif R(2) = '1' and A /= "010" then B <= "010"; BVALID <= '1';
elsif R(3) = '1' and A /= "011" then B <= "011"; BVALID <= '1';
elsif R(4) = '1' and A /= "100" then B <= "100"; BVALID <= '1';
elsif R(5) = '1' and A /= "101" then B <= "101"; BVALID <= '1';
elsif R(6) = '1' and A /= "110" then B <= "110"; BVALID <= '1';
DO NOT COPY
elsif R(7) = '1' and A /= "111" then B <= "111"; BVALID <= '1';
else  B <= "000"; BVALID <= '0';
end if;
end process;
end Vprior2i_arch;
DO NOT COPY
way to know with a particular tool is to synthesize the circuit and analyze the
results in terms of delay and cell or gate count.
Both nested “if” statements and “for” statements may lead to long delay
chains in synthesis. To get guarantee that you get a faster dual-priority encoder,DO NOT COPY
you must follow a structural or semi-structural design approach. For example,
you can start by writing a dataflow model of a fast 8-input priority encoder using
the ideas found in the 74x148 logic diagram (Figure 5-50 on page 375) or in a
related ABEL program (Table 5-24 on page 378). Then you can put two of these
together in a structure that “knocks out” the highest-priority input in order toDO NOT COPY
find the second, as we showed in Figure 6-6 on page 471.
6.3.4 Cascading Comparators
Cascading comparators is something we typically would not do in a VHDLDO NOT COPY
behavioral model, because the language and the IEEE  std_logic_arith
package let us define comparators of any desired length directly. However, we
may indeed need to write structural or semi-structural VHDL programs that
hook up smaller comparator components in a specific way to obtain high
DO NOT COPY
performance.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

510  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 2 8 library IEEE;
Behavioral VHDL use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
program for a 64-bit use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
DO NOT COPY
comparator.
entity comp64 is
port ( A, B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (63 downto 0);
EQ, GT: out STD_LOGIC );
end comp64;
DO NOT COPY
architecture comp64_arch of comp64 is
begin
EQ <= '1' when A = B else '0';
GT <= '1' when A > B else '0';
end comp64_arch;
DO NOT COPY
Table 6-28 is a simple behavioral model of a 64-bit comparator with equals
and greater-than outputs. This program uses the IEEE  std_logic_unsigned
package, whose built-in comparison functions automatically treat all signals of
DO NOT COPYtype  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  as unsigned integers. Although the program is fully
synthesizable, the speed and size of the result depends on the “intelligence” of
the particular tool that is used.
An alternative is to build the comparator by cascading smaller components,
such as 8-bit comparators. Table 6-29 is the behavioral model of an 8-bit
DO NOT COPYcomparator. A particular tool may or may not synthesize a very fast comparator
from this program, but it’s sure to be significantly faster than a 64-bit comparator
in any case.
Next, we can write a structural program that instantiates eight of these 8-bit
comparators and hooks up their individual outputs through additional logic to
DO NOT COPY
calculate the overall comparison result. One way to do this is shown Table 6-30.
A  generate  statement creates not only the individual 8-bit comparators, but
Ta b l e 6 - 2 9 library IEEE;
VHDL program for anDO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
8-bit comparator. use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity comp8 is
port ( A, B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
EQ, GT: out STD_LOGIC );
DO NOT COPY
end comp8;
architecture comp8_arch of comp8 is
begin
EQ <= '1' when A = B else '0';
GT <= '1' when A > B else '0';
DO NOT COPY
end comp8_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  511
Ta b l e 6 - 3 0  VHDL structural architecture for a 64-bit comparator.
architecture comp64s_arch of comp64 is
component comp8DO NOT COPY
port ( A, B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
EQ, GT: out STD_LOGIC);
end component;
signal EQ8, GT8: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); -- =, > for 8-bit slice
signal SEQ, SGT: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (8 downto 0); -- serial chain of slice results
DO NOT COPY
begin
SEQ(8) <= '1'; SGT(8) <= '0';
U1: for i in 7 downto 0 generate
U2: comp8 port map (A(7+i*8 downto i*8), B(7+i*8 downto i*8), EQ8(i), GT8(i));
SEQ(i) <= SEQ(i+1) and EQ8(i);
DO NOT COPYSGT(i) <= SGT(i+1) or (SEQ(i+1) and GT8(i));
end generate;
EQ <= SEQ(0); GT <= SGT(0);
end comp64s_arch;
DO NOT COPY
also cascading logic that serially builds up the overall result from most signifi-
cant to least significant stage.
An unsophisticated tool could synthesize a slow iterative comparator
circuit for our original 64-bit comparator architecture in Table 6-28. In this
situation, the architecture in Table 6-30 yields a faster synthesized circuit
DO NOT COPY
because it explicitly “pulls” out the cascading information for each 8-bit slice
and combines it in a faster combinational circuit (just 8 levels of  AND-OR  logic,
not 64). A more sophisticated tool might flatten the 8-bit comparator into faster,
non-iterative structure similar to the 74x682 MSI comparator (Figure 5-84 on
page 421), and it might flatten our iterative cascading logic in Table 6-30 intoDO NOT COPY
two-level sum-of-products equations similar to the ones in the ABEL solution
on page 483.
6.3.5 Mode-Dependent Comparator
DO NOT COPY
For the next example, let us suppose we have a system in which we need to
compare two 32-bit words under normal circumstances, but where we must
sometimes ignore one or two low-order bits of the input words. The operating
mode is specified by two mode-control bits,  M1  and  M0, as shown in Table 6-9
on page 484.DO NOT COPY
The desired functionality can be obtained very easily in VHDL using a
case  statement to select the behavior by mode, as shown in the program in
Table 6-31. This is a perfectly good behavioral description that is also fully
synthesizable. However, it has one major drawback in synthesis—it will, in all
likelihood, cause the creation of three separate equality and magnitude compar-DO NOT COPY
ators (32-, 31-, and 30-bit), one for each case in the  case  statement. The
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

512  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 3 1  VHDL behavioral architecture of a 32-bit mode-dependent comparator.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity Vmodecmp is
port ( M: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 downto 0);  -- mode
A, B: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (31 downto 0); -- unsigned integers
DO NOT COPYEQ, GT: out STD_LOGIC );  -- comparison results
end Vmodecmp;
architecture Vmodecmp_arch of Vmodecmp is
begin
process (M, A, B)
beginDO NOT COPY
case M is
when "00" =>
if A = B then EQ <= '1'; else EQ <= '0'; end if;
if A > B then GT <= '1'; else GT <= '0'; end if;
when "01" =>
DO NOT COPYif A(31 downto 1) = B(31 downto 1) then EQ <= '1'; else EQ <= '0'; end if;
if A(31 downto 1) > B(31 downto 1) then GT <= '1'; else GT <= '0'; end if;
when "10" =>
if A(31 downto 2) = B(31 downto 2) then EQ <= '1'; else EQ <= '0'; end if;
if A(31 downto 2) > B(31 downto 2) then GT <= '1'; else GT <= '0'; end if;
when others => EQ <= '0';  GT <= '0';
DO NOT COPY
end case;
end process;
end Vmodecmp_arch;
individual comparators may or may not be fast, as discussed in the previous sub-
DO NOT COPY
section, but we won’t worry about speed for this example.
A more efficient alternative is to perform just one comparison for the 30
high-order bits of the inputs, and use additional logic that is dependent on mode
to give a final result using the low-order bits as necessary. This approach is
DO NOT COPYshown in Table 6-32. Two variables  EQ30  and  GT30  are used within the process
to hold the results of the comparison of the 30 high-order bits. A case statement
similar to the previous architecture’s is then used to obtain the final results as a
function of the mode. If desired, the speed of the 30-bit comparison can be opti-
mized using the methods discussed in the preceding subsection.
DO NOT COPY
6.3.6 Ones Counter
Several important algorithms include the step of counting the number of “1” bits
in a data word. In fact, some microprocessor instruction sets have been extended
recently to include ones counting as a basic instruction. In this example, let us
DO NOT COPY
suppose that we have a requirement to design a combinational circuit that counts
ones in a 32-bit word as part of the arithmetic and logic unit of a microprocessor.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  513
Ta b l e 6 - 3 2  More efficient architecture for a 32-bit mode-dependent comparator.
architecture Vmodecpe_arch of Vmodecmp is
beginDO NOT COPY
process (M, A, B)
variable EQ30, GT30: STD_LOGIC; -- 30-bit comparison results
begin
if A(31 downto 2) = B(31 downto 2) then EQ30 := '1'; else EQ30 := '0'; end if;
if A(31 downto 2) > B(31 downto 2) then GT30 := '1'; else GT30 := '0'; end if;
DO NOT COPY
case M is
when "00" =>
if EQ30='1' and A(1 downto 0) = B(1 downto 0) then
EQ <= '1'; else EQ <= '0'; end if;
if GT30='1' or (EQ30='1' and A(1 downto 0) > B(1 downto 0)) then
GT <= '1'; else GT <= '0'; end if;
DO NOT COPY
when "01" =>
if EQ30='1' and A(1) = B(1) then EQ <= '1'; else EQ <= '0'; end if;
if GT30='1' or (EQ30='1' and A(1) > B(1)) then
GT <= '1'; else GT <= '0'; end if;
when "10" =>  EQ <= EQ30;  GT <= GT30;
DO NOT COPYwhen others => EQ <= '0';  GT <= '0';
end case;
end process;
end Vmodecpe_arch;
DO NOT COPYOnes counting can be described very easily by a behavioral VHDL
program, as shown in Table 6-33. This program is fully synthesizable, but it may
generate a very slow, inefficient realization with 32 5-bit adders in series.
library IEEE; Ta b l e 6 - 3 3
DO NOT COPYBehavioral VHDL
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all; program for a 32-bit
ones counter.
entity Vcnt1s is
port ( D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (31 downto 0);
SUM: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (4 downto 0) );
end Vcnt1s;DO NOT COPY
architecture Vcnt1s_arch of Vcnt1s is
begin
process (D)
variable S: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(4 downto 0);
beginDO NOT COPY
S := "00000";
for i in 0 to 31 loop
if D(i) = '1' then S := S + "00001"; end if;
end loop;
SUM <= S;
end process;DO NOT COPY
end Vcnt1s_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

514  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
D[24]
2
D[2:0] FA 3
ADDER2 D[28]
2
DO NOT COPYD[5:3]
FA
4
D[25] ADDER3
2
D[8:6] FA 3
ADDER2 D[30] D[31]
2
D[11:9] FA
5  6
DO NOT COPYD[26] ADDER4 INCR5 SUM[5:0]
2
D[14:12] FA 3
ADDER2 D[29]
2
D[17:15] FA
4
D[27] ADDER3
2
DO NOT COPYD[20:18] FA 3
ADDER2
2
D[23:21] FA
signal names  P[0:7][1:0]  Q[0:3][2:0]  R[0:1][3:0]  S[4:0]
DO NOT COPYFigure 6-15  Structure of 32-bit ones counter.
To synthesize a more efficient realization of the ones counter, we must
come up with an efficient structure and then write an architecture that describes
it. Such a structure is the adder tree shown in Figure 6-15. A full adder (FA) adds
DO NOT COPY
three input bits to produce a 2-bit sum. Pairs of 2-bit numbers are added by 2-bit
adders (ADDER2), each of which also has a carry input that can include add
another 1-bit input to its sum. The resulting 3-bit sums are combined by 3-bit
adders (ADDER3), and the final pair of 4-bit sums are combined in a 4-bit adder
(ADDER4). By making use of the available carry inputs, this tree structure can
DO NOT COPY
combine 31 bits. A separate 5-bit incrementer is used at the end to handle the one
remaining input bit.
The structure of Figure 6-15 can be created nicely by a structural VHDL
architecture, as shown in Table 6-34. The program begins by declaring all of the
DO NOT COPYcomponents that will be used in the design, corresponding to the blocks in the
figure.
The letter under each column of signals in Figure 6-15 corresponds to the
name used for that signal in the program. Each of signals  P,  Q, and  R  is an array
with one  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  per connection in the corresponding column. The
DO NOT COPYprogram defines a corresponding type for each of these, followed by the actual
signal declaration.
The program in Table 6-34 makes good use of  generate  statements to
create the multiple adder components on the left-hand side of the figure—eight
FAs, four  ADDER2s, and two  ADDER3s. Finally, it instantiates one each of
DO NOT COPY
ADDER4  and  INCR5.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  515
architecture Vcnt1str_arch of Vcnt1str is Ta b l e 6 - 3 4
VHDL structural
component FA port ( A, B, CI: in  STD_LOGIC;
architecture for a
DO NOT COPYS, CO:  out STD_LOGIC );
32-bit ones counter.
end component;
component ADDER2 port ( A, B: in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 downto 0);
CI:  in  STD_LOGIC;
S:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(2 downto 0) );
end component;DO NOT COPY
component ADDER3 port ( A, B: in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(2 downto 0);
CI:  in  STD_LOGIC;
S:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0) );
end component;
DO NOT COPY
component ADDER4 port ( A, B: in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0);
CI:  in  STD_LOGIC;
S:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(4 downto 0) );
end component;
component INCR5 port ( A:  in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(4 downto 0);
DO NOT COPY
CI: in  STD_LOGIC;
S:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(5 downto 0) );
end component;
type Ptype is array (0 to 7) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 downto 0);
type Qtype is array (0 to 3) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(2 downto 0);
DO NOT COPY
type Rtype is array (0 to 1) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0);
signal P: Ptype;  signal Q: Qtype;  signal R: Rtype;
signal S: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(4 downto 0);
begin
U1: for i in 0 to 7 generate
DO NOT COPY
U1C: FA port map (D(3*i), D(3*i+1), D(3*i+2), P(i)(0), P(i)(1));
end generate;
U2: for i in 0 to 3 generate
U2C: ADDER2 port map (P(2*i), P(2*i+1), D(24+i), Q(i));
end generate;
U3: for i in 0 to 1 generateDO NOT COPY
U3C: ADDER3 port map (Q(2*i), Q(2*i+1), D(28+i), R(i));
end generate;
U4: ADDER4 port map (R(0), R(1), D(30), S);
U5: INCR5 port map (S, D(31), SUM);
end Vcnt1str_arch;
DO NOT COPY
The definitions of the ones counter’s individual component entities and
architectures, from  FA  to  INCR, can be made in separate structural or behavioral
programs. For example, Table 6-35 is a structural program for FA. The rest of the
DO NOT COPY
components are left as exercises (6.20–6.22).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

516  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 3 5 library IEEE;
Structural VHDL use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
program for a
DO NOT COPY
full adder. entity FA is
port ( A, B, CI: in  STD_LOGIC;
S, CO:  out STD_LOGIC );
end FA;
architecture FA_arch of FA is
DO NOT COPY
begin
S <= A xor B xor CI;
CO <= (A and B) or (A and CI) or (B and CI);
end FA_arch;
DO NOT COPY
6.3.7 Tic-Tac-Toe
Our last example is the design of a combinational circuit that picks a player’s
next move in the game of Tic-Tac-Toe. In case you’re not familiar with the game,
the rules are explained in the box on page 488. We’ll repeat here our strategy for
DO NOT COPY
playing and winning the game:
1.  Look for a row, column, or diagonal that has two of my marks (X  or  O,
depending on which player I am) and one empty cell. If one exists, place
my mark in the empty cell; I win!
DO NOT COPY
2.  Else, look for a row, column, or diagonal that has two of my opponent’s
marks and one empty cell. If one exists, place my mark in the empty cell
to block a potential win by my opponent.
3.  Else, pick a cell based on experience. For example, if the middle cell is
DO NOT COPYopen, it’s usually a good bet to take it. Otherwise, the corner cells are good
bets. Intelligent players can also notice and block a developing pattern by
the opponent or “look ahead” to pick a good move.
To avoid confusion between “O” and “0” in our programs, we’ll call the
second player “Y”. Now we can think about how to encode the inputs and out-
DO NOT COPY
puts of the circuit. The inputs represent the current state of the playing grid.
There are nine cells, and each cell has one of three possible states (empty, occu-
pied by  X, occupied by  Y). The outputs represent the move to make, assuming
that it is  X’s turn. There are only nine possible moves that a player can make, so
the output can be encoded in just four bits.
DO NOT COPY
There are several choices of how to code the state of one cell. Because the
game is symmetric, we choose a symmetric encoding that can help us later:
00  Cell is empty.
10  Cell is occupied by  X.
DO NOT COPY
01  Cell is occupied by  Y.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  517
library IEEE; Ta b l e 6 - 3 6
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; VHDL package with
definitions for the
package TTTdefs isDO NOT COPY
Tic-Tac-Toe project.
type TTTgrid is array (1 to 3) of STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 to 3);
subtype TTTmove is STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (3 downto 0);
constant MOVE11: TTTmove := "1000";
DO NOT COPY
constant MOVE12: TTTmove := "0100";
constant MOVE13: TTTmove := "0010";
constant MOVE21: TTTmove := "0001";
constant MOVE22: TTTmove := "1100";
constant MOVE23: TTTmove := "0111";
constant MOVE31: TTTmove := "1011";
DO NOT COPY
constant MOVE32: TTTmove := "1101";
constant MOVE33: TTTmove := "1110";
constant NONE:  TTTmove := "0000";
end TTTdefs;
DO NOT COPY
So, we can encode the 3  ×  3  grid’s state in 18 bits. Since VHDL supports
arrays, it is useful to define an array type,  TTTgrid, that contains elements
corresponding to the cells in the grid. Since this type will be used throughout our
Tic-Tac-Toe project, it is convenient to put this definition, along with severalDO NOT COPY
others that we’ll come to, in a VHDL package, as shown in Table 6-36.
It would be natural to define  TTTgrid  as a two-dimensional array of
STD_LOGIC, but not all VHDL tools support two-dimensional arrays. Instead,
we define it as an array of 3-bit  STD_LOGIC_VECTORs, which is almost the same
DO NOT COPY
thing. To represent the Tic-Tac-Toe grid, we’ll use two signals  X  and  Y  of this
type, where an element of a variable is 1 if the like-named player has a mark in
the corresponding cell. Figure 6-11 shows the correspondence between signal
names and cells in the grid.
DO NOT COPY
1 2 3 column
Figure 6-16
row
Tic-Tac-Toe grid and
X(1)(1) X(1)(2) X(1)(2)
1 VHDL signal names.
Y(1)(1) Y(1)(2) Y(1)(2)
DO NOT COPY
X(2)(1) X(2)(2) X(2)(2)
2
Y(2)(1) Y(2)(2) Y(2)(2)
X(3)(1) X(3)(2) X(3)(2)
3
DO NOT COPYY(3)(1) Y(3)(2) Y(3)(2)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

518  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
TwoInRow
9
X X PICK
4
DO NOT COPYMOVE WINMV
9
Y Y
U1
4
MOVE MOVE
TwoInRow
X
DO NOT COPY
4
MOVE BLKMV
Y
U2
Figure 6-17 9
X
Entity partitioning for
9
the Tic-Tac-Toe game.DO NOT COPYY
U3
The package in Table 6-36 also defines a 4-bit type  TTTmove  for encoded
moves. A player has nine possible moves, and one more code is used for the case
DO NOT COPYwhere no move is possible. This particular coding was chosen and used in the
package for no other reason than that it’s the same coding that was used in the
ABEL version of this example in Section 6.2.7. By defining the coding in the
package, we can easily change the definition later without having to change the
entities that use it (for example, see Exercise 6.23).
DO NOT COPY
Rather than try to design the Tic-Tac-Toe move-finding circuit as a single
monolithic entity, it makes sense for us to try to partition it into smaller pieces. In
fact, partitioning it along the lines of the three-step strategy at the beginning of
this section seems like a good idea.
We note that steps 1 and 2 of our strategy are very similar; they differ only
DO NOT COPY
in reversing the roles of the player and the opponent. An entity that finds a win-
ning move for me can also find a blocking move for my opponent. Looking at
this characteristic from another point of view, an entity that finds a winning
move for me can find a blocking move for me if the encodings for me and my
opponent are swapped. Here’s where our symmetric encoding pays off—we can
DO NOT COPY
swap players merely by swapping signals  X  and  Y.
With this in mind, we can use two copies of the same entity,  TwoInRow, to
perform steps 1 and 2 as shown in Figure 6-17. Notice that signal X is connected
to the top input of the first  TwoInRow  entity, but to the bottom input of the sec-
DO NOT COPYond. A third entity,  PICK, picks a winning move if one is available from  U1, else
it picks a blocking move if available from  U2, else it uses “experience” (step 3)
to pick a move.
Table 6-37 is a structural VHDL program for the top-level entity, GETMOVE.
In addition to the IEEE  std_logic_1164  package, it uses our  TTTdefs
DO NOT COPYpackage. Notice that the “use” clause for the  TTTdefs  packages specifies that it
is stored in the “work” library, which is automatically created for our project.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  519
library IEEE; Ta b l e 6 - 3 7
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; Top-level structural
use work.TTTdefs.all; VHDL entity for
DO NOT COPY
picking a move in
entity GETMOVE is Tic-Tac-Toe.
port ( X, Y: in  TTTgrid;
MOVE: out TTTmove );
end GETMOVE;
DO NOT COPY
architecture GETMOVE_arch of GETMOVE is
component TwoInRow port ( X, Y: in  TTTgrid;
MOVE: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0) );
end component;
DO NOT COPY
component PICK port ( X, Y:  in  TTTgrid;
WINMV, BLKMV: in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0);
MOVE:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0) );
end component;
DO NOT COPY
signal WIN, BLK: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0);
begin
U1: TwoInRow port map (X, Y, WIN);
U2: TwoInRow port map (Y, X, BLK);
U3: PICK port map (X, Y, WIN, BLK, MOVE);DO NOT COPY
end GETMOVE_arch;
The architecture in Table 6-37 declares and uses just two components,
TwoInRow  and  PICK, which will be defined shortly. The only internal signals are
DO NOT COPY
WIN  and  BLK, which pass winning and blocking moves from the two instances of
TwoInRow  to  PICK, as in Figure 6-17. The statement part of the architecture has
just three statements to instantiate the three blocks in the figure.
Now comes the interesting part, the design of the individual entities in
Figure 6-17. We’ll start withDO NOT COPY  TwoInRow  since it accounts for two-thirds of the
design. Its entity definition is very simple, as shown in Table 6-38. But there’s
plenty to discuss about its architecture, shown in Table 6-39.
Ta b l e 6 - 3 8
library IEEE;DO NOT COPY
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; Declaration of
use work.TTTdefs.all; TwoInRow  entity.
entity TwoInRow is
port ( X, Y: in  TTTgrid;
DO NOT COPYMOVE: out TTTmove );
end TwoInRow;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

520  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
Ta b l e 6 - 3 9  Architecture of  TwoInRow  entity.
architecture TwoInRow_arch of TwoInRow is
DO NOT COPY
function R(X, Y: TTTgrid; i, j: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN is
variable result: BOOLEAN;
begin  -- Find 2-in-row with empty cell i,j
result := TRUE;
for jj in 1 to 3 loop
DO NOT COPY
if jj = j then result := result and X(i)(jj)='0' and Y(i)(jj)='0';
else result := result and X(i)(jj)='1'; end if;
end loop;
return result;
end R;
DO NOT COPY
function C(X, Y: TTTgrid; i, j: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN is
variable result: BOOLEAN;
begin  -- Find 2-in-column with empty cell i,j
result := TRUE;
for ii in 1 to 3 loop
DO NOT COPYif ii = i then result := result and X(ii)(j)='0' and Y(ii)(j)='0';
else result := result and X(ii)(j)='1'; end if;
end loop;
return result;
end C;
DO NOT COPY
function D(X, Y: TTTgrid; i, j: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN is
variable result: BOOLEAN;  -- Find 2-in-diagonal with empty cell i,j.
begin  -- This is for 11, 22, 33 diagonal.
result := TRUE;
for ii in 1 to 3 loop
DO NOT COPYif ii = i then result := result and X(ii)(ii)='0' and Y(ii)(ii)='0';
else result := result and X(ii)(ii)='1'; end if;
end loop;
return result;
end D;
DO NOT COPY
function E(X, Y: TTTgrid; i, j: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN is
variable result: BOOLEAN;  -- Find 2-in-diagonal with empty cell i,j.
begin  -- This is for 13, 22, 31 diagonal.
result := TRUE;
for ii in 1 to 3 loop
if ii = i then result := result and X(ii)(4-ii)='0' and Y(ii)(4-ii)='0';
DO NOT COPY
else result := result and X(ii)(4-ii)='1'; end if;
end loop;
return result;
end E;
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3  Design Examples Using VHDL  521
begin Ta b l e 6 - 3 9
process (X, Y) (continued)
variable G11, G12, G13, G21, G22, G23, G31, G32, G33: BOOLEAN;
DO NOT COPY
begin
G11 := R(X,Y,1,1) or C(X,Y,1,1) or D(X,Y,1,1);
G12 := R(X,Y,1,2) or C(X,Y,1,2);
G13 := R(X,Y,1,3) or C(X,Y,1,3) or E(X,Y,1,3);
G21 := R(X,Y,2,1) or C(X,Y,2,1);
G22 := R(X,Y,2,2) or C(X,Y,2,2) or D(X,Y,2,2) or E(X,Y,2,2);
DO NOT COPY
G23 := R(X,Y,2,3) or C(X,Y,2,3);
G31 := R(X,Y,3,1) or C(X,Y,3,1) or E(X,Y,3,1);
G32 := R(X,Y,3,2) or C(X,Y,3,2);
G33 := R(X,Y,3,3) or C(X,Y,3,3) or D(X,Y,3,3);
if  G11 then MOVE <= MOVE11;
DO NOT COPYelsif G12 then MOVE <= MOVE12;
elsif G13 then MOVE <= MOVE13;
elsif G21 then MOVE <= MOVE21;
elsif G22 then MOVE <= MOVE22;
elsif G23 then MOVE <= MOVE23;
elsif G31 then MOVE <= MOVE31;
DO NOT COPY
elsif G32 then MOVE <= MOVE32;
elsif G33 then MOVE <= MOVE33;
else  MOVE <= NONE;
end if;
end process;
end TwoInRow_arch;DO NOT COPY
The architecture defines several functions, each of which determines
whether there is a winning move (from  X’s point of view) in a particular cell  i,j.
A winning move exists if cellDO NOT COPY  i,j  is empty and the other two cells in the same
row, column, or diagonal contain an  X. Functions  R  and  C  look for winning
moves in cell  i,j’s row and column, respectively. Functions  D  and  E  look in the
two diagonals.
Within the architecture’s single process, nine  BOOLEAN  variables  G11–G33
are declared to indicate whether each of the cells has a winning move possible.DO NOT COPY
Assignment statements at the beginning of the process set each variable to  TRUE
if there is such a move, calling and combining all of the appropriate functions for
cell  i,j.
The rest of the process is a deeply nested “if” statement that looks for a
DO NOT COPY
winning move in all possible cells. Although it typically results in slower synthe-
sized logic nested “if” is required rather than some form of “case” statement,
because multiple moves may be possible. If no winning move is possible, the
value “NONE” is assigned.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

522  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
EXPLICIT In addition to a cell index  i,j, the functions  R,  C,  D, and  E  in Table 6-39 are passed
IMPURITY the grid state X and Y. This is necessary because VHDL functions are by default pure,
DO NOT COPY
which means that signals and variables declared in the function’s parents are  not
directly visible within the function. However, you can relax this restriction by
explicitly declaring a function to be  impure  by placing the keyword  impure  before
the keyword  function  in its definition.
DO NOT COPY
The  PICK  entity combines the results of two  TwoInRow  entities according
to the program in Table 6-40. First priority is given to a winning move, followed
by a blocking move. Otherwise, function  MT  is called for each cell, starting with
DO NOT COPYthe middle and ending with the side cells, to find an available move. This com-
pletes the design of the Tic-Tac-Toe circuit.
Ta b l e 6 - 4 0 library IEEE;
VHDL program to pick use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
a winning or blockingDO NOT COPYuse work.TTTdefs.all;
Tic-Tac-Toe move, or
entity PICK is
else use “experience.”
port ( X, Y:  in  TTTgrid;
WINMV, BLKMV: in  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0);
MOVE:  out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(3 downto 0) );
DO NOT COPYend PICK;
architecture PICK_arch of PICK is
function MT(X, Y: TTTgrid; i, j: INTEGER) return BOOLEAN is
begin  -- Determine if cell i,j is empty
return X(i)(j)='0' and Y(i)(j)='0';
DO NOT COPYend MT;
begin
process (X, Y, WINMV, BLKMV)
begin  -- If available, pick:
if  WINMV /= NONE then MOVE <= WINMV;  -- winning move
elsif BLKMV /= NONE then MOVE <= BLKMV;  -- else blocking move
DO NOT COPYelsif MT(X,Y,2,2)  then MOVE <= MOVE22; -- else center cell
elsif MT(X,Y,1,1)  then MOVE <= MOVE11; -- else corner cells
elsif MT(X,Y,1,3)  then MOVE <= MOVE13;
elsif MT(X,Y,3,1)  then MOVE <= MOVE31;
elsif MT(X,Y,3,3)  then MOVE <= MOVE33;
elsif MT(X,Y,1,2)  then MOVE <= MOVE12; -- else side cells
DO NOT COPY
elsif MT(X,Y,2,1)  then MOVE <= MOVE21;
elsif MT(X,Y,2,3)  then MOVE <= MOVE23;
elsif MT(X,Y,3,2)  then MOVE <= MOVE32;
else  MOVE <= NONE;  -- else grid is full
end if;
DO NOT COPYend process;
end PICK_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  523
Exercises
6.1  Explain how the 16-bit barrel shifter of Section 6.1.1 can be realized with a com-
DO NOT COPYbination of 74x157s and 74x151s. How does this approach compare with the
others in delay and parts count?
6.2  Show how the 16-bit barrel shifter of Section 6.1.1 can be realized in eight
identical GAL22V10s.
6.3  Find a coding of the shift amounts (S[3:0]) and modes (C[2:0]) in the barrel
DO NOT COPYshifter of Table 6-3 that further reduces the total number of product terms used by
the design.
6.4  Make changes to the dual priority encoder program of Table 6-6 to further reduce
the number of product terms required. State whether your changes increase the
delay of the circuit when realized in a GAL22V10. Can you reduce the product
DO NOT COPYterms enough to fit the design into a GAL16V8?
6.5  Here’s an exercise where you can use your brain, like the author had to when
figuring out the equation for the  SUM0  output in Table 6-12. Do each of the
SUM1–SUM3  outputs require more terms or fewer terms than  SUM0?
6.6  Complete the design of the ABEL and PLD based ones counting circuit that was
DO NOT COPYstarted in Section 6.2.6. Use 22V10 or smaller PLDs, and try to minimize the total
number of PLDs required. State the total delay of your design in terms of the
worst-case number of PLD delays in a signal path from input to output.
6.7  Find another code for the Tic-Tac-Toe moves in Table 6-13 that has the same rota-
tion properties as the original code. That is, it should be possible to compensate
DO NOT COPYfor a 180°  rotation of the grid using just inverters and wire rearrangement. Deter-
mine whether the  TWOINHAF  equations will still fit in a single 22V10 using the
new code.
6.8  Using a simulator, demonstrate a sequence of moves in which the  PICK2  PLD in
Table 6-16 will lose a Tic-Tac-Toe game, even if  X  goes first.
DO NOT COPY
6.9  Modify the program in Table 6-16 to give the program a better chance of winning,
or at least not losing. Can your new program still lose?
6.10  Modify the both the “other logic” in Figure 6-13 and the program in Table 6-16
to give the program a better chance of winning, or at least not losing. Can your
new program still lose?
DO NOT COPY
6.11  Write the VHDL functions for  Vror,  Vsll,  Vsrl,  Vsla, and  Vsra  in Table 6-17
using the  ror,  sll,  srl,  sla, and  sra  operations as defined in Table 6-3.
6.12  The iterative-circuit version of  fixup  in Table 6-20 has a worst-case delay path
of 15  OR  gates from the first decoded value of  i  (14) to the  FSEL(0)  signal.
Figure out a trick that cuts this delay path almost in half with no cost (or negative
DO NOT COPY
cost) in gates. How can this trick be extended further to save gates or gate inputs?
6.13  Rewrite the  barrel16  entity definition in Table 6-17 and the architecture in
Table 6-22 so that a single direction-control bit is made explicitly available to the
architecture.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

524  Chapter 6  Combinational Design Examples
MOUT(15:0) ROUT(15:0)  FOUT(15:0)
DIN(15:0) MAGIC ROL16 FIXUP MAGIC DOUT(15:0)
ROUT(0)
DO NOT COPY
S(3:0)
other logic
C(2:0)
Figure X6.14
DO NOT COPY
6.14  Rewrite the  barrel16  architecture definition in Table 6-22 to use the approach
shown in Figure X6.14.
6.15  Write a semi-behavioral or structural version of the  fpencr_arch architecture of
Table 6-25 that generates only one adder in synthesis, and that does not generate
DO NOT COPYmultiple 10-bit comparators for the nested “if” statement.
6.16  Repeat Exercise 6.15, including a structural definition of an efficient rounding
circuit that performs the round function. Your circuit should require significantly
fewer gates than a 4-bit adder.
6.17  Redesign the VHDL dual priority encoder of Section 6.3.3 to get better, known
DO NOT COPYperformance, as suggested in the last paragraph of the section.
6.18  Write a structural VHDL architecture for a 64-bit comparator that is similar to
Table 6-30 except that it builds up the comparison result serially from least to
most significant stage.
6.19  What significant change occurs in the synthesis of the VHDL program in
DO NOT COPYTable 6-31 if we change the statements in the “when  others” case to “null”?
6.20  Write behavioral VHDL programs for the “ADDERx” components used in
Table 6-34.
6.21  Write a structural VHDL programs for the “ADDERx” components in Table 6-34.
Use a generic definition so that the same entity can be instantiated for  ADDER2,
DO NOT COPY
ADDER3, and  ADDER5, and show what changes must be made in Table 6-34 to
do this.
6.22  Write a structural VHDL program for the “INCR5” component in Table 6-34.
6.23  Using an available VHDL synthesis tool, synthesize the Tic-Tac-Toe design of
Section 6.3.7, fit it into an available FPGA, and determine how many internal
DO NOT COPY
resources it uses. Then try to reduce the resource requirements by specifying a
different encoding of the moves in the  TTTdefs  package.
6.24  The Tic-Tac-Toe program in Section 6.3.7 eventually loses against an intelligent
Y
opponent if applied to the grid state shown in Figure X6.24. Use an available
X VHDL simulator to prove that this is true. Then modify the  PICK  entity to win in
DO NOT COPY
this and similar situations and verify your design using the simulator.
Y
Figure X6.24
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

c h a p t e r
DO NOT
7
COPY
DO NOT
Sequential
Logic Design PrinciplesCOPY
ogic circuits are classified into two types, “combinational” and
“sequential.” A  combinational  logic circuit is one whose outputs
DO NOT
depend only on its current inputs. The rotary channel selector knob
L
on an  old-fashioned TV  is like  a  combinational circuit—its
“output” selects a channel based only on its current “input”—the position of
the knob.
A  sequentialCOPY  logic circuit is one whose outputs depend not only on its
current inputs, but also on the past sequence of inputs, possibly arbitrarily
far back in time. The circuit controlled by the channel-up and channel-down
pushbuttons on a TV or VCR is a sequential circuit—the channel selection
depends on the past sequence of up/down pushes, at least since when you
started viewing 10 hours before, and perhaps as far back as when you firstDO NOT
plugged the device into the wall.
So it is inconvenient, and often impossible, to describe the behavior of
a sequential circuit by means of a table that lists outputs as a function of the
input sequence that has been received up until the current time. To know
COPY
where you’re going next, you need to know where you are now. With the
TV channel selector, it is impossible to determine what channel is currently
selected by looking only at the preceding sequence of presses on the up and
down pushbuttons, whether we look at the preceding 10 presses or the
preceding 1,000. More information, the current “state” of the channel
DO NOT
selector, is needed. Probably the best definition of “state” that I’ve seen
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 431
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

432  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
appeared in Herbert Hellerman’s book on  Digital Computer System Principles
(McGraw-Hill, 1967):
stateDO NOT COPYThe  state  of a sequential circuit is a collection of  state variables  whose
state variable values at any one time contain all the information about the past necessary
to account for the circuit’s future behavior.
In the channel-selector example, the current channel number is the current
state. Inside the TV, this state might be stored as seven binary state variables
DO NOT COPY
representing a decimal number between 0 and 127. Given the current state
(channel number), we can always predict the next state as a function of the inputs
(presses of the up/down pushbuttons). In this example, one highly visible output
of the sequential circuit is an encoding of the state itself—the channel-number
DO NOT COPYdisplay. Other outputs, internal to the TV, may be combinational functions of the
state alone (e.g., VHF/UHF/cable tuner selection) or of both state and input
(e.g., turning off the TV if the current state is 0 and the “down” button is
pressed).
State variables need not have direct physical significance, and there are
DO NOT COPYoften many ways to choose them to describe a particular sequential circuit. For
example, in the TV channel selector, the state might be stored as three BCD
digits or 12 bits, with many of the bit combinations (4,096 possible) going
unused.
In a digital logic circuit, state variables are binary values, corresponding to
DO NOT COPY
certain logic signals in the circuit, as we’ll see in later sections. A circuit with  n
n  n 
binary state variables has 2 possible states. As large as it might be, 2 is always
finite-state machine finite, never infinite, so sequential circuits are sometimes called  finite-state
machines.
The state changes of most sequential circuits occur at times specified by a
DO NOT COPY
clock free-running  clock  signal. Figure 7-1 gives timing diagrams and nomenclature
for typical clock signals. By convention, a clock signal is active high if state
changes occur at the clock’s rising edge or when the clock is  HIGH, and active
clock period low in the complementary case. The  clock period  is the time between successive
clock frequency transitions in the same direction, and the  clock frequency  is the reciprocal of the
DO NOT COPY
clock tick period. The first edge or pulse in a clock period or sometimes the period itself is
duty cycle called a  clock tick. The  duty cycle  is the percentage of time that the clock signal
DO NOT COPY
NON-FINITE- A group of mathematicians recently proposed a non-finite-state machine, but they’re
STATE MACHINES still busy listing its states. . . . Sorry, that’s just a joke. There  are  mathematical mod-
els for infinite-state machines, such as Turing machines. They typically contain a
small finite-state-machine control unit, and an infinite amount of auxiliary memory,
such as an endless tape.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.1  Bistable Elements  433
(a) state changes occur here
CLK
DO NOT COPY
tH t L period = t per
tper frequency = 1 / t per
duty cycle = t H / t per
(b) state changes occur here
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-1
CLK_L
Clock signals:
t L tH (a) active high;
tper duty cycle = t  / t  (b) active low.
L  per
DO NOT COPY
is at its asserted level. Typical digital systems, from digital watches to supercom-
puters, use a quartz-crystal oscillator to generate a free-running clock signal.
Clock frequencies might range from 32.768 kHz (for a watch) to 500 MHz (for a
CMOS RISC microprocessor with a cycle time of 2 ns); “typical” systems using
TTL and CMOS parts have clock frequencies in the 5–150 MHz range.DO NOT COPY
In this chapter we’ll discuss two types of sequential circuits that account
for the majority of practical discrete designs. A  feedback sequential circuit  uses feedback sequential
ordinary gates and feedback loops to obtain memory in a logic circuit, thereby circuit
creating sequential-circuit building blocks such as latches and flip-flops that are
used in higher-level designs. ADO NOT COPY  clocked synchronous state machine  uses these clocked synchronous
building blocks, in particular edge-triggered  D  flip-flops, to create circuits state machine
whose inputs are examined and whose outputs change in accordance with a
controlling clock signal. There are other sequential circuit types, such as general
fundamental mode, multiple pulse mode, and multiphase circuits, which are
DO NOT COPY
sometimes useful in high-performance systems and VLSI, and are discussed in
advanced texts.
7.1 Bistable Elements
DO NOT COPY
The simplest sequential circuit consists of a pair of inverters forming a feedback
loop, as shown in Figure 7-2. It has  no  inputs and two outputs,  Q  and  Q_L.
7.1.1 Digital Analysis
The circuit of Figure 7-2 is often called a  bistable, since a strictly digital analysis bistable
DO NOT COPY
shows that it has two stable states. If  Q  is  HIGH, then the bottom inverter has a
HIGH  input and a  LOW  output, which forces the top inverter’s output  HIGH  as
we assumed in the first place. But if  Q  is  LOW, then the bottom inverter has a
LOW  input and a  HIGH  output, which forces  Q  LOW, another stable situation.
We could use a single state variable, the state of signal  Q, to describe the state of
DO NOT COPY
the circuit; there are two possible states,  Q  =  0 and  Q  =  1.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

434  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Vin1  Vout1
Q
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-2
A pair of inverters forming
Vin2 Vout2
a bistable element. Q_L
The bistable element is so simple that it has no inputs and therefore no way
DO NOT COPY
of controlling or changing its state. When power is first applied to the circuit, it
randomly comes up in one state or the other and stays there forever. Still, it
serves our illustrative purposes very well, and we  will  actually show a couple of
applications for it in Sections 8.2.3 and 8.2.4.
DO NOT COPY
7.1.2 Analog Analysis
The analysis of the bistable has more to reveal if we consider its operation from
an analog point of view. The dark line in Figure 7-3 shows the steady-state (DC)
transfer function  T  for a single inverter; the output voltage is a function of input
DO NOT COPYvoltage,  Vout  =  T(Vin ). With two inverters connected in a feedback loop as in
Figure 7-2, we know that  Vin1  =  Vout2  and  Vin2  =  Vout1 ; therefore, we can plot the
transfer functions for both inverters on the same graph with an appropriate
labeling of the axes. Thus, the dark line is the transfer function for the top
inverter in Figure 7-2, and the colored line is the transfer function for the bottom
DO NOT COPY
one.
Considering only the steady-state behavior of the bistable’s feedback loop,
and not dynamic effects, the loop is in equilibrium if the input and output
voltages of both inverters are constant DC values consistent with the loop
connection and the inverters’ DC transfer function. That is, we must have
DO NOT COPY
Vin1  =  Vout2
=  T(Vin2)
=  T(Vout1 )
DO NOT COPY=  T(T(Vin1))
stable
Vout1
Figure 7-3
= Vin2
Transfer functions for
inverters in a bistableDO NOT COPY
metastable Transfer function:
feedback loop.
Vout1 = T(Vin1)
Vout2 = T(Vin2)
stable
DO NOT COPY
Vin1 = Vout2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.1  Bistable Elements  435
Likewise, we must have
Vin2  =  T(T(Vin2))
We can find these equilibrium points graphically from Figure 7-3; they are the
DO NOT COPY
points at which the two transfer curves meet. Surprisingly, we find that there are
not two but  three  equilibrium points. Two of them, labeled  stable, correspond to stable
the two states that our “strictly digital” analysis identified earlier, with  Q  either
0 (LOW) or 1 (HIGH).
DO NOT COPYThe third equilibrium point, labeled  metastable, occurs with  Vout1  and  Vout2 metastable
about halfway between a valid logic 1 voltage and a valid logic 0 voltage; so  Q
and  Q_L  are not valid logic signals at this point. Yet the loop equations are
satisfied; if we can get the circuit to operate at the metastable point, it could
theoretically stay there indefinitely.
DO NOT COPY
7.1.3 Metastable Behavior
Closer analysis of the situation at the metastable point shows that it is aptly
named. It is not truly stable, because random noise will tend to drive a circuit
that is operating at the metastable point toward one of the stable operating points
DO NOT COPY
as we’ll now demonstrate.
Suppose the bistable is operating precisely at the metastable point in
Figure 7-3. Now let us assume that a small amount of circuit noise reduces  Vin1
by a tiny amount. This tiny change causes  Vout1  to  increase  by a small amount.
But since  V produces  V , we can follow the first horizontal arrow from near
DO NOT COPYout1  in2 
the metastable point to the second transfer characteristic, which now demands a
lower voltage for  Vout2 , which is  Vin1 . Now we’re back where we started, except
we have a much larger change in voltage at  Vin1  than the original noise produced,
and the operating point is still changing. This “regenerative” process continues
until we reach the stable operating point at the upper left-hand corner ofDO NOT COPY
Figure 7-3. However, if we perform a “noise” analysis for either of the stable
operating points, we find that feedback brings the circuit back toward the stable
operating point, rather than away from it.
Metastable behavior of a bistable can be compared to the behavior of a ball
dropped onto a hill, as shown in Figure 7-4. If we drop a ball from overhead, itDO NOT COPY
will probably roll down immediately to one side of the hill or the other. But if it
lands right at the top, it may precariously sit there for a while before random
metastable
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-4
DO NOT COPYBall and hill analogy for
stable  stable metastable behavior.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

436  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
forces (wind, rodents, earthquakes) start it rolling down the hill. Like the ball at
the top of the hill, the bistable may stay in the metastable state for an unpredict-
able length of time before nondeterministically settling into one stable state or
DO NOT COPY
the other.
If the  simplest  sequential circuit is susceptible to metastable behavior, you
can be sure that  all  sequential circuits are susceptible. And this behavior is not
something that only occurs at power-up.
Returning to the ball-and-hill analogy, consider what happens if we try to
DO NOT COPY
kick the ball from one side of the hill to the other. Apply a strong force (Arnold
Schwarzenegger), and the ball goes right over the top and lands in a stable
resting place on the other side. Apply a weak force (Mr. Rogers), and the ball
falls back to its original starting place. But apply a wishy-washy force (Charlie
DO NOT COPYBrown), and the ball goes to the top of the hill, teeters, and eventually falls back
to one side or the other.
This behavior is completely analogous to what happens to flip-flops under
marginal triggering conditions. For example, we’ll soon study  S-R  flip-flops,
where a pulse on the  S  input forces the flip-flop from the 0 state to the 1 state. A
DO NOT COPYminimum pulse width is specified for the  S  input. Apply a pulse of this width or
longer, and the flip-flop immediately goes to the 1 state. Apply a very short
pulse, and the flip-flop stays in the 0 state. Apply a pulse just under the minimum
width, and the flip-flop may go into the metastable state. Once the flip-flop is in
the metastable state, its operation depends on “the shape of its hill.” Flip-flops
DO NOT COPY
built from high-gain, fast technologies tend to come out of metastability faster
than ones built from low-performance technologies.
We’ll say more about metastability in the next section in connection with
specific flip-flop types, and in Section 8.9 with respect to synchronous design
methodology and synchronizer failure.
DO NOT COPY
7.2 Latches and Flip-Flops
Latches and flip-flops are the basic building blocks of most sequential circuits.
Typical digital systems use latches and flip-flops that are prepackaged, function-
DO NOT COPY
ally  specified  devices  in  a  standard  integrated  circuit.  In  ASIC  design
environments, latches and flip-flops are typically predefined cells specified by
the ASIC vendor. However, within a standard IC or an ASIC, each latch or flip-
flop cell is typically designed as a feedback sequential circuit using individual
DO NOT COPYlogic gates and feedback loops. We’ll study these discrete designs for two
reasons—to understand the behavior of the prepackaged elements better, and to
gain the capability of building a latch or flip-flop “from scratch” as is required
occasionally in digital-design practice and often in digital-design exams.
flip-flop All digital designers use the name  flip-flop  for a sequential device that nor-
DO NOT COPYmally samples its inputs and changes its outputs only at times determined by a
latch clocking signal. On the other hand, most digital designers use the name  latch  for
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  437
R S  R Q QN
Q
0  0 last Q last QN Figure 7-5
DO NOT COPY0  1 0 1 S-R  latch: (a) circuit
1  0 1 0 design using  NOR
QN 1  1 0 0 gates; (b) function
S
(a)  (b) table.
a sequential device that watches all of its inputs continuously and changes itsDO NOT COPY
outputs at any time, independent of a clocking signal. We follow this standard
convention in this text. However, some textbooks and digital designers may
(incorrectly) use the name “flip-flop” for a device that we call a “latch.”
In any case, because the functional behaviors of latches and flip-flops are
DO NOT COPY
quite different, it is important for the logic designer to know which type is being
used in a design, either from the device’s part number (e.g., 74x374 vs. 74x373)
or other contextual information. We discuss the most commonly used types of
latches and flip-flops in the following subsections.
DO NOT COPY
7.2.1 S-R Latch
An S-R  (set-reset) latch  based on  NOR  gates is shown in Figure 7-5(a). The S-R  latch
circuit has two inputs,  S  and  R, and two outputs, labeled  Q  and  QN, where  QN
is normally the complement of  Q. Signal  QN  is sometimes labeled  Q  or  Q_L.
If  S  and  R  are both 0, the circuit behaves like the bistable element—we
DO NOT COPY
have a feedback loop that retains one of two logic states,  Q  =  0 or  Q  =  1. As
shown in Figure 7-5(b), either  S  or R  may be asserted to force the feedback loop
to a desired state.  S  sets  or  presets  the  Q  output to 1;  R  resets  or clears  the  Q  out- set
put to 0. After the S or R  input is negated, the latch remains in the state that it was preset
forced into. Figure 7-6(a) shows the functional behavior of anDO NOT COPY  S-R  latch for a reset
typical sequence of inputs. Colored arrows indicate causality, that is, which clear
input transitions cause which output transitions.
DO NOT COPY
S
R
Q
DO NOT COPY
QN
(a)  (b)
Figure 7-6  Typical operation of an  S-R  latch: (a) “normal” inputs; (b)  S  and  R
DO NOT COPYasserted simultaneously.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

438  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Q  VERSUS QN  In most applications of an  S-R  latch, the  QN  (a.k.a.  Q) output is always the comple-
ment of the  Q  output. However, the  Q  name is not quite correct, because there is one
DO NOT COPY
case where this output is not the complement of  Q. If both  S  and  R  are 1, as they are
in several places in Figure 7-6(b), then both outputs are forced to 0. Once we negate
either input, the outputs return to complementary operation as usual. However, if we
negate both inputs simultaneously, the latch goes to an unpredictable next state, and it
may in fact oscillate or enter the metastable state. Metastability may also occur if a 1
DO NOT COPY
pulse that is too short is applied to  S  or  R.
Three different logic symbols for the same  S-R  latch circuit are shown in
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-7. The symbols differ in the treatment of the complemented output.
Historically, the first symbol was used, showing the active-low or complemented
signal name inside the function rectangle. However, in bubble-to-bubble logic
design the second form of the symbol is preferred, showing an inversion bubble
outside the function rectangle. The last form of the symbol is obviously wrong.
DO NOT COPY
propagation delay Figure 7-8 defines timing parameters for an  S-R  latch. The  propagation
delay  is the time it takes for a transition on an input signal to produce a transition
on an output signal. A given latch or flip-flop may have several different propa-
gation delay specifications, one for each pair of input and output signals. Also,
the propagation delay may be different depending on whether the output makes
DO NOT COPY
a  LOW-to-HIGH  or  HIGH-to-LOW transition. With an  S-R  latch, a  LOW-to-HIGH
transition on  S  can cause a LOW-to-HIGH  transition on Q, so a propagation delay
tpLH(SQ)  occurs as shown in transition 1 in the figure. Similarly, a  LOW-to-HIGH
transition on  R  can cause a  HIGH-to-LOW  transition on  Q, with propagation
delay  t as shown in transition 2. Not shown in the figure are the corre-
DO NOT COPYpHL(RQ) 
sponding transitions on  QN, which would have propagation delays  tpHL(SQN) and
tpLH(RQN).
minimum pulse width Minimum pulse width specifications are usually given for the  S  and  R
inputs. As shown in Figure 7-8, the latch may go into the metastable state and
DO NOT COPYremain there for a random length of time if a pulse shorter than the minimum
width  tpw(min)  is applied to  S  or  R. The latch can be deterministically brought out
of the metastable state only by applying a pulse to  S  or  R  that meets or exceeds
the minimum pulse width requirement.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-7
Symbols for an S-R  latch:
(a) without bubble;
S  Q S  Q S Q
(b) preferred for bubble-
R QN R Q R QN
to-bubble design;
(c) incorrect becauseDO NOT COPY
of double negation. (a) (b)  (c)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  439
HOW CLOSE As mentioned in the previous note, an  S-R  latch may go into the metastable state if
IS CLOSE? S  and  R  are negated simultaneously. Often, but not always, a commercial latch’s
DO NOT COPY
specifications define “simultaneously” (e.g.,  S  and  R  negated within 20 ns of each
other). In any case, the minimum delay between negating  S  and  R  for them to be
considered nonsimultaneous is closely related to the minimum pulse width specifi-
cation. Both specifications are measures of how long it takes for the latch’s feedback
loop to stabilize during a change of state.
DO NOT COPY
S
DO NOT COPY(1)
R
(2)
Q
DO NOT COPY
tpLH(SQ) t pHL(RQ) tpw(min)
Figure 7-8  Timing parameters for an  S-R  latch.
7.2.2 S-R LatchDO NOT COPY
An S-R  latch  (read “S-bar-R-bar latch”) with active-low set and reset inputs may S-R  latch
be built from  NAND  gates as shown in Figure 7-9(a). In TTL and CMOS logic
families,  S-R  latches are used much more often than  S-R  latches because  NAND
gates are preferred over  NOR  gates.
DO NOT COPY
As shown by the function table, Figure 7-9(b), operation of the  S-R  latch is
similar to that of the  S-R, with two major differences. First,  S  and  R  are active
low, so the latch remembers its previous state when  S  =  R  =  1; the active-low
inputs are clearly indicated in the symbols in (c). Second, when both  S  and  R  are
asserted simultaneously, both latch outputs go to 1, not 0 as in the  S-R  latch.
DO NOT COPY
Except for these differences, operation of the  S-R  is the same as the  S-R, includ-
ing timing and metastability considerations.
Figure 7-9  S-R  latch: (a) circuit design using  NAND  gates; (b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY
(a) S_L (b)  (c)
S_L R_L Q QN
or S Q
S  Q
0  0 1 1
0  1 1 0 R Q
1  0 0 1
DO NOT COPY
R_L QN 1  1  last Q last QN
or R
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

440  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
(a) S (b)  (c)
S R C Q QN
Q
S 
0  0  1  last Q last QN Q
C
DO NOT COPY0  1 1 0 1
C Q
R
1  0 1 1 0
1  1 1 1 1
QN
x  x 0  last Q last QN
R
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-10  S-R latch with enable: (a) circuit using  NAND  gates; (b) function
table; (c) logic symbol.
7.2.3 S-R Latch with Enable
An  S-R  or  S-R  latch is sensitive to its  S  and  R  inputs at all times. However, it
DO NOT COPY
may easily be modified to create a device that is sensitive to these inputs only
S-R  latch with enable when an enabling input  C  is asserted. Such an  S-R  latch with enable  is shown in
Figure 7-10. As shown by the function table, the circuit behaves like an  S-R
latch when  C  is 1, and retains its previous state when C  is 0. The latch’s behavior
for a typical set of inputs is shown in Figure 7-11. If both  S  and  R  are 1 when  C
DO NOT COPY
changes from 1 to 0, the circuit behaves like an  S-R  latch in which  S  and  R  are
negated simultaneously—the next state is unpredictable and the output may
become metastable.
7.2.4 D Latch
DO NOT COPY
S-R  latches are useful in control applications, where we often think in terms of
setting a flag in response to some condition, and resetting it when conditions
change; so we control the set and reset inputs somewhat independently. Howev-
er, we often need latches simply to store bits of information—each bit of
DO NOT COPYinformation is presented on a signal line, and we’d like to store it somewhere. A
D  latch D  latch  may be used in such an application.
Figure 7-12 shows a  D  latch. Its logic diagram is recognizable as that of an
S-R  latch with enable, with an inverter added to generate  S  and R  inputs from the
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-11  Typical operation of an  S-R  latch with enable.
Ignored since C is 0.  Ignored until C is 1.
S
DO NOT COPY
R
C
Q
DO NOT COPY
QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  441
D
Q
C D Q QN
CDO NOT COPY  1 0 0 1 D  Q
1 1 1 0 C Q
QN 0  x last Q last QN
(a) (b)  (c)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-12  D  latch: (a) circuit design using  NAND  gates; (b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
D
C
DO NOT COPY
Q
Figure 7-13  Functional behavior of a D latch for various inputs.
DO NOT COPY
single  D  (data) input. This eliminates the troublesome situation in  S-R  latches,
where  S  and  R  may be asserted simultaneously. The control input of a  D  latch,
labeled  C  in (c), is sometimes named  ENABLE,  CLK, or  G, and is active low in
some  D-latch designs.
An example of a  D  latch’s functional behavior is given in Figure 7-13.
DO NOT COPY
When the  C  input is asserted, the  Q  output follows the  D  input. In this situation,
the latch is said to be “open” and the path from  D  input to  Q  output is “transpar-
ent”; the circuit is often called a  transparent latch  for this reason. When the  C transparent latch
input is negated, the latch “closes”; the  Q  output retains its last value and no
longer changes in response toDO NOT COPY  D, as long as  C  remains negated.
More detailed timing behavior of the  D  latch is shown in Figure 7-14. Four
different delay parameters are shown for signals that propagate from the  C  or  D
input to the  Q  output. For example, at transitions 1 and 4 the latch is initially
Figure 7-14DO NOT COPY  Timing parameters for a  D  latch.
D
C DO NOT COPY
(1)  (2)  (3)  (4) (5)
Q
DO NOT COPY
t pHL(DQ) tpHL(CQ) thold
t pLH(CQ) tpLH(DQ) t pLH(DQ) tsetup
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

442  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
“closed” and the  D  input is the opposite of Q  output, so that when  C  goes to 1 the
latch “opens up” and the  Q  output changes after delay  tpLH(CQ)  or  tpHL(CQ) . At
transitions 2 and 3 the  C  input is already 1 and the latch is already open, so that
DO NOT COPY
Q  transparently follows the transitions on  D  with delay  tpHL(DQ)  and  tpLH(DQ) .
Four more parameters specify the delay to the  QN  output, not shown.
Although the  D  latch eliminates the  S  =  R  =  1  problem of the  S-R  latch, it
does not eliminate the metastability problem. As shown in Figure 7-14, there is
a (shaded) window of time around the falling edge of  C  when the  D  input must
DO NOT COPY
not change. This window begins at time  tsetup  before the falling (latching) edge
setup time of  C;  tsetup  is called the setup time. The window ends at time  thold  afterward;  thold
hold time is called the  hold time. If  D  changes at any time during the setup- and hold-time
window, the output of the latch is unpredictable and may become metastable, as
DO NOT COPYshown for the last latching edge in the figure.
7.2.5 Edge-Triggered D Flip-Flop
positive-edge-triggered A  positive-edge-triggered D  flip-flop  combines a pair of  D  latches, as shown in
D  flip-flop Figure 7-15, to create a circuit that samples its  D  input and changes its  Q and  QN
DO NOT COPYoutputs only at the rising edge of a controlling  CLK  signal. The first latch is
master called the  master; it is open and follows the input when  CLK  is 0. When  CLK
goes to 1, the master latch is closed and its output is transferred to the second
slave latch, called the  slave. The slave latch is open all the while that  CLK  is 1, but
changes only at the beginning of this interval, because the master is closed and
DO NOT COPY
unchanging during the rest of the interval.
The triangle on the  D  flip-flop’s  CLK  input indicates edge-triggered behav-
dynamic-input ior, and  is  called a  dynamic-input indicator. Examples of  the  flip-flop’s
indicator functional behavior for several input transitions are presented in Figure 7-16.
The  QM  signal shown is the output of the master latch. Notice that  QM  changes
DO NOT COPY
only when  CLK  is 0. When  CLK  goes to 1, the current value of  QM  is transferred
to  Q, and  QM  is prevented from changing until  CLK  goes to 0 again.
Figure 7-17 shows more detailed timing behavior for the  D  flip-flop. All
propagation delays are measured from the rising edge of  CLK, since that’s the
only event that causes an output change. Different delays may be specified for
DO NOT COPY
LOW-to-HIGH  and  HIGH-to-LOW  output changes.
Figure 7-15  Positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop: (a) circuit design using
D  latches; (b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY
(a) (b)  (c)
QM D CLK Q QN
D D  Q D  Q Q
0 0 1 D  Q
C C Q QN
1 1 0 CLK Q
DO NOT COPYx  0 last Q last QN
CLK
x  1 last Q last QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  443
D
CLK
DO NOT COPY
QM
Q
DO NOT COPY
QN
Figure 7-16  Functional behavior of a positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop.
Like a  D  latch, the edge-triggered  D  flip-flop has a setup and hold time
DO NOT COPY
window during which the  D  inputs must not change. This window occurs around
the triggering edge of  CLK, and is indicated by shaded color in Figure 7-17. If
the setup and hold times are not met, the flip-flop output will usually go to a sta-
ble, though unpredictable, 0 or 1 state. In some cases, however, the output will
oscillate or go to a metastable state halfway between 0 and 1, as shown at theDO NOT COPY
second-to-last clock tick in the figure. If the flip-flop goes into the metastable
state, it will return to a stable state on its own only after a probabilistic delay, as
explained in \secref{metest}. It can also be forced into a stable state by applying
another triggering clock edge with a  D  input that meets the setup- and hold-time
requirements, as shown at the last clock tick in the figure.DO NOT COPY
A  negative-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop  simply inverts the clock input, so negative-edge-triggered
that all the action takes place on the falling edge of  CLK_L; by convention, a D  flip-flop
falling-edge trigger is considered to be active low. The flip-flop’s function table
and logic symbol are shown in Figure 7-18.
DO NOT COPY
Some  D  flip-flops have  asynchronous inputs  that may be used to force the asynchronous inputs
flip-flop to a particular state independent of the  CLK  and  D  inputs. These inputs, preset
typically labeled  PR  (preset) and  CLR  (clear), behave like the set and reset clear
Figure 7-17  Timing behavior of a positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop.
DO NOT COPY
D
CLKDO NOT COPY
Q
DO NOT COPY
thold
t pLH(CQ) tpHL(CQ) tsetup
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

444  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
D CLK_L Q QN
D D  Q D  Q Q
0 0 1
C C Q QN
DO NOT COPY1 1 0 D  Q
x  0 last Q last QN CLK
CLK_L Q
x  1 last Q last QN
(a) (b)  (c)
Figure 7-18  Negative-edge triggered  D  flip-flop: (a) circuit design using
DO NOT COPY
D  latches; (b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
inputs on an  SR  latch. The logic symbol and  NAND  circuit for an edge-triggered
D  flip-flop with these inputs is shown in Figure 7-19. Although asynchronous
inputs are used by some logic designers to perform tricky sequential functions,
DO NOT COPYthey are best reserved for initialization and testing purposes, to force a sequential
circuit into a known starting state; more on this when we discuss synchronous
design methodology in \secref{syncmethod}.
7.2.6 Edge-Triggered D Flip-Flop with Enable
DO NOT COPY
A commonly desired function in  D  flip-flops is the ability to hold the last value
stored, rather than load a new value, at the clock edge. This is accomplished by
enable input adding an  enable input, called  EN  or  CE  (clock enable). While the name “clock
clock-enable input enable” is descriptive, the extra input’s function is not obtained by controlling
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-19  Positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop with preset and clear:
(a) logic symbol; (b) circuit design using  NAND  gates.
(b) PR_L
D
DO NOT COPY
(a) Q
PR
D Q
CLK Q
QN
CLR
DO NOT COPY
CLK
CLR_L
DO NOT COPY
TIME FOR A Commercial TTL positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flops do not use the master-slave
COMMERCIAL latch design of Figure 7-15 or Figure 7-19. Instead, flip-flops like the 74LS74 use the
six-gate design of Figure 7-20, which is smaller and faster. We’ll show how to
DO NOT COPY
formally analyze the next-state behavior of both designs in Section 7.9.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  445
PR_L
DO NOT COPY
CLR_L  Q
DO NOT COPY
CLK QN
Figure 7-20
Commercial circuit for
a positive-edge-
DO NOT COPY
triggered  D  flip-flop
D such as 74LS74.
the clock in any way whatsoever. Rather, as shown in Figure 7-21(a), a 2-input
multiplexer controls the value applied to the internal flip-flop’sDO NOT COPY  D  input. If  EN  is
asserted, the external  D  input is selected; if  EN  is negated, the flip-flop’s current
output is used. The resulting function table is shown in (b). The flip-flop symbol
is shown in (c); in some flip-flops, the enable input is active low, denoted by an
inversion bubble on this input.
DO NOT COPY
7.2.7 Scan Flip-Flop
An important flip-flop function for ASIC testing is so-called  scan capability. scan capability
The idea is to be able to drive the flip-flop’s  D  input with an alternate source of
data during device testing. When all of the flip-flops are put into testing mode,
DO NOT COPY
a test pattern can be “scanned in” to the ASIC using the flip-flops’ alternate data
inputs. After the test pattern is loaded, the flip-flops are put back into “normal”
mode, and all of the flip-flops are clocked normally. After one or more clock
ticks, the flip-flops are put back into test mode, and the test results are “scanned
out.”
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-21  Positive-edge-triggered D flip-flop with enable: (a) circuit design;
(b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
(a) (b)  (c)
DO NOT COPY
D D EN CLK Q QN
D  Q
EN  0 1 0 1
D  Q Q EN
1 1 1 0
CLK Q
C Q QN
x  0  last Q  last QN
CLKDO NOT COPYx  x 0 last Q last QN
x  x 1 last Q last QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

446  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
TE TI D CLK Q QN
D
TE  0 x 0 0 1 D
Q
DO NOT COPYD  Q Q 0 x 1 1 0
TE
C Q QN 1 0 x 0 1
TI TI
1 1 x 1 0 Q
CLK CLK
x x  x 0 last Q last QN
x x  x 1 last Q last QN
(a)DO NOT COPY(b)  (c)
Figure 7-22  Positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop with scan: (a) circuit design;
(b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
Figure 7-22(a) shows the design of a typical scan flip-flop. It is nothing
DO NOT COPY
more than a  D  flip-flop with a 2-input multiplexer on the  D  input. When the  TE
test-enable input, TE (test enable) input is negated, the circuit behaves like an ordinary  D  flip-flop.
test input, TI When  TE  is asserted, it takes its data from  TI  (test input) instead of from  D. This
functional behavior is shown in (b), and a symbol for the device is given in (c).
scan chain The extra inputs are used to connect all of an ASIC’s flip-flops in a  scan
DO NOT COPY
chain  for testing purposes. Figure 7-23 is a simple example with four flip-flops
in the scan chain. The  TE inputs of all the flip-flops are connected to a global  TE
input, while each flip-flop’s  Q  output is connected to another’s  TI  input in serial
(daisy-chain) fashion. The  TI,  TE, and  TO  (test output) connections are strictly
DO NOT COPYfor testing purposes; the additional logic connected to the  D  inputs and Q  outputs
needed to make the circuit do something useful are not shown.
To test the circuit, including the additional logic, the global  TE  input is
asserted while  n  clock ticks occur and  n  test-vector bits are applied to the global
TI  input and are thereby scanned (shifted) into the  n  flip-flops;  n  equals 4 in
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-23. Then TE  is negated, and the circuit is allowed to run for one or more
additional clock ticks. The new state of the circuit, represented by the new values
in the  n  flip-flops, can be observed (scanned out) at  TO  by asserting  TE  while  n
more clock ticks occur. To make the testing process more efficient, another test
vector can be scanned in while the previous result is being scanned out.
DO NOT COPY
ASIC Figure 7-23  A scan chain with four flip-flops.
external
pins
D D D D
DO NOT COPYQ Q Q Q
TE TE TE TE
TI TI TI TI TI TO
Q Q Q Q
CLK CLK CLK CLK
CLKDO NOT COPY
TE
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  447
There are many different types of scan flip-flops, corresponding to differ-
ent types of basic flip-flop functionality. For example, scan capability could be
added to the  D  flip-flop with enable in Figure 7-21, by replacing its internal
DO NOT COPY
2-input multiplexer with a 3-input one. At each clock tick, the flip-flop would
load  D,  TI, or its current state depending on the values of  EN  and  TE. Scan capa-
bility can also be added to other flip-flop types, such as  J-K  and  T  introduced
later in this section.
DO NOT COPY
*7.2.8 Master/Slave S-R Flip-Flop
We indicated earlier that  S-R  latches are useful in “control” applications, where
we may have independent conditions for setting and resetting a control bit. If the
control bit is supposed to be changed only at certain times with respect to a clock
signal, then we need anDO NOT COPY  S-R  flip-flop that, like a  D  flip-flop, changes its outputs
only on a certain edge of the clock signal. This subsection and the next two
describe flip-flops that are useful for such applications.
If we substitute  S-R  latches for the D  latches in the negative-edge-triggered
D  flip-flop of Figure 7-18(a), we get a  master/slave S-R  flip-flop, shown in master/slave S-R
Figure 7-24. Like aDO NOT COPY  D  flip-flop, the  S-R  flip-flop changes its outputs only at the flip-flop
falling edge of a control signal  C. However, the new output value depends on
input values not just at the falling edge, but during the entire interval in which  C
is 1 prior to the falling edge. As shown in Figure 7-25, a short pulse on  S  any
time during this interval can set the master latch; likewise, a pulse on  R  can reset
DO NOT COPY
it. The value transferred to the flip-flop output on the falling edge of  C  depends
on whether the master latch was last set or cleared while  C  was 1.
Shown in Figure 7-24(c), the logic symbol for the master/slave  S-R  flip-
flop does not use a dynamic-input indicator, because the flip-flop is not truly
edge triggered. It is more like a latch that follows its input during the entire inter-
DO NOT COPY
val that  C  is 1, but that changes its output to reflect the final latched value only
when  C  goes to 0. In the symbol, a  postponed-output indicator  indicates that the postponed-output
output signal does not change until enable input  C is negated. Flip-flops with this indicator
kind of behavior are sometimes called  pulse-triggered flip-flops. pulse-triggered
flip-flop
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-24  Master/slave  S-R  flip-flop: (a) circuit using  S-R  latches;
(b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
(a) (b)  (c)
S R  C Q QN
S S  QM S  S 
Q Q Q x x  0  last Q  last QN Q
DO NOT COPYC C C
QM_L
Q Q QN 0 0 last Q  last QN Q
R R R R
0 1  0  1
C 1 0  1  0
1 1  undef.  undef.
DO NOT COPY
*Throughout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

448  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ignored since C is 0.  Ignored until C is 1.  Ignored until C is 1.
S
DO NOT COPY
R
C
QM
DO NOT COPY
QM_L
Q
DO NOT COPY
QN
Figure 7-25  Internal and functional behavior of a master/slave  S-R  flip-flop.
DO NOT COPYThe operation of the master/slave  S-R  flip-flop is unpredictable if both  S
and  R  are asserted at the falling edge of  C. In this case, just before the falling
edge, both the  Q  and  QN  outputs of the master latch are 1. When  C  goes to 0, the
master latch’s outputs change unpredictably and may even become metastable.
At the same time, the slave latch opens up and propagates this garbage to the
DO NOT COPYflip-flop output.
*7.2.9 Master/Slave J-K Flip-Flop
The problem of what to do when  S  and  R  are asserted simultaneously is solved
master/slave J-K  flip- in a  master/slave J-K  flip-flop. The  J  and  K  inputs are analogous to  S  and  R.
flopDO NOT COPY
However, as shown in Figure 7-26, asserting  J  asserts the master’s  S  input only
if the flip-flop’s  QN  output is currently 1 (i.e.,  Q is 0), and asserting  K  asserts the
master’s  R  input only if  Q  is currently 1. Thus, if  J  and  K  are asserted simulta-
neously, the flip-flop goes to the opposite of its current state.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-26  Master/slave  J-K  flip-flop: (a) circuit design using  S-R  latches;
(b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
(a) (b)  (c)
J K  C Q QN
DO NOT COPYJ 
Q
S  QM S  C
J Q Q Q x x  0  last Q  last QN
C C Q
QM_L 0 0 last Q  last QN K
K R Q R Q QN
0 1  0  1
1 0  1  0
C DO NOT COPY
1 1  last QN  last Q
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  449
Ignored Ignored Ignored Ignored Ignored
since C is 0. since QN is 0. since C is now 0. since Q is 0. since QN is 0.
J
DO NOT COPY
K
C
QMDO NOT COPY
QM_L
Q
DO NOT COPY
QN
Figure 7-27  Internal and functional behavior of a master/slave  J-K  flip-flop.
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-27 shows the functional behavior of a  J-K  master/slave flip-flop
for a typical set of inputs. Note that the  J  and  K  inputs need not be asserted at the
end of the triggering pulse for the flip-flop output to change at that time. In fact,
because of the gating on the master latch’s  S  and  R  inputs, it is possible for the
flip-flop output to change to 1 even though  K  and not  J  is asserted at the end of
the triggering pulse. This behavior, known asDO NOT COPY  1s catching, is illustrated in the 1s catching
second-to-last triggering pulse in the figure. An analogous behavior known as  0s
catching  is illustrated in the last triggering pulse. Because of this behavior, the  J 0s catching
and  K  inputs of a  J-K  master/slave flip-flop must be held valid during the entire
interval that  C  is 1.
DO NOT COPY
7.2.10 Edge-Triggered J-K Flip-Flop
The problem of 1s and 0s catching is solved in an  edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop, edge-triggered J-K
whose functional equivalent is shown in Figure 7-28. Using an edge-triggered  D flip-flop
flip-flop internally, the edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop samples its inputs at the
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-28  Edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop: (a) equivalent function using an
edge-triggered  D  flip-flop; (b) function table; (c) logic symbol.
(a)  (b) (c)
J K  CLK Q QN
DO NOT COPYJ  Q
x x  0  last Q  last QN
J CLK
D  Q Q x x  1  last Q  last QN Q
K
K 0 0 last Q  last QN
CLK Q QN
0 1  0  1
CLK
DO NOT COPY1 0  1  0
1 1  last QN  last Q
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

450  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
J
K
DO NOT COPY
CLK
Q
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-29  Functional behavior of a positive-edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop.
rising edge of the clock and produces its next output according to the “charac-
teristic equation”  Q*  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K′  ⋅  Q  (see Section 7.3.3).
Typical functional behavior of an edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop is shown in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-29. Like the  D  input of an edge-triggered  D  flip-flop, the  J  and  K  inputs
of a  J-K  flip-flop must meet published setup- and hold-time specifications with
respect to the triggering clock edge for proper operation.
Because they eliminate the problems of 1s and 0s catching and of simulta-
neously asserting both control inputs, edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flops have largely
DO NOT COPY
74x109 obsoleted the older pulse-triggered types.  The  74x109  is a TTL positive-edge-
triggered  J-K  flip-flop with an active-low  K  input (named  K  or  K_L).
DO NOT COPYANOTHER The internal design of the 74LS109 is very similar to that of the 74LS74, which we
COMMERCIAL showed in Figure 7-20. As shown in Figure 7-30, the ’109 simply replaces the
(FLIP-FLOP, bottom-left gate of the ’74, which realizes the characteristic equation Q * = D, with an
THAT IS) AND-OR  structure that realizes the  J-K characteristic equation,  Q *  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K_L  ⋅  Q.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-30 PR_L
Internal logic diagram
for the 74LS109
positive-edge-triggered
J-KDO NOT COPY  flip-flop. CLR_L  Q
CLK QN
DO NOT COPY
J
K_L
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  451
T
Q
T
Q Q
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)
Figure 7-31  Positive-edge-triggered  T  flip-flop: (a) logic symbol; (b) functional behavior.
The most common application of  J-K  flip-flops is in clocked synchronous
state machines. As we’ll explain in Section 7.4.5, the next-state logic forDO NOT COPY  J-K
flip-flops is sometimes simpler than for  D  flip-flops. However, most state
machines are still designed using  D  flip-flops because the design methodology is
a bit simpler and because most sequential programmable logic devices contain
D, not  J-K, flip-flops. Therefore, we’ll give most of our attention to  D  flip-flops.
DO NOT COPY
7.2.11 T Flip-Flop
A T  (toggle) flip-flop changes state on every tick of the clock. Figure 7-31 shows T  flip-flop
the symbol and illustrates the behavior of a positive-edge-triggered  T  flip-flop.
Notice that the signal on the flip-flop’s  Q  output has precisely half the frequency
DO NOT COPY
of the T  input. Figure 7-32 shows how to obtain a T  flip-flop from a D  or J-K flip-
flop.  T flip-flops are most often used in counters and frequency dividers, as we’ll
show in \secref{counters}.
In many applications of  T  flip-flops, the flip-flop need not be toggled on
every clock tick. Such applications can use a T  flip-flop with enable. As shown T  flip-flop with enable
DO NOT COPY
in Figure 7-33, the flip-flop changes state at the triggering edge of the clock only
if the enable signal  EN  is asserted. Like the  D,  J, and  K  inputs on other edge-trig-
gered flip-flops, the  EN  input must meet specified setup and hold times with
respect to the triggering clock edge. The circuits of Figure 7-32 are easily modi-
fied to provide anDO NOT COPY  EN  input, as shown in Figure 7-34.
(a) (b)
Figure 7-32
1  J
D  Q Q Q Q Possible circuit designs for a
T CLK
DO NOT COPYCLK Q  T  flip-flop: (a) using a  D  flip-
T Q QN K QN
flop; (b) using a  J-K  flip-flop.
Figure 7-33  Positive-edge-triggered  T  flip-flop with enable: (a) logic symbol;
(b) functional behavior.
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)
EN
EN Q
T Q T
DO NOT COPY
Q
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

452  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Figure 7-34
J
Possible circuits for a D  Q Q EN Q Q
EN T CLK
T  flip-flop with enable:DO NOT COPYQ 
CLK Q QN QN
K
(a) using a  D  flip-flop; T
(b) using a  J-K  flip-flop. (a) (b)
DO NOT COPY7.3 Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis
Although latches and flip-flops, the basic building blocks of sequential circuits,
are themselves feedback sequential circuits that can be formally analyzed, we’ll
clocked synchronous first study the operation of  clocked synchronous state machines, since they are
state machineDO NOT COPYthe easiest to understand. “State machine” is a generic name given to these
sequential circuits; “clocked” refers to the fact that their storage elements (flip-
flops) employ a clock input; and “synchronous” means that all of the flip-flops
use the same clock signal. Such a state machine changes state only when a trig-
gering edge or “tick” occurs on the clock signal.
DO NOT COPY
7.3.1 State-Machine Structure
Figure 7-35 shows the general structure of a clocked synchronous state machine.
state memory The  state memory  is a set of  n  flip-flops that store the current state of the
n 
machine, and has 2 distinct states. The flip-flops are all connected to a common
DO NOT COPY
tick clock signal that causes the flip-flops to change state at each  tick  of the clock.
What constitutes a tick depends on the flip-flop type (edge triggered, pulse trig-
gered, etc.). For the positive-edge-triggered  D  and  J-K  flip-flops considered in
this section, a tick is the rising edge of the clock signal.
next-state logic The next state of the state machine in Figure 7-35 is determined by the
DO NOT COPY
output logic next-state logic  F  as a function of the current state and input. The  output logic  G
Figure 7-35  Clocked synchronous state-machine structure (Mealy machine).
DO NOT COPY
inputs Next-state Output
excitation  State current state
Logic Logic outputs
DO NOT COPYMemory
F G
clock input
DO NOT COPY
clock
signal
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  453
determines the output as a function of the current state and input. Both  F  and  G
are strictly combinational logic circuits. We can write
Next state  (current state, input)
DO NOT COPY=  F
Output  =  G(current state, input)
State machines may use positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flops for their state
memory, in which case a tick occurs at each rising edge of the clock signal. It is
also possible for the state memory to use negative-edge-triggered  D  flip-flops,  D
DO NOT COPY
latches, or  J-K  flip-flops. However, inasmuch as most state machines are
designed nowadays using programmable logic devices with positive-edge-trig-
gered  D  flip-flops, that’s what we’ll concentrate on.
7.3.2 Output LogicDO NOT COPY
A sequential circuit whose output depends on both state and input as shown in
Figure 7-35 is called a  Mealy machine. In some sequential circuits, the output
depends on the state alone:
Output =  G(current state)
DO NOT COPY
Such a circuit is called a  Moore machine, and its general structure is shown in
Figure 7-36.
Obviously, the only difference between the two state-machine models is in
how outputs are generated. In practice, many state machines must be categorized
as Mealy machines, because they have one or more  Mealy-type outputs  that
DO NOT COPY
depend on input as well as state. However, many of these same machines also
have one or more  Moore-type outputs  that depend only on state.
In the design of high-speed circuits, it is often necessary to ensure that
state-machine outputs are available as early as possible and do not change during
each clock period. One way to get this behavior is to encode the state so that theDO NOT COPY
state variables themselves serve as outputs. We call this an  output-coded state output-coded state
assignment;  it  produces  a Moore  machine  in which  the  output logic  of assignment
Figure 7-36 is null, consisting of just wires.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-36  Clocked synchronous state-machine structure (Moore machine).
inputs Next-state Output
excitation  State current state
Logic Logic
DO NOT COPYMemory outputs
F G
clock input
DO NOT COPY
clock
signal
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

454  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
DO NOT COPY
inputs Next-state Output Output
excitation  State current state pipelined
Logic Logic Pipeline
Memory outputs
Memory
F G
clock input clock input
DO NOT COPY
clock
signal
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-37  Mealy machine with pipelined outputs.
Another approach is to design the state machine so that the outputs during
one clock period depend on the state and inputs during the  previous  clock period.
pipelined outputs We call these pipelined outputs, and they are obtained by attaching another stage
DO NOT COPY
of memory (flip-flops) to a Mealy machine’s outputs as in Figure 7-37.
With appropriate circuit or drawing manipulations, you can map one state-
machine model into another. For example, you could declare the flip-flops that
produce pipelined outputs from a Mealy machine to be part of its state memory,
DO NOT COPYand thereby obtain a Moore machine with an output-coded state assignment.
The exact classification of a state machine into one style or another is not
so important. What’s important is how you think about output structure and how
it satisfies your overall design objectives, including timing and flexibility. For
example, pipelined outputs are great for timing, but you can use them only in
DO NOT COPYsituations where you can figure out the desired next output value one clock
period in advance. In any given application, you may use different styles for
different output signals. For example, we’ll see in Section 7.11.5 that different
statements can be used to specify different output styles in ABEL.
DO NOT COPY
7.3.3 Characteristic Equations
The functional behavior of a latch or flip-flop can be described formally by a
characteristic equation characteristic equation  that specifies the flip-flop’s next state as a function of its
current state and inputs.
DO NOT COPY
The characteristic equations of the flip-flops in Section 7.2 are listed in
* suffix Table 7-1. By convention, the  ∗  suffix in  Q∗  means “the next value of  Q.” Notice
that the characteristic equation does not describe detailed timing behavior of the
device (latching vs. edge-triggered, etc.), only the functional response to the
control inputs. This simplified description is useful in the analysis of state
DO NOT COPY
machines, as we’ll soon show.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  455
Ta b l e 7 - 1
Characteristic
Device Type Equation Latch and flip-flop
characteristic
DO NOT COPYS-R  latch  Q∗  =  S  +  R′  ⋅  Q equations.
D  latch  Q∗  =  D
Edge-triggered  D  flip-flop  Q∗  =  D
D  flip-flop with enable  Q∗  =  EN  ⋅  D  +  EN′  ⋅  Q
Master/slave  S-R  flip-flop  Q∗  =  S  +  R′  ⋅  Q
DO NOT COPY
Master/slave  J-K  flip-flop  Q∗  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K′  ⋅  Q
Edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop  Q∗  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K′  ⋅  Q
T  flip-flop  Q∗  =  Q′
T  flip-flop with enable  Q∗  =  EN  ⋅  Q′  +  EN′  ⋅  Q
DO NOT COPY
7.3.4 Analysis of State Machines with D Flip-Flops
Consider the formal definition of a state machine that we gave previously:
DO NOT COPYNext state (current state, input)
=  F
Output=  G(current state, input)
Recalling our notion that “state” embodies all we need to know about the past
history of the circuit, the first equation tells us that what we next need to know
can be determined from what we currently know and the current input. TheDO NOT COPY
second equation tells us that the current output can be determined from the same
information. The goal of sequential circuit analysis is to determine the next-state
and output functions so that the behavior of a circuit can be predicted.
The analysis of a clocked synchronous state machine has three basic steps:
DO NOT COPY
1.  Determine the next-state and output functions  F  and  G.
2.  Use  F  and  G  to construct a  state/output table  that completely specifies the state/output table
next state and output of the circuit for every possible combination of cur-
rent state and input.
DO NOT COPY
3.  (Optional) Draw a  state diagram  that presents the information from the state diagram
previous step in graphical form.
Figure 7-38  shows  a  simple  state  machine  with  two  positive-edge-
triggered  D  flip-flops. To determine the next-state function  F, we must first con-
DO NOT COPY
sider the behavior of the state memory. At the rising edge of the clock signal,
each  D  flip-flop samples its  D  input and transfers this value to its  Q  output; the
characteristic equation of a  D  flip-flop is  Q∗  =  D. Therefore, to determine the
next value of  Q  (i.e.,  Q*), we must first determine the current value of  D.
In Figure 7-38 there are two  D  flip-flops, and we have named the signals on
DO NOT COPY
their outputs  Q0  and  Q1. These two outputs are the state variables; their value is
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

456  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Next-state Logic F  State Memory  Output Logic G
output
DO NOT COPY
input MAX
excitation
EN
EN
D0  Q0
D  Q
EN′
CLK Q
DO NOT COPY
Q0
Q0′
DO NOT COPY
D1  Q1
D  Q
CLK Q
Q1
Q1′
DO NOT COPY
clock signal
current state
CLK
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-38  Clocked synchronous state machine using positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flops.
the current state of the machine. We have named the signals on the correspond-
excitation ing  D  inputs  D0  and  D1. These signals provide the  excitation  for the  D  flip-flops
DO NOT COPYat each clock tick. Logic equations that express the excitation signals as func-
excitation equation tions of the current state and input are called  excitation equations  and can be
derived from the circuit diagram:
D0  =  Q0  ⋅  EN′  +  Q0′  ⋅  EN
D1  =  Q1  ⋅  EN′  +  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  EN  +  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  EN
DO NOT COPY
By convention, the next value of a state variable after a clock tick is denot-
* suffix ed by appending a star to the state-variable name, for example,  Q0∗  or  Q1∗.
Using the characteristic equation of  D  flip-flops,  Q∗  =  D, we can describe the
next-state function of the example machine with equations for the next value of
DO NOT COPYthe state variables:
Q0∗  =  D0
Q1∗  =  D1
Substituting the excitation equations for  D0  and  D1, we can write
DO NOT COPYQ0∗  =  Q0  ⋅  EN′  +  Q0′  ⋅  EN
Q1∗  =  Q1  ⋅  EN′  +  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  EN  +  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  EN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  457
(a) (b) (c) Ta b l e 7 - 2
EN  EN  EN 
Transition, state, and
Q1 Q0  0  1 S  0  1 S  0  1 state/output tables for
DO NOT COPYthe state machine in
00  00  01  A  A  B  A  A, 0  B, 0
Figure 7-38.
01  01  10  B  B  C  B  B, 0  C, 0
10  10  11  C  C  D  C  C, 0  D, 0
11  11  00  D  D  A  D  D, 0  A, 1
DO NOT COPY
Q1∗ Q0∗  S∗  S∗, MAX
These equations, which express the next value of the state variables as a function
of current state and input, are called  transition equations. transition equation
For each combination of current state and input value, the transition equa-
DO NOT COPY
tions predict the next state. Each state is described by two bits, the current values
of  Q0  and  Q1: (Q1  Q0) = 00, 01, 10, or 11. [The reason for “arbitrarily” picking
the order (Q1  Q0) instead of (Q0  Q1) will become apparent shortly.] For each
state, our example machine has just two possible input values,  EN  = 0 or EN  = 1,
so there are a total of 8 state/input combinations. (In general, a machine withDO NOT COPY  s
s+i 
state bits and  i  inputs has 2 state/input combinations.)
Table 7-2(a) shows a  transition table  that is created by evaluating the tran- transition table
sition equations for every possible state/input combination. Traditionally, a
transition table lists the states along the left and the input combinations along the
top of the table, as shown in the example.DO NOT COPY
The function of our example machine is apparent from its transition
table—it is a 2-bit binary counter with an enable input  EN. When  EN  =  0 the
machine maintains its current count, but when  EN  =  1 the count advances by 1 at
each clock tick, rolling over to 00 when it reaches a maximum value of 11.
DO NOT COPY
If we wish, we may assign alphanumeric  state names  to each state. The state names
simplest naming is  00  =  A,  01  =  B,  10  =  C, and  11  =  D. Substituting the state
names for combinations of  Q1  and  Q0  (and  Q1∗  and  Q0∗) in Table 7-2(a) pro-
duces the  state table  in (b). Here “S” denotes the current state, and “S∗” denotes state table
the next state of the machine. A state table is usually easier to understand than a
DO NOT COPY
transition table because in complex machines we can use state names that have
meaning. However, a state table contains less information than a transition table
because it does not indicate the binary values assumed by the state variables in
each named state.
DO NOT COPYOnce a state table is produced, we have only the output logic of the
machine left to analyze. In the example machine, there is only a single output
signal, and it is a function of both current state and input (this is a Mealy
machine). So we can write a single  output equation: output equation
MAX  =  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  EN
DO NOT COPY
The output behavior predicted by this equation can be combined with the next-
state information to produce a  state/output table  as shown in Table 7-2(c). state/output table
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

458  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
EN = 0 EN = 0
(MAX = 0) (MAX = 0)
EN = 1
A  B
DO NOT COPY(MAX = 0)
EN = 1 EN = 1
(MAX = 1) (MAX = 0)
Figure 7-39DO NOT COPY
State diagram
EN = 1
corresponding to the D  C
(MAX = 0)
state machine of EN = 0 EN = 0
Table 7-2.
(MAX = 0) (MAX = 0)
DO NOT COPY
State/output tables for Moore machines are slightly simpler. For example,
in the circuit of Figure 7-38 suppose we removed the  EN  signal from the  AND
gate that produces the  MAX  output, producing a Moore-type output  MAXS. Then
MAXS  is a function of the state only, and the state/output table can list  MAXS  in
DO NOT COPYa single column, independent of the input values. This is shown in Table 7-3.
state diagram A  state diagram  presents the information from the state/output table in a
node graphical format. It has one circle (or  node) for each state, and an arrow (or
directed arc directed arc) for each transition. Figure 7-39 shows the state diagram for our
example state machine. The letter inside each circle is a state name. Each arrow
DO NOT COPY
leaving a given state points to the next state for a given input combination; it also
shows the output value produced in the given state for that input combination.
The state diagram for a Moore machine can be somewhat simpler. In this
case, the output values can be shown inside each state circle, since they are func-
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 7 - 3
EN
State/output table for
a Moore machine. S  0  1  MAXS
A  A  B  0
DO NOT COPYB  B  C  0
C  C  D  0
D  D  A  1
S∗
DO NOT COPY
A CLARIFICATION  The state-diagram notation for output values in Mealy machines is a little mislead-
ing. You should remember that the listed output value is produced continuously
when the machine is in the indicated state and has the indicated input, not just during
DO NOT COPYthe transition to the next state.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  459
EN = 0 EN = 0
A  EN = 1 B
MAXS=0  MAXS=0
DO NOT COPY
EN = 1  EN = 1
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-40
State diagram
D  EN = 1 C
MAXS=1  MAXS=0 corresponding to the
EN = 0 EN = 0 state machine of
Table 7-3.
DO NOT COPY
tions of state only. The state diagram for a Moore machine using this convention
is shown in Figure 7-40.
The original logic diagram of our example state machine, Figure 7-38, was
laid out to match our conceptual model of a Mealy machine. However, nothing
requires us to group the next-state logic, state memory, and output logic in thisDO NOT COPY
way. Figure 7-41 shows another logic diagram for the same state machine. To
analyze this circuit, the designer (or analyzer, in this case) can still extract the
required information from the diagram as drawn. The only circuit difference in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-41  Redrawn logic diagram for a clocked synchronous state machine.
MAX
DO NOT COPY
D0  Q0  D1  Q1
D  Q D  Q
CLK Q CLK Q
DO NOT COPY
EN
CLK
DO NOT COPY
LITTLE ARROWS, Since there is only one input in our example machine, there are only two possible
LITTLE ARROWS input combinations, and two arrows leaving each state. In a machine with  n  inputs,
n 
EVERYWHERE we would have 2 arrows leaving each state. This is messy if  n  is large. Later, in
Figure 7-44, we’ll describe a convention whereby a state needn’t have one arrow
DO NOT COPY
leaving it for each input combination, only one arrow for each different next state.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

460  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
SUGGESTIVE Using the transition, state, and output tables, we can construct a timing diagram that
DRAWINGS shows the behavior of a state machine for any desired starting state and input
DO NOT COPY
sequence. For example, Figure 7-42 shows the behavior of our example machine
with a starting state of 00 (A) and a particular pattern on the  EN  input.
Notice that the value of the  EN  input affects the next state only at the rising
edge of the CLOCK input; that is, the counter counts only if EN  = 1 at the rising edge
of CLOCK. On the other hand, since  MAX is a Mealy-type output, its value is affect-
DO NOT COPY
ed by  EN  at all times. If we also provide a Moore-type output  MAXS  as suggested
in the text, its value depends only on state as shown in the figure.
The timing diagram is drawn in a way that shows changes in the  MAX  and
MAXS  outputs occurring slightly later than the state and input changes that cause
them, reflecting the combinational-logic delay of the output circuits. Naturally, the
DO NOT COPY
drawings are merely suggestive; precise timing is normally indicated by a timing
table of the type suggested in Section 5.2.1.
DO NOT COPYthe new diagram is that we have used the flip-flops’  QN  outputs (which are
normally the complement of  Q) to save a couple of inverters.
In summary, the detailed steps for analyzing a clocked synchronous state
machine are as follows:
excitation equations 1.  Determine the excitation equations for the flip-flop control inputs.
DO NOT COPY
transition equations 2.  Substitute the excitation equations into the flip-flop characteristic equa-
tions to obtain transition equations.
transition table 3.  Use the transition equations to construct a transition table.
output equations 4.  Determine the output equations.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-42  Timing diagram for example state machine.
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
EN
Q1
Q0
DO NOT COPY
MAX
MAXS
DO NOT COPY
STATE A  A  B  C  C C  D  D D  A  A
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  461
Q1′
X
Q0
DO NOT COPYD0  Q0
X′ D  Q
Q2′
CLK Q
Q2′
Q0
X
XDO NOT COPY
Q1
D1 Q1
X′ D  Q
Q2 CLK Q
Q1
DO NOT COPYZ2
Q2
Q0′ D2  Q2
D  Q
Q0′ Z1
X′ CLK Q
Y
YDO NOT COPY
CLK
Figure 7-43DO NOT COPY  A clocked synchronous state machine with three flip-flops and eight states.
5.  Add output values to the transition table for each state (Moore) or state/ transition/output table
input combination (Mealy) to create a transition/output table.
6.  Name the states and substitute state names for state-variable combinations state names
DO NOT COPY
in the transition/output table to obtain a state/output table. state/output table
7.  (Optional) Draw a state diagram corresponding to the state/output table. state diagram
We’ll go through this complete sequence of steps to analyze another
clocked synchronous state machine, shown in Figure 7-43. Reading the logic
DO NOT COPY
diagram, we find that the excitation equations are as follows:
D0  =  Q1′  ⋅  X  +  Q0  ⋅  X′  +  Q2
D1  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  X  +  Q1  ⋅  X′  +  Q2  ⋅  Q1
D2  =  Q2  ⋅  Q0′  +  Q0′  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPY
Substituting into the characteristic equation for  D  flip-flops, we obtain the tran-
sition equations:
Q0∗  =  Q1′  ⋅  X  +  Q0  ⋅  X′  +  Q2
Q1∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  X  +  Q1  ⋅  X′  +  Q2  ⋅  Q1
DO NOT COPY
Q2∗  =  Q2  ⋅  Q0′  +  Q0′  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

462  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 4
(a) X Y  (b) X Y
Transition/output
and state/output Q2 Q1 Q0  00  01  10  11  Z1 Z2  S  00  01  10  11  Z1 Z2
tables for theDO NOT COPY
000  000  100  001  001  10  A  A  E  B  B  10
state machine B  B  B  D  D 
001  001  001  011  011  10  10
in Figure 7-43.
010  010  110  000  000  10  C  C  G  A  A  10
011  011  011  010  010  00  D  D  D  C  C  00
E  F  F  F  F 
DO NOT COPY100  101  101  101  101  11  11
101  001  001  001  001  10  F  B  B  B  B  10
110  111  111  111  111  11  G  H  H  H  H  11
111  011  011  011  011  11  H  D  D  D  D  11
Q2∗ Q1∗ Q0∗  S∗
DO NOT COPY
A transition table based on these equations is shown in Table 7-4(a). Reading
the logic diagram, we can write two output equations:
Z1  =  Q2  +  Q1′  +  Q0′
DO NOT COPYZ2  =  Q2  ⋅  Q1  +  Q2  ⋅  Q0′
The resulting output values are shown in the last column of (a). Assigning state
names  A–H, we obtain the state/output table shown in (b).
A state diagram for the example machine is shown in Figure 7-44. Since
our example is a Moore machine, the output values are written with each state.
DO NOT COPY
transition expression Each arc is labeled with a  transition expression; a transition is taken for input
combinations for which the transition expression is 1. Transitions labeled “1”
are always taken.
Figure 7-44  State diagram corresponding to Table 7-4.
DO NOT COPY
X • Y′ X′
A  X B
Z1 Z2 = 10 Z1 Z2 = 10
X′ • Y
DO NOT COPY1
E  1 F
Z1 Z2 = 11 Z1 Z2 = 10
X X
DO NOT COPYG  1 H
Z1 Z2 = 11 Z1 Z2 = 11
1
X′ • Y
C  X D
Z1 Z2 = 10 Z1 Z2 = 00
DO NOT COPY
X • Y′ X′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.3  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Analysis  463
The transition expressions on arcs leaving a particular state must be mutu-
ally exclusive and all inclusive, as explained below:
•DO NOT COPY  No two transition expressions can equal 1 for the same input combination, mutual exclusion
since a machine can’t have two next states for one input combination.
•  For every possible input combination, some transition expression must all inclusion
equal 1, so that all next states are defined.
DO NOT COPYStarting with the state table, a transition expression for a particular current
state and next state can be written as a sum of minterms for the input combina-
tions that cause that transition. If desired, the expression can then be minimized
to give the information in a more compact form. Transition expressions are most
useful in the  design  of state machines, where the expressions may be developed
from the word description of the problem, as we’ll show in \secref{diagdsgn}.DO NOT COPY
*7.3.5 Analysis of State Machines with J-K Flip-Flops
Clocked synchronous state machines built from  J-K  flip-flops can also be ana-
lyzed by the basic procedure in the preceding subsection. The only difference is
that there are two excitation equations for each flip-flop—one forDO NOT COPY  J  and the other
for  K. To obtain the transition equations, both of these must be substituted into
the  J-K’s characteristic equation,  Q∗  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K′  ⋅  Q.
Figure 7-45 is an example state machine using  J-K  flip-flops. Reading the
logic diagram, we can derive the following excitation equations:
DO NOT COPY
J0  =  X  ⋅  Y′
K0  =  X  ⋅  Y′  +  Y  ⋅  Q1
J1  =  X  ⋅  Q0  +  Y
K1  =  Y  ⋅  Q0′  +  X  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q0
DO NOT COPY
X
J0
Y′ J  Q0 Figure 7-45
Q
Clocked synchronous
CLK
Y K0 Q state machine using
K
Q1 J-K  flip-flops.
DO NOT COPY
X
Q0 X
Y Q0
J1 Z
X J  Q1 Q1
Q
Y
DO NOT COPYCLK Q0′
Q0′ K1 Q Q1′
Y K
Y
X
Y′
Q0
DO NOT COPY
CLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

464  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 5 (a) (b)
X Y  X Y
Transition/output
and state/output Q1 Q0  00  01  10  11  S  00  01  10  11
tables for theDO NOT COPY
00  00, 0  10, 1  01, 0  10, 1  A  A, 0  C, 1  B, 0  C, 1
state machine
01  01, 0  11, 0  10, 0  11, 0  B  B, 0  D, 0  C, 0  D, 0
in Figure 7-45.
10  10, 0  00, 0  11, 0  00, 0  C  C, 0  A, 0  D, 0  A, 0
11  11, 0  10, 0  00, 1  10, 1  D  D, 0  C, 0  A, 1  C, 1
DO NOT COPY
Q1∗ Q0∗,  Z  S∗,  Z
Substituting into the characteristic equation for  J-K  flip-flops, we obtain the
transition equations:
DO NOT COPY
Q0∗  =  J0  ⋅  Q0′  +  K0′  ⋅  Q0
=  X  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q0′  + (X  ⋅  Y′  +  Y  ⋅  Q1)′  ⋅  Q0
=  X  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q0′  +  X′  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q0  +  X′  ⋅  Q1′⋅  Q0  +  Y  ⋅  Q1′⋅  Q0
Q1∗  =  J1  ⋅  Q1′  +  K1′  ⋅  Q1
DO NOT COPY
=  (X  ⋅  Q0  +  Y)  ⋅  Q1′  + (Y  ⋅  Q0′  +  X  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q0)′⋅  Q1
=  X  ⋅  Q1′⋅  Q0  +  Y  ⋅  Q1′  +  X′  ⋅  Y′  ⋅  Q1  +  Y′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  +  X′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  +  Y  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0
A transition table based on these equations is shown in Table 7-5(a). Reading the
logic diagram, we can write the output equation:
DO NOT COPY
Z  =  X  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  +  Y  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′
The resulting output values are shown in each column of (a) along with the next
state. Assigning state names  A–D, we obtain the state/output table shown in (b).
DO NOT COPYA corresponding state diagram that uses transition expressions is shown in
Figure 7-46.
X • Y′ Z = 0 unless otherwise indicated X′ • Y′
Figure 7-46
State diagram X • Y′
DO NOT COPYA  B
corresponding to the
state machine of
Table 7-5.
X • Y′
Y Y Y
DO NOT COPY(Z = 1) • 
X  Y′
(Z = 1)
X • Y′
C  D
X′ • Y
X • Y′ X′ • Y′
X • Y
DO NOT COPY
(Z = 1)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  465
7.4 Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design
The steps for designing a clocked synchronous state machine, starting from a
word description or specification, are just about the reverse of the analysis stepsDO NOT COPY
that we used in the preceding section:
1.  Construct a state/output table corresponding to the word description or state/output table
specification, using mnemonic names for the states. (It’s also possible to
DO NOT COPYstart with a state diagram; this method is discussed in \secref{diagdsgn}.)
2.  (Optional) Minimize the number of states in the state/output table. state minimization
3.  Choose a set of state variables and assign state-variable combinations to state assignment
the named states.
4.  Substitute the state-variable combinations into the state/output table to cre- transition/output table
DO NOT COPY
ate a transition/output table that shows the desired next state-variable
combination and output for each state/input combination.
5.  Choose a flip-flop type (e.g.,  D  or  J-K) for the state memory. In most cases,
you’ll already have a choice in mind at the outset of the design, but this step
DO NOT COPYis your last chance to change your mind.
6.  Construct an excitation table that shows the excitation values required to excitation table
obtain the desired next state for each state/input combination.
7.  Derive excitation equations from the excitation table. excitation equations
8.DO NOT COPY  Derive output equations from the transition/output table. output equations
9.  Draw a logic diagram that shows the state-variable storage elements and logic diagram
realizes the required excitation and output equations. (Or realize the equa-
tions directly in a programmable logic device.)
DO NOT COPYIn this section, we’ll describe each of these basic steps in state-machine
design. Step 1 is the most important, since it is here that the designer really
designs, going through the creative process of translating a (perhaps ambiguous) design
English-language description of the state machine into a formal tabular descrip-
tion. Step 2 is hardly ever performed by experienced digital designers, but
designers bring much of their experience to bear in step 3.DO NOT COPY
Once the first three steps are completed, all of the remaining steps can be
completed by “turning the crank,” that is, by following a well-defined synthesis
procedure. Steps 4 and 6–9 are the most tedious, but they are easily automated.
For example, when you design a state machine that will be realized in a program-
DO NOT COPY
mable logic device, you can use an ABEL compiler to do the cranking, as shown
in Section 7.11.2. Still, it’s important for you to understand the details of the
synthesis procedure, both to give you an appreciation of the compiler’s function
and to give you a chance of figuring out what’s really going on when the compil-
er produces unexpected results. Therefore, all nine steps of the state-machine
DO NOT COPY
design procedure are discussed in the remainder of this section.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

466  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
STATE-TABLE Designing a state table (or equivalently, a state diagram) is a creative process that
DESIGN AS A KIND is like writing a computer program in many ways:
DO NOT COPY
OF PROGRAMMING •  You start with a fairly precise description of inputs and outputs, but a possibly
ambiguous description of the desired relationship between them, and usually
no clue about how to actually obtain the desired outputs from the inputs.
•  During the design, you may have to identify and choose among different ways
DO NOT COPYof doing things, sometimes using common sense, and sometimes arbitrarily.
•  You may have to identify and handle special cases that weren’t included in the
original description.
•  You will probably have to keep track of several ideas in your head during the
design process.
DO NOT COPY
•  Since the design process is not an algorithm, there’s no guarantee that you can
complete the state table or program using a finite number of states or lines of
code. However, unless you work for the government, you must try to do so.
•  When you finally run the state machine or program, it will do exactly what you
told it to do—no more, no less.
DO NOT COPY
•  There’s no guarantee that the thing will work the first time; you may have to
debug and iterate on the whole process.
Although state-table design is a challenge, there’s no need to be intimidated. If
you’ve made it this far in your education, then you’ve probably written a few pro-
DO NOT COPYgrams that worked, and you can become just as good at designing state tables.
7.4.1 State-Table Design Example
DO NOT COPYThere are several different ways to describe a state machine’s state table. Later,
we’ll see how ABEL and VHDL can specify state tables indirectly. In this sec-
tion, however, we deal only with state tables that are specified directly, in the
same tabular format that we used in the previous section for analysis.
We’ll present the state-table design process, as well as the synthesis proce-
DO NOT COPYdure in later subsections, using the simple design problem below:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  A  and  B, and
a single output  Z  that is 1 if:
–  A  had the same value at each of the two previous clock ticks,  or
DO NOT COPY–  B  has been 1 since the last time that the first condition was true.
Otherwise, the output should be 0.
If the meaning of this specification isn’t crystal clear to you at this point, don’t
worry. Part of your job as a designer is to convert such a specification into a state
DO NOT COPYtable that is absolutely unambiguous; even if it doesn’t match what was original-
ly intended, it at least forms a basis for further discussion and refinement.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  467
REALIZING For proper system operation, the hardware design of a state machine should ensure
RELIABLE RESET that it enters a known initial state on power-up, such as the  INIT  state in our design
DO NOT COPY
example. Most systems have a  RESET  signal that is asserted during power-up.
The  RESET  signal is typically generated by an analog circuit. Such a reset cir-
cuit typically detects a voltage (say, 4.5 V) close to the power supply’s full voltage,
and follows that with a delay (say, 100 ms) to ensure that all components (including
oscillators) have had time to stabilize before it “unresets” the system. The Texas
DO NOT COPY
Instruments TL7705 is such an analog reset IC; it has an internal 4.5-V reference for
the detector and uses an external resistor and capacitor to determine the “unreset”
time constant.
If a state machine is built using discrete flip-flops with asynchronous preset
and clear inputs, the RESET signal can be applied to these inputs to force the machine
DO NOT COPY
into the desired initial state. If preset and clear inputs are not available, or if reset
must be synchronous (as in systems using high-speed microprocessors), then the
RESET signal may be used as another input to the state machine, with all of the next-
state entries going to the desired initial state when  RESET  is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
As an additional “hint” or requirement, state-table design problems often
include timing diagrams that show the state machine’s expected behavior for one
or more sequences of inputs. Such a timing diagram is unlikely to specify unam-
DO NOT COPY
biguously the machine’s behavior for all possible sequences of inputs but, again,
it’s a good starting point for discussion and a benchmark against which proposed
designs can be checked. Figure 7-47 is such a timing diagram for our example
state-table design problem.
The first step in the state-table design is to construct a template. From the
DO NOT COPY
word description, we know that our example is a Moore machine—its output
depends only on the current state, that is, what happened in previous clock peri-
ods. Thus, as shown in Figure 7-48(a), we provide one next-state column for
each possible input combination and a single column for the output values. The
order in which the input combinations are written doesn’t affect this part of theDO NOT COPY
Figure 7-47  Timing diagram for example state machine.
CLOCKDO NOT COPY
A
B
DO NOT COPY
Z
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

468  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
A B A B
(a) (b)
Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z
Initial state INIT 0 Initial state INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0
DO NOT COPY. . . Got a 0 on A A0 0
. . . Got a 1 on A A1 0
. . .
S∗ S∗
DO NOT COPY
A B A B
(c) (d) 
Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z
Initial state INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0 Initial state INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0
Got a 0 on A A0  OK  OK  A1  A1  0 Got a 0 on A A0  OK  OK  A1  A1  0
Got a 1 on A A1  0 Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK  OK  0
DO NOT COPYGot two equal A inputs OK  Got two equal A inputs OK
1  1
S∗ S∗
Figure 7-48  Evolution of a state table.
DO NOT COPY
process, but we’ve written them in Karnaugh-map order to simplify the deriva-
tion of excitation equations later. In a Mealy machine we would omit the output
column and write the output values along with the next-state values under each
input combination. The leftmost column is simply an English-language remind-
DO NOT COPY
er of the meaning of each state or the “history” associated with it.
The word description isn’t specific about what happens when this machine
is first started, so we’ll just have to improvise. We’ll assume that when power is
initial state first applied to the system, the machine enters an  initial state, called  INIT  in this
example. We write the name of the initial state (INIT) in the first row, and leave
DO NOT COPY
room for enough rows (states) to complete the design. We can also fill in the
value of  Z  for the  INIT  state; common sense says it should be 0 because there
were  no  inputs beforehand.
Next, we must fill in the next-state entries for the  INIT  row. The  Z  output
can’t be 1 until we’ve seen at least two inputs on  A, so we’ll provide two states,
DO NOT COPY
A0  and  A1, that “remember” the value of  A  on the previous clock tick, as shown
in Figure 7-48(b). In both of these states,  Z  is 0, since we haven’t satisfied the
conditions for a 1 output yet. The precise meaning of state  A0  is “Got  A  =  0  on
the previous tick,  A  ≠  0  on the tick before that, and  B  ≠  1  at some time since the
DO NOT COPYprevious pair of equal  A  inputs.” State  A1  is defined similarly.
At this point we know that our state machine has at least three states, and
we have created two more blank rows to fill in. Hmmmm, this isn’t such a good
trend! In order to fill in the next-state entries for  one state (INIT), we had to create
two  new states  A0  and  A1. If we kept going this way, we could end up with
DO NOT COPY
65,535 states by bedtime! Instead, we should be on the lookout for existing states
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  469
A B A B
(a)  (b) 
Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z Meaning S  00 01  11  10  Z
Initial state INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0 Initial state INIT A0  A0  A1  A1 0
DO NOT COPYGot a 0 on A A0  OK  OK  A1  A1  0 Got a 0 on A A0  OK0  OK0  A1  A1 0
Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK  OK 0 Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK1  OK1 0
Got two equal A inputs  OK ?  OK  OK  ? 1 Two equal, A=0 last  OK0  1
Two equal, A=1 last OK1 1
S∗ S∗
DO NOT COPY
A B A B
(c) (d)
Meaning  S 00 01  11  10  Z Meaning  S 00 01  11  10  Z
Initial state  INIT A0  A0  A1  A1 0 Initial state  INIT A0  A0  A1  A1 0
Got a 0 on A A0  OK0  OK0  A1  A1 0 Got a 0 on A A0  OK0  OK0  A1  A1 0
Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK1  OK1 0 Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK1  OK1 0
DO NOT COPYTwo equal, A=0 last  OK0  OK0  OK0  OK1  A1  Two equal, A=0 last  OK0  OK0  OK0  OK1  A1 
1 1
Two equal, A=1 last OK1 1 Two equal, A=1 last OK1 A0  OK0  OK1  OK1 1
S∗ S∗
Figure 7-49  Continued evolution of a state table.
DO NOT COPY
that have the same meaning as new ones that we might otherwise create. Let’s
see how it goes.
In state  A0, we know that input  A  was 0 at the previous clock tick.
Therefore, if  A  is 0 again, we go to a new state  OK  with  Z  = 1, as shown in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-48(c). If  A  is 1, then we don’t have two equal inputs in a row, so we go
to state  A1  to remember that we just got a 1. Likewise in state  A1, shown in (d),
we go to  OK  if we get a second 1 input in a row, or to  A0  if we get a 0.
Once we get into the  OK  state, the machine description tells us we can stay
there as long as  B  = 1, irrespective of the  A  input, as shown in Figure 7-49(a). If
DO NOT COPY
B  =  0, we have to look for two 1s or two 0s in a row on  A  again. However, we’ve
got a little problem in this case. The current  A  input may or may not be the sec-
ond equal input in a row, so we may still be “OK” or we may have to go back to
A0  or  A1. We defined the  OK  state too broadly—it doesn’t “remember” enough
to tell us which way to go.
DO NOT COPY
The problem is solved in Figure 7-49(b) by splitting  OK  into two states,
OK0  and  OK1, that “remember” the previous  A  input. All of the next states for
OK0  and  OK1  can be selected from existing states, as shown in (c) and (d). For
example, if we get  A  =  0 in  OK0, we can just stay in  OK0; we don’t have to create
a new state that “remembers” three 0s in a row, because the machine’s descrip-DO NOT COPY
tion doesn’t require us to distinguish that case. Thus, we have achieved “closure”
of the state table, which now describes a  finite-state machine. As a sanity check,
Figure 7-50 repeats the timing diagram of Figure 7-47, listing the states that
should be visited according to our final state table.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

470  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
CLOCK
DO NOT COPYA
B
Z
DO NOT COPY
STATE INIT  A0 OK0  A1  OK1  A0 OK0  OK1  OK0 A1  OK1  A0
Figure 7-50  Timing diagram and state sequence for example state machine.
DO NOT COPY7.4.2 State Minimization
Figure 7-49(d) is a “minimal” state table for our original word description, in the
sense that it contains the fewest possible states. However, Figure 7-51 shows
other state tables, with more states, that also do the job. Formal procedures can
be used to minimize the number of states in such tables.
DO NOT COPY
The basic idea of formal minimization procedures is to identify  equivalent
equivalent states states, where two states are equivalent if it is impossible to distinguish the states
by observing only the current and future  outputs  of the machine (and  not  the
internal state variables). A pair of equivalent states can be replaced by a single
state.
DO NOT COPY
Two states  S1  and  S2  are equivalent if two conditions are true. First,  S1
and  S2  must produce the same values at the state-machine output(s); in a Mealy
machine, this must be true for all input combinations. Second, for each input
combination,  S1  and  S2  must have either the same next state or equivalent next
DO NOT COPYstates.
Thus, a formal state-minimization procedure shows that states  OK00  and
OKA0  in Figure 7-51(a) are equivalent because they produce the same output
Figure 7-51  Nonminimal state tables equivalent to Figure 7-49(d).
DO NOT COPY
A B A B
(a)  (b)
Meaning  S 00 01  11  10  Z Meaning  S 00 01  11  10  Z
Initial state  INIT A0  A0  A1  A1 0 Initial state  INIT A0  A0  A1  A1 0
Got a 0 on A A0  OK00  OK00  A1  A1 0 Got a 0 on A A0  OK00  OK00  A1  A1 0
Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK11  OK11 0 Got a 1 on A A1  A0  A0  OK11  OK11 0
DO NOT COPY
Got 00 on A  OK00  OK00  OK00 OKA1  A1  1 Got 00 on A  OK00  OK00  OK00 A001  A1  1
Got 11 on A OK11 A0  OKA0 OK11  OK11 1 Got 11 on A OK11 A0  A110 OK11  OK11 1
OK, got a 0 on A  OKA0  OK00  OK00 OKA1  A1  1 Got 001 on A, B=1  A001  A0  AE10 OK11  OK11 1
OK, got a 1 on A OKA1 A0  OKA0 OK11  OK11 1 Got 110 on A, B=1 A110 OK00  OK00 AE01  A1 1
S∗ Got bb...10 on A, B=1  AE10  OK00  OK00 AE01  A1 1
Got bb...01 on A, B=1 AE01 A0  AE10 OK11  OK11 1
DO NOT COPYS∗
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  471
and their next-state entries are identical. Since the states are equivalent, state
OK00  may be eliminated and its occurrences in the table replaced by  OKA0, or
vice versa. Likewise, states  OK11 and  OKA1  are equivalent.
DO NOT COPY
To minimize the state table in Figure 7-51(b), a formal procedure must use
a bit of circular reasoning. States  OK00,  A110, and  AE10  all produce the same
output and have almost identical next-state entries, so they might be equivalent.
They are equivalent only if  A001  and  AE01  are equivalent. Similarly,  OK11,
A001, and  AE01  are equivalent only if  A110  and  AE10  are equivalent. In other
DO NOT COPY
words, the states in the first set are equivalent if the states in the second set are,
and vice versa. So, let’s just go ahead and say they’re equivalent.
DO NOT COPYIS THIS REALLY Details of formal state-minimization procedures are discussed in advanced text-
ALL NECESSARY? books, cited in the References. However, these procedures are seldom used by most
digital designers. By carefully matching state meanings to the requirements of the
problem, experienced digital designers produce state tables for small problems with
a minimal or near-minimal number of states, without using a formal minimization
DO NOT COPYprocedure. Also, there are situations where increasing  the number of states may sim-
plify the design or reduce its cost, so even an automated state-minimization
procedure doesn’t necessarily help. A designer can do more to simplify a state
machine during the state-assignment phase of the design, discussed in the next
subsection.
DO NOT COPY
7.4.3 State Assignment
The next step in the design process is to determine how many binary variables
are required to represent the states in the state table, and to assign a specific com-
DO NOT COPY
bination to each named state. We’ll call the binary combination assigned to a
particular state a  coded state. The total number of states in a machine with  n flip- coded state
n
flops is 2 , so the number of flip-flops needed to code  s  states is  log 2  s, the total number of states
smallest integer greater than or equal to log 2  s.
For reference, the state/output table of our example machine is repeated in
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-6. It has five states, so it requires three flip-flops. Of course, three flip-
flops provide a total of eight states, so there will be 8  −  5  =  3  unused states. We’ll unused states
discuss alternatives for handling the unused states at the end of this subsection.
Right now, we have to deal with lots of choices for the five coded states.
DO NOT COPY
INITIAL VERSUS The example state machine in this subsection visits its initial state only during reset.
IDLE STATES Many machines are designed instead with an “idle” state that is entered both at reset
and whenever the machine has nothing in particular to do.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

472  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 6
A B
State and output table
for example problem. S  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0
A0  OK0  OK0  A1  A1  0
A1  A0  A0  OK1  OK1  0
OK0  OK0  OK0  OK1  A1  1
DO NOT COPY
OK1  A0  OK0  OK1  OK1  1
S∗
n 
The simplest assignment of  s  coded states to 2 possible states is to use the
DO NOT COPY
first  s  binary integers in binary counting order, as shown in the first assignment
column of Table 7-7. However, the simplest state assignment does not always
lead to the simplest excitation equations, output equations, and resulting logic
circuit. In fact, the state assignment often has a major effect on circuit cost, and
may interact with other factors, such as the choice of storage elements (e.g.,  D
DO NOT COPY
vs.  J-K  flip-flops) and the realization approach for excitation and output logic
(e.g., sum-of-products, product-of-sums, or ad hoc).
So, how do we choose the best state assignment for a given problem? In
general, the only formal way to find the  best  assignment is to try  all  the assign-
DO NOT COPYments. That’s too much work, even for students. Instead, most digital designers
rely on experience and several practical guidelines for making reasonable state
assignments:
•  Choose an initial coded state into which the machine can easily be forced
at reset (00. . . 00 or 11. . . 11 in typical circuits).
DO NOT COPY
•  Minimize the number of state variables that change on each transition.
CAUTION: MATH  The number of different ways to choose m coded states out of a set of n possible states
DO NOT COPY
n n!
is given by a  binomial coefficient, denoted    , whose value is ----------------------------- . (We
 m m! ⋅ ( n – m)
used binomial coefficients previously in Section 2.10, in the context of decimal
8
coding.) In our example, there are   different ways to choose five coded states out
 5
DO NOT COPYof eight possible states, and 5! ways to assign the five named states to each different
8!
choice. So there are --------------  ⋅ 5! or 6,720 different ways to assign the five states of our
5! ⋅ 3!
example machine to combinations of three binary state variables. We don’t have time
to look at all of them.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  473
Ta b l e 7 - 7
Assignment 
Possible state
State Simplest Decomposed One-hot Almost one-hot assignments for the
nameDO NOT COPYQ1–Q3 Q1–Q3 Q1–Q5 Q1–Q4 state machine in
INIT  Table 7-6.
000  000  00001  0000
A0  001  100  00010  0001
A1  010  101  00100  0010
DO NOT COPYOK0  011  110  01000  0100
OK1  100  111  10000  1000
•  Maximize the number of state variables that don’t change in a group of
DO NOT COPYrelated states (i.e., a group of states in which most of transitions stay in the
group).
•  Exploit symmetries in the problem specification and the corresponding
symmetries in the state table. That is, suppose that one state or group of
states means almost the same thing as another. Once an assignment has
DO NOT COPY
been established for the first, a similar assignment, differing only in one
bit, should be used for the second.
n 
•  If there are unused states (i.e., if  s  <  2 where  n  =  log_2  s), then choose
the “best” of the available state-variable combinations to achieve the fore-
DO NOT COPYgoing goals. That is, don’t limit the choice of coded states to the first  s  n-bit
integers.
•  Decompose the set of state variables into individual bits or fields where
each bit or field has a well-defined meaning with respect to the input
effects or output behavior of the machine.
DO NOT COPY
•  Consider using more than the minimum number of state variables to make
a decomposed assignment possible.
Some of these ideas are incorporated in the “decomposed” state assign-
ment in Table 7-7. As before, the initial state is 000, which is easy to force either
asynchronously (applying theDO NOT COPY  RESET signal to the flip-flop  CLR  inputs) or syn-
chronously (by  AND’ing  RESET′  with all of the  D  flip-flop inputs). After this
point, the assignment takes advantage of the fact that there are only four states in
addition to  INIT, which is a fairly “special” state that is never re-entered once the
machine gets going. Therefore,  Q1  can be used to indicate whether or not the
DO NOT COPY
machine is in the  INIT state, and  Q2 and  Q3 can be used to distinguish among the
four non-INIT  states.
The non-INIT  states in the “decomposed” column of Table 7-7 appear to
have been assigned in binary counting order, but that’s just a coincidence. State
bits  Q2  and  Q3  actually have individual meanings in the context of the state
DO NOT COPY
machine’s inputs and output.  Q3  gives the previous value of  A, and  Q2  indicates
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

474  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
that the conditions for a 1 output are satisfied in the current state. By decompos-
ing the state-bit meanings in this way, we can expect the next-state and output
logic to be simpler than in a “random” assignment of Q2,Q3 combinations to the
DO NOT COPY
non-INIT  states. We’ll continue the state-machine design based on this assign-
ment in later subsections.
Another useful state assignment, one that can be adapted to any state
one-hot assignment machine, is the  one-hot assignment  shown in Table 7-7. This assignment uses
more than the minimum number of state variables—it uses one bit per state. In
DO NOT COPY
addition to being simple, a one-hot assignment has the advantage of usually
leading to small excitation equations, since each flip-flop must be set to 1 for
transitions into only one state. An obvious disadvantage of a one-hot assign-
ment, especially for machines with many states, is that it requires (many) more
DO NOT COPYthan the minimum number of flip-flops. However, the one-hot encoding is ideal
for a machine with  s  states that is required to have a set of 1-out-of-s  coded out-
puts indicating its current state. The one-hot-coded flip-flop outputs can be used
directly for this purpose, with no additional combinational output logic.
The last column of Table 7-7 is an “almost one-hot assignment” that uses
DO NOT COPYthe “no-hot” combination for the initial state. This makes a lot of sense for two
reasons: It’s easy to initialize most storage devices to the all-0s state, and the
initial state in this machine is never revisited once the machine gets going.
Completing the state-machine design using this state assignment is considered
in Exercises 7.35 and 7.38.
DO NOT COPY
unused states We promised earlier to consider the disposition of  unused states  when the
n
number of states available with  n  flip-flops, 2 , is greater than the number of
states required,  s. There are two approaches that make sense, depending on the
application requirements:
DO NOT COPY•  Minimal risk.  This approach assumes that it is possible for the state
machine somehow to get into one of the unused (or “illegal”) states, per-
haps because of a hardware failure, an unexpected input, or a design error.
Therefore, all of the unused state-variable combinations are identified, and
explicit next-state entries are made so that, for any input combination, the
DO NOT COPYunused states go to the “initial” state, the “idle” state, or some other “safe”
state. This is an automatic consequence of some design methodologies if
the initial state is coded 00. . . 00.
•  Minimal cost.  This approach assumes that the machine will never enter an
unused state. Therefore, in the transition and excitation tables, the next-
DO NOT COPY
state entries of the unused states can be marked as “don’t-cares.” In most
cases, this simplifies the excitation logic. However, the machine’s behavior
if it ever does enter an unused state may be pretty weird.
We’ll look at both of these approaches as we complete the design of our example
DO NOT COPY
state machine.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  475
7.4.4 Synthesis Using D Flip-Flops
Once we’ve assigned coded states to the named states of a machine, the rest of
the design process is pretty much “turning the crank.” In fact, in Section 7.11.2
DO NOT COPY
we’ll describe software tools that can turn the crank for you. Just so that you’ll
appreciate those tools, however, we’ll go through the process by hand in this
subsection.
Coded states are substituted for named states in the (possibly minimized)
state table to obtain a  transition table. The transition table shows the next coded transition table
DO NOT COPY
state for each combination of current coded state and input. Table 7-8 shows the
transition and output table that is obtained from the example state machine of
Table 7-6 on page 472 using the “decomposed” assignment of Table 7-7 on
page 473.
DO NOT COPYThe next step is to write an  excitation table  that shows, for each combina- excitation table
tion of coded state and input, the flip-flop excitation input values needed to make
the machine go to the desired next coded state. This structure and content of this
table depend on the type of flip-flops that are used (D,  J-K,  T, etc.). We  usually
have a particular flip-flop type in mind at the beginning of a design—and we
certainlyDO NOT COPY do in this subsection, given its title. In fact, most state-machine designs
nowadays use  D flip-flops, because of their availability in both discrete packages
and programmable logic devices, and because of their ease of use (compare with
J-K  flip-flops in the next subsection).
Of all flip-flop types, a  D  flip-flop has the simplest characteristic equation,
DO NOT COPY
Q∗  =  D. Each  D  flip-flop in a state machine has a single excitation input, D, and
the excitation table must show the value required at each flip-flop’s  D  input for
each coded-state/input combination. Table 7-9 shows the excitation table for our
example problem. Since  D  =  Q∗, the excitation table is identical to the transition
table, except for labeling of its entries. Thus, with  D  flip-flops, you don’t really
DO NOT COPY
need to write a separate excitation table; you can just call the first table a  transi-
tion/excitation table. transition/excitation
The excitation table is like a truth table for three combinational logic func- table
tions (D1,  D2,  D3) of five variables (A,  B,  Q1,  Q2,  Q3). Accordingly, we can
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 7 - 8
A B 
Transition and output
Q1 Q2 Q3  00  01  11  10  Z table for example
problem.
000  100  100  101  101  0
DO NOT COPY
100  110  110  101  101  0
101  100  100  111  111  0
110  110  110  111  101  1
111  100  110  111  111  1
DO NOT COPYQ1∗ Q2∗ Q3∗
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

476  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 9
A B
Excitation and output
table for Table 7-8 Q1 Q2 Q3  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPYusing  D  flip-flops.
000  100  100  101  101  0
100  110  110  101  101  0
101  100  100  111  111  0
110  110  110  111  101  1
DO NOT COPY
111  100  110  111  111  1
D1 D2 D3
design circuits to realize these functions using any of the combinational design
DO NOT COPYmethods at our disposal. In particular, we can transfer the information in the
excitation maps excitation table to Karnaugh maps, which we may call  excitation maps, and find
a minimal sum-of-products or product-of-sums expression for each function.
Excitation maps for our example state machine are shown in Figure 7-52.
Each function, such as  D1, has five variables and therefore uses a  5-variable
DO NOT COPY
5-variable Karnaugh Karnaugh map. A 5-variable map is drawn as a pair of 4-variable maps, where
map cells in the same position in the two maps are considered to be adjacent. These
maps are a bit unwieldy, but if you want to design by hand any but the most triv-
ial state machines, you’re going to get stuck with 5-variable maps and worse. At
least we had the foresight to label the input combinations of the original state
DO NOT COPY
table in Karnaugh-map order, which makes it easier to transfer information to
the maps in this step. However, note that the  states  were not assigned in
Karnaugh-map order; in particular, the rows for states 110 and 111 are in the
opposite order in the map as in the excitation table.
DO NOT COPY
D1 A A
A B A B 
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10
Figure 7-52
00 1 1  1  1 •  00 1  1  1  1
Excitation maps for Q2′  Q3′
01 0  0  0  0 01 1  1  1  1
D1 ,  D2 , and  D3
Q3 Q3
11 0  0  0  0 11 1  1  1  1
assuming thatDO NOT COPY
Q2 Q2
unused states 10 0  0  0  0 10 1  1  1  1
Q1
go to state 000.
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
Q2′ • Q3′ • A Q1 • A
D2  A A D3 A A
DO NOT COPYA B  A B  A B  A B 
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01 11  10 •  •  Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10
Q1  Q3′  A′
00 0  0  0  0 00 1  1  0  0 00 0  0 1  1 00 0  0 1  1
01 0  0  0  0 01 0  0  1  1 01 0  0  0  0 01 0  0 1  1
Q3 Q3 Q3 Q3
11 0  0  0  0 11 0  1  1  1 11 0  0  0  0 11 0  0 1  1
Q2 Q2 •  •  Q2 Q2
DO NOT COPY10 0  0  0  0 10 1  1  1  0 Q1  Q3  A 10 0  0  0  0 10 0  0  1 1
Q1 • Q2 • B
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  477
It is in this step, transferring the excitation table to excitation maps, that we
discover why the excitation table is not quite a truth table—it does not specify
functional values for  all  input combinations. In particular, the next-state infor-
DO NOT COPY
mation for the unused states, 001, 010, and 011, is not specified. Here we must
make a choice, discussed in the preceding subsection, between a minimal-risk
and a minimal-cost strategy for handling the unused states. Figure 7-52 has
taken the minimal-risk approach: The next state for each unused state and input
combination is 000, the  INIT  state. The three rows of colored 0s in each Kar-
DO NOT COPY
naugh map are the result of this choice. With the maps completely filled in, we
can now obtain minimal sum-of-products expressions for the flip-flop excitation
inputs:
D1  =  Q1  +  Q2′  ⋅  Q3′
D2  =  Q1  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  A′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  A  +  Q1  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  B
DO NOT COPY
D3  =  Q1  ⋅  A  +  Q2′  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  A
An output equation can easily be developed directly from the information
in Table 7-9. The output equation is simpler than the excitation equations,
because the output is a function of state only. We could use a Karnaugh map, but
DO NOT COPY
it’s easy to find a minimal-risk output function algebraically, by writing it as the
sum of the two coded states (110 and 111) in which  Z  is 1:
Z  =  Q1  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  Q3′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  Q3
=  Q1  ⋅  Q2
DO NOT COPY
At this point, we’re just about done with the state-machine design. If the
state machine is going to be built with discrete flip-flops and gates, then the final
step is to draw a logic diagram. On the other hand, if we are using a programma-
ble logic device, then we only have to enter the excitation and output equations
into a computer file that specifies how to program the device, as an example
DO NOT COPY
shows in Section 7.11.1. Or, if we’re lucky, we specified the machine using a
state-machine  description  language  like  ABEL  in  the  first  place
(Section 7.11.2), and the computer did all the work in this subsection for us!
DO NOT COPY
MINIMAL-COST If we choose in our example to derive minimal-cost excitation equations, we write
SOLUTION “don’t-cares” in the next-state entries for the unused states. The colored d’s in
Figure 7-53 are the result of this choice. The excitation equations obtained from this
map are somewhat simpler than before:
DO NOT COPYD1  =  1
D2  =  Q1  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  A′ +  Q3  ⋅ A  +  Q2  ⋅  B
D3  =  A
For a minimal-cost output function, the value of  Z  is a “don’t-care” for the unused
states. This leads to an even simpler output function,  Z  =  Q2. The logic diagram for
DO NOT COPY
the minimal-cost solution is shown in Figure 7-54.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

478  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
D1 A A
A B A B 
Figure 7-53 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10
Excitation maps for  D1 , 00 1  1  1  1 00 1  1  1  1
1
D2 , andDO NOT COPY  D3  assuming
01 d  d  d  d 01 1  1  1  1
that next states of Q3 Q3
11 d  d  d  d 11 1  1  1  1
unused states are Q2 Q2
10 d  d  d  d 10 1  1  1  1
“don’t-cares.”
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
DO NOT COPY
A A A A
D2 A B  A B  D3 A B  A B 
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01 11  10 •  •  Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10
Q1  Q3′  A′
00 0  0  0  0 00 1  1  0  0 00 0 0  1  1 A 00 0  0 1 1
01 d  d  d  d 01 0  0  1  1 01 d  d  d  d 01 0  0 1 1
Q3 Q3 Q3 Q3
DO NOT COPY11 d  d  d  d 11 0  1  1  1 11 d  d  d  d 11 0  0 1 1
Q2 Q2 •  Q2 Q2
10 d  d  d  d 10 1  1  1  0 Q3  A 10 d  d  d  d 10 0  0  1 1
Q2 • B
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
DO NOT COPYD1  Q1
1 D  Q
Figure 7-54
Logic diagram resulting CLK Q
CLR
from Figure 7-53.
Q1
Q3′
DO NOT COPYD2 Q2
A′
D  Q Z
Q3
CLK Q
A
A CLR
Q2
DO NOT COPYB B D3  Q3
D  Q
CLK Q
CLR
RESET_L
DO NOT COPY
CLK
*7.4.5 Synthesis Using J-K Flip-Flops
DO NOT COPYAt one time,  J-K  flip-flops were popular for discrete SSI state-machine designs,
since a  J-K  flip-flop embeds more functionality than a  D  flip-flop in the same
size SSI package. By “more functionality” we mean that the combination of  J
and  K  inputs yields more possibilities for controlling the flip-flop than a single
D  input does. As a result, a state machine’s excitation logic may be simpler using
DO NOT COPY
J-K  flip-flops than using  D  flip-flops, which reduced package count when SSI
gates were used for the excitation logic.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  479
JUST FOR FUN  While minimizing excitation logic was a big deal in the days of SSI-based design, the
name of the game has changed with PLDs and ASICs. As you might guess from your
DO NOT COPY
knowledge of the AND-OR structure of combinational PLDs, the need to provide sep-
arate  AND-OR  arrays for the  J  and  K  inputs of a  J-K  flip-flop would be a distinct
disadvantage in a sequential PLD.
In ASIC technologies,  J-K flip-flops aren’t so desirable either. For example, in
LSI Logic Corp.’s LCA10000 series of CMOS gate arrays, an FD1  D  flip-flop
DO NOT COPY
macrocell uses 7 “gate cells”, while an FJK1 J-K  flip-flop macrocell uses 9 gate cells,
over 25% more chip area. Therefore, a more cost-effective design usually results
from sticking with  D  flip-flops and using the extra chip area for more complex
excitation logic in just the cases where it’s really needed.
Still, this subsection describes the  J-K  synthesis process “just for fun.”
DO NOT COPY
Up through the state-assignment step, the design procedure with  J-K  flip-
flops is basically the same as with  D  flip-flops. The only difference is that a
designer might select a slightly different state assignment, knowing the sort of
DO NOT COPY
behavior that can easily be obtained from  J-K  flip-flops (e.g., “toggling” by set-
ting  J  and  K  to 1).
The big difference occurs in the derivation of an excitation table from the
transition table. With  D  flip-flops, the two tables are identical; using the  D’s
characteristic equation, Q∗  =  D, we simply substitute D  =  Q∗  for each entry. With
DO NOT COPY
J-K  flip-flops, each entry in the excitation table has twice as many bits as in the
transition table, since there are two excitation inputs per flip-flop.
A  J-K  flip-flop’s characteristic equation,  Q∗  =  J  ⋅  Q′  +  K′  ⋅  Q, cannot be
rearranged to obtain independent equations for  J and  K. Instead, the required val-
ues for J  and  K  are expressed as functions of  Q and  Q∗  in a J-K  application table, J-K  application table
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-10. According to the first row, if  Q  is currently 0, all that is required to
obtain 0 as the next value of  Q  is to set J  to 0; the value of  K  doesn’t matter. Sim-
ilarly, according to the third row, if  Q  is currently 1, the next value of  Q  will be 0
if K  is 1, regardless of J’s value. Each desired transition can be obtained by either
of two different combinations on theDO NOT COPY  J  and  K  inputs, so we get a “don’t-care”
entry in each row of the application table.
To obtain a  J-K  excitation table, the designer must look at both the current
and desired next value of each state bit in the transition table and substitute the
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 7 - 1 0
Q  Q∗∗  J  K 
Application table for
0  0  0  d J-K  flip-flops.
0  1  1  d
1  0  d  1
DO NOT COPY
1  1  d  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

480  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
corresponding pair of  J  and  K  values from the application table. For the transi-
tion table in Table 7-8 on page 475, these substitutions produce the excitation
table in Table 7-11. For example, in state 100 under input combination 00,  Q1  is
DO NOT COPY
1 and the required  Q1∗  is 1; therefore, “d0” is entered for  J1 K1. For the same
state/input combination, Q2 is 0 and  Q2∗ is 1, so “1d” is entered for J2 K2. Obvi-
ously, it takes quite a bit of patience and care to fill in the entire excitation table
(a job best left to a computer).
As in the  D  synthesis example of the preceding subsection, the excitation
DO NOT COPY
table is  almost  a truth table for the excitation functions. This information is
transferred to Karnaugh maps in Figure 7-55.
The excitation table does not specify next states for the unused states, so
once  again  we  must  choose  between  the  minimal-risk  and  minimal-cost
DO NOT COPYapproaches. The colored entries in the Karnaugh maps result from taking the
minimal-risk approach.
Figure 7-55  Excitation maps for  J1,  K1,  J2,  K2 ,  J3 , and  K3 , assuming that
unused states go to state 000.
DO NOT COPY
J1 A A K1 A A
A B A B  A B A B 
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10
00 1 1  1  1 Q2 • Q3′ 00 d  d  d  d 00 d d  d  d  00 0  0  0  0
01 0 0 0 0 01 d  d  d  d 01 d d d d 01 0  0  0  0
Q3 Q3 Q3 Q3
DO NOT COPY11 0 0 0 0 11 d  d  d  d 11 d d d d 11 0  0  0  0
Q2 Q2 Q2 Q2
10 0 0 0 0 10 d  d  d  d 10 d d d d 10 0  0  0  0
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
Q1′ Q3′ • A • B′
A A A A
J2 DO NOT COPYA B  A B  K2 A B  A B 
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01 11  10 •  •  Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10
Q1  Q3′  A′
00 0  0  0  0 00 1  1  0  0 00 d  d d  d 00 d  d d  d
01 0 0 0 0 01 0  0  1  1 01 d d d d 01 d  d d  d
Q3 Q3 Q3 Q3
11 d d d d 11 d  d  d  d 11 1 1 1 1 11 1  0 0  0
Q2 Q2 •  •  Q2 Q2
DO NOT COPY10 d d d d 10 d  d  d  d Q1  Q3  A′ 10 1 1 1 1 10 0  0  0 1
Q3 • A′ • B′
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
Q1′
A A A A
J3 A B  A B  K3 A B  A B 
DO NOT COPY
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01 11 10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10
00 0  0  1  1  Q2′ • A 00 0  0 1  1 00 d  d d  d 00 d  d d  d
01 d d d d 01 d  d  d  d 01 1  1  1  1 01 1  1 0  0
Q3 Q3 Q3 Q3
11 d d d d 11 d  d  d  d 11 1 1 1 1 11 1  1 0  0
Q2 Q2 •  Q2 Q2
10 0  0  0  0 10 0  0  1  1 Q1  A 10 d d d d 10 d  d d  d
DO NOT COPY
A′
Q1=0 B Q1=1 B Q1=0 B Q1=1 B
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  481
Ta b l e 7 - 1 1
A B 
Excitation and output
Q1 Q2 Q3  00 01 11 10  Z table for the state
DO NOT COPYmachine of Table 7-8,
000  1d, 0d, 0d  1d, 0d, 0d  1d, 0d, 1d  1d, 0d, 1d  0
using  J-K  flip-flops.
100  d0, 1d, 0d  d0, 1d, 0d  d0, 0d, 1d  d0, 0d, 1d  0
101  d0, 0d, d1  d0, 0d, d1  d0, 1d, d0  d0, 1d, d0  0
110  d0, d0, 0d  d0, d0, 0d  d0, d0, 1d  d0, d1, 1d  1
DO NOT COPY
111  d0, d1, d1  d0, d0, d1  d0, d0, d0  d0, d0, d0  1
J1 K1, J2 K2, J3 K3
Note that even though the “safe” next state for unused states is 000, we
DO NOT COPY
didn’t just put 0s in the corresponding map cells, as we were able to do in the  D
case. Instead, we still had to work with the application table to determine the
proper combination of  J  and  K  needed to get  Q∗ = 0  for each unused state entry,
once again a tedious and error-prone process.
Using the maps in Figure 7-55, we can derive sum-of-products excitation
DO NOT COPY
equations:
J1  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q3′  K1  =  0
J2  =  Q1  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  A′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  A  K2  =  Q1′  +  Q3′  ⋅  A  ⋅  B′  +  Q3  ⋅  A′  ⋅  B′
J3  =  Q2′  ⋅  A  +  Q1  ⋅  A  K3  =  Q1′  +  A′
DO NOT COPY
These equations take two more gates to realize than do the preceding subsec-
tion’s minimal-risk equations using  D  flip-flops, so  J-K  flip-flops didn’t save us
anything in this example, least of all design time.
DO NOT COPY
MINIMAL-COST In the preceding design example, excitation maps for the minimal-cost approach
SOLUTION would have been somewhat easier to construct, since we could have just put d’s in
all of the unused state entries. Sum-of-products excitation equations obtained from
DO NOT COPYthe minimal-cost maps (not shown) are as follows:
J1  =  1  K1  =  0
J2  =  Q1  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  A′ +  Q3  ⋅  A  K2  =  Q3′  ⋅  A  ⋅  B′  +  Q3  ⋅  A′  ⋅  B′
J3  =  A  K3  =  A′
DO NOT COPY
The state encoding for the  J-K  circuit is the same as in the  D  circuit, so the output
equation is the same,  Z  =  Q1  ⋅  Q2  for minimal risk,  Z  =  Q2 for minimal cost.
A logic diagram corresponding to the minimal-cost equations is shown in
Figure 7-56. This circuit has two more gates than the minimal-cost  D  circuit in
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-54, so  J-K  flip-flops still didn’t save us anything.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

482  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
J1
1 J  Q1
Q
CLK
K1 Q
0 K 
DO NOT COPYQ1 CLR
Q3′
A′
Q3 J2
J  Q2
A Q Z
A CLK
K2 Q
DO NOT COPYQ3′ K 
A CLR
B′
B
Q3
A′ J3
J  Q3
B′ Q
CLK
DO NOT COPYA K3 Q
K 
A′ CLR
RESET_L
CLK
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-56  Logic diagram for example state machine using  J-K  flip-flops
and minimal-cost excitation logic.
7.4.6 More Design Examples Using D Flip-Flops
DO NOT COPYWe’ll conclude this section with two more state-machine design examples using
D  flip-flops. The first example is a “1s-counting machine”:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  X  and  Y, and
one output,  Z. The output should be 1 if the number of 1 inputs on  X  and  Y
since reset is a multiple of 4, and 0 otherwise.
DO NOT COPY
At first glance, you might think the machine needs an infinite number of states,
since it counts 1 inputs over an arbitrarily long time. However, since the output
indicates the number of inputs received  modulo 4, four states are sufficient.
We’ll name them  S0–S3, where  S0  is the initial state and the total number of 1s
DO NOT COPY
received in  Si  is  i  modulo 4. Table 7-12 is the resulting state and output table.
Ta b l e  7 - 1 2 X Y
State and output
table for 1s-counting Meaning S  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
machine.
Got zero 1s (modulo 4)  S0  S0  S1  S2  S1  1
Got one 1 (modulo 4)  S1  S1  S2  S3  S2  0
Got two 1s (modulo 4)  S2  S2  S3  S0  S3  0
Got three 1s (modulo 4)  S3  S3  S0  S1  S0  0
DO NOT COPY
S∗
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  483
Ta b l e 7 - 1 3
X Y 
Transition/excitation
Q1 Q2  00  01  11  10  Z and output table for
DO NOT COPY1s-counting machine.
00  00  01  11  01  1
01  01  11  10  11  0
11  11  10  00  10  0
10  10  00  01  00  0
DO NOT COPY
Q1∗ Q2∗  or  D1 D2
The 1s-counting machine can use two state variables to code its four states,
with no unused states. In this case, there are only 4! possible assignments of
coded states to named states. Still, we’ll try only one of them. We’ll assign codedDO NOT COPY
states to the named states in Karnaugh-map order (00, 01, 11, 10) for two rea-
sons: In this state table, it minimizes the number of state variables that change
for most transitions, potentially simplifying the excitation equations; and it sim-
plifies the mechanical transfer of information to excitation maps.
DO NOT COPY
A transition/excitation table based on our chosen state assignment is
shown in Table 7-13. Since we’re using  D  flip-flops, the transition and excitation
tables are the same. Corresponding Karnaugh maps for  D1  and  D2  are shown in
Figure 7-57. Since there are no unused states, all of the information we need is in
the excitation table; no choice is required between minimal-risk and minimal-
DO NOT COPY
cost approaches. The excitation equations can be read from the maps, and the
output equation can be read directly from the transition/excitation table:
D1  =  Q2  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y  +  Q1′  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y  +  Q1  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y′  +  Q2  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′
D2  =  Q1′  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y  +  Q1′  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y′  +  Q2  ⋅  X′  ⋅  Y′  +  Q2′  ⋅  X  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPYZ  =  Q1′  ⋅  Q2′
A logic diagram using  D  flip-flops and  AND-OR  or  NAND-NAND  excitation
logic can be drawn from these equations.
•  •  •  •  Q1′ • X′ • Y  Q1′ • X • Y′ 
DO NOT COPYQ2  X′  Y Q1′  X  Y Figure 7-57
D1  X D2 X Excitation maps for  D1
X Y X Y
and  D2  inputs in
Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10 Q1 Q2 00  01  11 10 1s-counting machine.
00 0 0 1  0 00 0  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY
01 0  1 1 1 01 1  1  0  1
Q2 Q2
11 1 1 0 1 11 1  0  0  0
Q1 Q1
10 1 0 0 0 10 0  0  1  0
DO NOT COPY
Y Y
Q1 • X′ • Y′ Q2 • X′ • Y′  Q2 • X′ • Y′ Q2′ • X • Y
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

484  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
The second example is a “combination lock” state machine that activates
an “unlock” output when a certain binary input sequence is received:
DO NOT COPYDesign a clocked synchronous state machine with one input,  X, and two
outputs,  UNLK  and  HINT. The  UNLK  output should be 1 if and only if  X  is
0 and the sequence of inputs received on  X  at the preceding seven clock
ticks was 0110111. The  HINT  output should be 1 if and only if the current
value of  X  is the correct one to move the machine closer to being in the
DO NOT COPY“unlocked” state (with  UNLK  =  1).
It should be apparent from word description that this is a Mealy machine. The
UNLK  output depends on both the past history of inputs and  X’s current value,
and  HINT  depends on both the state and the current  X  (indeed, if the current  X
DO NOT COPYproduces  HINT  =  0, then the clued-in user will want to change X  before the clock
tick).
A  state  and  output  table  for  the  combination  lock  is  presented  in
Table 7-14. In the initial state,  A, we assume that we have received no inputs in
the required sequence; we’re looking for the first 0 in the sequence. Therefore, as
DO NOT COPYlong as we get 1 inputs, we stay in state  A, and we move to state  B  when we
receive a 0. In state  B, we’re looking for a 1. If we get it, we move on to  C; if we
don’t, we can stay in  B, since the 0 we just received might still turn out to be the
first 0 in the required sequence. In each successive state, we move on to the next
state if we get the correct input, and we go back to  A  or  B  if we get the wrong
DO NOT COPY
one. An exception occurs in state  G; if we get the wrong input (a 0) there, the
previous three inputs might still turn out to be the first three inputs of the
required sequence, so we go back to state  E  instead of  B. In state  H, we’ve
received the required sequence, so we set  UNLK  to 1 if  X  is 0. In each state, we
set  HINT  to 1 for the value of  X  that moves us closer to state  H.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 7 - 1 4
X
State and output table
for combination-lock Meaning  S  0  1
machine.
DO NOT COPYGot zip  A  B, 01  A, 00
Got 0  B  B, 00  C, 01
Got 01  C  B, 00  D, 01
Got 011  D  E, 01  A, 00
Got 0110  E  B, 00  F, 01
DO NOT COPY
Got 01101  F  B, 00  G, 01
Got 011011  G  E, 00  H, 01
Got 0110111  H  B, 11  A, 00
S∗,  UNLK HINT
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.4  Clocked Synchronous State-Machine Design  485
Ta b l e 7 - 1 5
X 
Transition/excitation
Q1 Q2 Q3  0 1 table for combination-
DO NOT COPYlock machine.
000  001, 01  000, 00
001  001, 00  010, 01
010  001, 00  011, 01
011  100, 01  000, 00
DO NOT COPY
100  001, 00  101, 01
101  001, 00  110, 01
110  100, 00  111, 01
111  001, 11  000, 00
DO NOT COPY
Q1∗ Q2∗ Q3∗,  UNLK HINT
The combination lock’s eight states can be coded with three state variables,
leaving no unused states. There are 8! state assignments to choose from. To keep
things simple, we’ll use the simplest, and assign the states in binary countingDO NOT COPY
order, yielding the transition/excitation table in Table 7-15. Corresponding
Karnaugh maps for  D1,  D2, and  D3  are shown in Figure 7-58. The excitation
equations can be read from the maps:
D1  =  Q1  ⋅  Q2′  ⋅  X  +  Q1′  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  X′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  Q3′
DO NOT COPY
D2  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  X  +  Q2  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  X
D3  =  Q1  ⋅  Q2′  ⋅  Q3′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  X′  +  Q2′  ⋅  X′  +  Q3′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  X′  +  Q2  ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  X
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-58  Excitation maps for  D1 ,  D2 , and  D3  in combination-lock machine.
Q1 • Q2′ • X  Q2′ • Q3 • X  Q1 • Q2 • Q3′ Q2 • Q3 • X′
D1  X D2 X D3 X
X Q1  X Q1  X Q1
DO NOT COPY
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10
00 0 0 1  0 00 0  0  0  0 •  00 1 1  1 0
Q2′  X′
01 0  0 1 0 01 0  0  1  1 01 1  1  0  0
Q3 Q3 Q3
11 1 0 0 0 11 0  0  0  0 11 0  1 0  0
DO NOT COPY
Q2 Q2 Q2
10 0 1 1 0 10 0  0  1  1 10 1  0  1  1
Q1 Q1 Q1
Q1′ • Q2 • Q3 • X′ Q1 • Q2 • Q3′ Q2 • Q3′ • X  Q3′ • Q1′ • X Q2 • Q3′ • X
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

486  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Q1′ • Q2′ • Q3′ • X′ Q1 • Q2′ • X′  Q2′ • Q3 • X′
UNLK  X HINT X
X Q1 X Q1
DO NOT COPY
Q2 Q3 00  01  11  10 Q2 Q3 00  01  11 10
00 0 0 0  0 00 1  0  1  0
01 0  0 0 0 01 0  0  1  1
Q3 Q3
Figure 7-59 11 0 1 0 0 11 1  1  0  0
DO NOT COPY
Karnaugh maps for Q2 Q2
10 0 0 0 0 10 0  0  1  1
output functions
UNLK  and  HINT  in
combination-lock Q1 Q1
machine.
Q1 • Q2 • Q3 • X′ Q2 • Q3 • X′ Q2 • Q3′ • X
DO NOT COPY
The output values are transferred from the transition/excitation and output table
to another set of maps in Figure 7-59. The corresponding output equations are:
UNLK  =  Q1  ⋅  Q2  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  X′
DO NOT COPY
HINT  =  Q1′  ⋅  Q2′ ⋅  Q3′  ⋅  X′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q2′  ⋅  X  +  Q2′  ⋅  Q3  ⋅  X +  Q2 ⋅  Q3 ⋅  X′  +  Q2  ⋅ Q3′  ⋅  X
Note that some product terms are  repeated in the  excitation and output
equations, yielding a slight savings in the cost of the  AND-OR  realization. If we
went through the trouble of performing a formal multiple-output minimization
DO NOT COPY
of all five excitation and output functions, we could save two more gates (see
Exercise 7.52).
7.5 Designing State Machines Using State Diagrams
DO NOT COPY
Aside from planning the overall architecture of a digital system, designing state
machines is probably the most creative task of a digital designer. Most people
like to take a graphical approach to design—you’ve probably solved many
problems just by doodling. For that reason, state diagrams are often used to
DO NOT COPYdesign small- to medium-sized state machines. In this section, we’ll give exam-
ples of state-diagram design, and describe a simple procedure for synthesizing
circuits from the state diagrams. This procedure is the basis of the method used
by CAD tools that can synthesize logic from graphical or even text-based “state
diagrams.”
DO NOT COPY
Designing a state diagram is much like designing a state table, which, as
we showed in Section 7.4.1, is much like writing a program. However, there is
one fundamental difference between a state diagram and a state table, a differ-
ence that makes state-diagram design simpler but also more error prone:
DO NOT COPY•  A state table is an exhaustive listing of the next states for each state/input
combination. No ambiguity is possible.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.5  Designing State Machines Using State Diagrams  487
•  A state diagram contains a set of arcs labeled with transition expressions.
Even when there are many inputs, only one transition expression is
required per arc. However, when a state diagram is constructed, there is no
DO NOT COPY
guarantee that the transition expressions written on the arcs leaving a par-
ticular state cover all the input combinations exactly once.
In an improperly constructed (ambiguous) state diagram, the next state for some ambiguous state
input combinations may be unspecified, which is generally undesirable, while diagram
multiple next states may be specified for others, which is just plain wrong. Thus,DO NOT COPY
considerable care must be taken in the design of state diagrams; we’ll give
several examples.
Our first example is a state machine that controls the tail lights of a 1965
Ford Thunderbird, shown in Figure 7-60. There are three lights on each side, and
DO NOT COPY
for turns they operate in sequence to show the turning direction, as illustrated in
Figure 7-61. The state machine has two input signals,  LEFT  and  RIGHT, that
indicate the driver’s request for a left turn or a right turn. It also has an emergen-
cy-flasher input,  HAZ, that requests the tail lights to be operated in hazard
mode—all six lights flashing on and off in unison. We also assume the existence
DO NOT COPY
of a free-running clock signal whose frequency equals the desired flashing rate
for the lights.
Figure 7-60
DO NOT COPYT-bird tail lights.
DO NOT COPY
CALIFORNIA
DO NOT COPY
ZOTTFFS
DO NOT COPYLC  LB  LA RA  RB  RC
WHOSE REAR Actually, Figure 7-60 looks more like the rear end of a Mercury Capri, which also
END? had sequential tail lights.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

488  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
(a)  LC LB  LA  (b)  RA RB  RC
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-61
Flashing sequence for
T-bird tail lights:
(a) left turn; (b) right turn.DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
L2
Figure 7-62
Initial state diagram
and output table for 1  1
DO NOT COPY
T-bird tail lights.
L3 L1
DO NOT COPY1 LEFT
(LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)′ 1
HAZ
IDLE LR3
DO NOT COPY
Output Table
State LC LB LA RA RB RC 1 RIGHT
IDLE 0 0 0 0 0 0
L1 0 0 1 0 0 0 R3 R1
DO NOT COPY
L2 0 1 1 0 0 0
L3 1 1 1 0 0 0
R1 0 0 0 1 0 0
1  1
R2 0 0 0 1 1 0
R3 0 0 0 1 1 1
DO NOT COPYLR3 1 1 1 1 1 1 R2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.5  Designing State Machines Using State Diagrams  489
Given the foregoing requirements, we can design a clocked synchronous
state machine to control the T-bird tail lights. We will design a Moore machine,
so that the state alone determines which lights are on and which are off. For a left
DO NOT COPY
turn, the machine should cycle through four states, in which the right-hand lights
are off and 0, 1, 2, or 3 of the left-hand lights are on. Likewise, for a right turn, it
should cycle through four states in which the left-hand lights are off and 0, 1, 2,
or 3 of the right-hand lights are on. In hazard mode, only two states are
required—all lights on and all lights off.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-62 shows our first cut at a state diagram for the machine. A com-
mon  IDLE  state is defined in which all of the lights are off. When a left turn is
requested, the machine goes through three states in which 1, 2, and 3 of the left-
hand lights are on, and then back to  IDLE; right turns work similarly. In the haz-
ard mode, the machine cycles back and forth between theDO NOT COPY  IDLE  state and a state
in which all six lights are on. Since there are so many outputs, we’ve included a
separate output table rather than writing output values on the state diagram.
Even without assigning coded states to the named states, we can write output
equations from the output table, if we let each state name represent a logic
expression that is 1 only in that state:DO NOT COPY
LA  =  L1  +  L2  +  L3  +  LR3  RA  =  R1  +  R2  +  R3  +  LR3
LB  =  L2  +  L3  +  LR3  RB  =  R2  +  R3  +  LR3
LC  =  L3  +  LR3  RC  =  R3  +  LR3
DO NOT COPY
There’s one big problem with the state diagram of Figure 7-62—it doesn’t
properly handle multiple inputs asserted simultaneously. For example, what
happens in the  IDLE  state if both  LEFT  and  HAZ  are asserted? According to the
state diagram, the machine goes to two states,  L1  and  LR3, which is impossible.
In reality, the machine would have only one next state, which could beDO NOT COPY  L1,  LR3,
or a totally unrelated (and possibly unused) third state, depending on details of
the state machine’s realization (e.g., see Exercise 7.54).
The problem is fixed in Figure 7-63, where we have given the  HAZ  input
priority. Also, we treat  LEFT  and  RIGHT  asserted simultaneously as a hazard
request, since the driver is clearly confused and needs help.DO NOT COPY
The new state diagram is unambiguous because the transition expressions
on the arcs leaving each state are mutually exclusive and all-inclusive. That is,
for each state, no two expressions are 1 for the same input combination, and
some expression is 1 for every input combination. This can be confirmed alge-
DO NOT COPY
braically for this or any other state diagram by performing two steps:
1.  Mutual exclusion. For each state, show that the logical product of each pos- mutual exclusion
sible pair of transition expressions on arcs leaving that state is 0. If there
are  n  arcs, then there are  n(n  −  1) / 2 logical products to evaluate.
DO NOT COPYall inclusion
2.  All inclusion.  For each state, show that the logical sum of the transition
expressions on all arcs leaving that state is 1.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

490  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
L2
DO NOT COPY
1  1
L3 L1
DO NOT COPY
LEFT • HAZ • RIGHT′
1
1
(LEFT + RIGHT +HAZ)′
HAZ + LEFT • RIGHT
DO NOT COPYIDLE LR3
1
RIGHT • HAZ′ • LEFT′
DO NOT COPY
R3 R1
1  1
Figure 7-63DO NOT COPY
Corrected state
diagram for T-bird R2
tail lights.
If there are many transitions leaving each state, these steps, especially the first
DO NOT COPY
one, are very difficult to perform. However, typical state machines, even ones
with lots of states and inputs, don’t have many transitions leaving each state,
since most designers can’t dream up such complex machines in the first place.
This is where the trade-off between state-table and state-diagram design occurs.
DO NOT COPYIn state-table design, the foregoing steps are not required, because the structure
of a state table guarantees mutual exclusion and all inclusion. But if there are a
lot of inputs, the state table has  lots  of columns.
Verifying that a state diagram is unambiguous may be difficult in principle,
but it’s not too bad in practice for small state diagrams. In Figure 7-63, most of
DO NOT COPYthe states have a single arc with a transition expression of 1, so verification is
trivial. Real work is needed only to verify the  IDLE  state, which has four transi-
tions leaving it. This can be done on a sheet of scratch paper by listing the eight
combinations of the three inputs, and checking off the combinations covered by
each transition expression. Each combination should have exactly one check. As
DO NOT COPY
another example, consider the state diagrams in Figures 7-44 and 7-46 on pages
462 and 464; both can be verified mentally.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.5  Designing State Machines Using State Diagrams  491
L2
DO NOT COPY
HAZ′  HAZ′  HAZ
L3 L1
DO NOT COPY
LEFT • HAZ′ • RIGHT′
1 HAZ
1
(LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)′
HAZ + LEFT • RIGHT
DO NOT COPYIDLE LR3
1 HAZ
RIGHT • HAZ′ • LEFT′
DO NOT COPY
R3 R1
HAZ′  HAZ′  HAZ
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-64
Enhanced state
R2 diagram for T-bird
tail lights.
Returning to the T-bird tail lights machine, we can now synthesize a circuit
DO NOT COPY
from the state diagram if we wish. However, if we want to change the machine’s
behavior, now is the time to do it, before we do all the work of synthesizing a
circuit. In particular, notice that once a left- or right-turn cycle has begun, the
state diagram in Figure 7-63 allows the cycle to run to completion, even if  HAZ
is asserted. While this may have a certain aesthetic appeal, it would be safer forDO NOT COPY
the car’s occupants to have the machine go into hazard mode as soon as possible.
The state diagram is modified to provide this behavior in Figure 7-64.
Now we’re finally ready to synthesize a circuit for the T-bird machine. The
state diagram has eight states, so we’ll need a minimum of three flip-flops to
code the states. Obviously, there are many state assignments possible (8! to beDO NOT COPY
exact); we’ll use the one in Table 7-16 for the following reasons:
1.  An initial (idle) state of 000 is compatible with most flip-flops and regis-
ters, which are easily initialized to the 0 state.
2.DO NOT COPY  Two state variables,  Q1 and  Q0, are used to “count” in Gray-code sequence
for the left-turn cycle (IDLE→L1→L2→L3→IDLE). This minimizes the
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

492  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 1 6
State  Q2  Q1  Q0
State assignment
for T-bird tail lights IDLE  0  0  0
DO NOT COPYstate machine. L1 
0  0  1
L2  0  1  1
L3  0  1  0
R1  1  0  1
DO NOT COPYR2  1  1  1
R3  1  1  0
LR3  1  0  0
DO NOT COPYnumber of state-variable changes per state transition, which can often
simplify the excitation logic.
3.  Because of the symmetry in the state diagram, the same sequence on  Q1
and  Q0  is used to “count” during a right-turn cycle, while  Q2  is used to
distinguish between left and right.
DO NOT COPY
4.  The remaining state-variable combination is used for the  LR3  state.
The next step is to write a sort of transition table. However, we must use a
format different from the transition tables of Section 7.4.4, because the transi-
tions in a state diagram are specified by expressions rather than by an exhaustive
transition listDO NOT COPYtabulation of next states. We’ll call the new format a  transition list  because it has
one row for each transition or arc in the state diagram.
Table 7-17 is the transition list for the state diagram of Figure 7-64 and the
state assignment of Table 7-16. Each row contains the current state, next state,
and transition expression for one arc in the state diagram. Both the named and
DO NOT COPY
coded versions of the current state and next state are shown. The named states
are useful for reference purposes, while the coded states are used to develop
transition equations.
Once we have a transition list, the rest of the synthesis steps are pretty
much “turning the crank.” Synthesis procedures are described in Section 7.6.
DO NOT COPY
Although these procedures can be applied manually, they are usually embedded
in a CAD software package; thus, Section 7.6 can help you understand what’s
going on (or going wrong) in your favorite CAD package.
We also encountered one “turn-the-crank” step in this section—finding the
DO NOT COPYambiguities in state diagrams. Even though the procedure we discussed can be
easily automated, few if any CAD programs perform this step in this way. For
example, one “state diagram entry” tool silently removes duplicated transitions
and goes to the state coded “00...00” for missing transitions, without warning the
user. Thus, in most design environments, the designer is responsible for writing
DO NOT COPYa state-machine description that is unambiguous. The state-machine description
languages at the end of this chapter provide a good way to do this.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.6  State-Machine Synthesis Using Transition Lists  493
Ta b l e 7 - 1 7
S  Q2  Q1  Q0  Transition expression  S∗∗  Q2∗∗  Q1∗∗  Q0∗∗ 
Transition list for
IDLE  0  0  0  (LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)′  IDLE  0  0  0 T-bird tail lights
DO NOT COPYstate machine.
IDLE  0  0  0  LEFT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  RIGHT′  L1  0  0  1
IDLE  0  0  0  HAZ  +  LEFT  ⋅  RIGHT  LR3  1  0  0
IDLE  0  0  0  RIGHT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  LEFT′  R1  1  0  1
DO NOT COPY
L1  0  0  1  HAZ′  L2  0  1  1
L1  0  0  1  HAZ  LR3  1  0  0
L2  0  1  1  HAZ′  L3  0  1  0
L2DO NOT COPY  0  1  1  HAZ  LR3  1  0  0
L3  0  1  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
R1  1  0  1  HAZ′  R2  1  1  1
R1  1  0  1  HAZ  LR3  1  0  0
DO NOT COPY
R2  1  1  1  HAZ′  R3  1  1  0
R2  1  1  1  HAZ  LR3  1  0  0
R3  1  1  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
LR3  1  0  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
*7.6 State-Machine Synthesis Using Transition Lists
Once a machine’s state diagram has been designed and a state assignment hasDO NOT COPY
been made, the creative part of the design process is pretty much over. The rest
of the synthesis procedure can be carried out by CAD programs.
As we showed in the preceding section, a transition list can be constructed
from a machine’s state diagram and state assignment. This section shows how to
synthesize a state machine from its transition list. It also delves into some of theDO NOT COPY
options and nuances of state-machine design using transition lists. Although this
material is useful for synthesizing machines by hand, its main purpose is to help
you understand the internal operation and the external quirks of CAD programs
and languages that deal with state machines.
DO NOT COPY
*7.6.1 Transition Equations
The first step in synthesizing a state machine from a transition list is to develop
a set of transition equations that define each next-state variable  V∗  in terms of
the current state and input. The transition list can be viewed as a sort of hybrid
DO NOT COPY
* This section and all of its subsections are optional.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

494  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
truth table in which the state-variable combinations for current-state are listed
explicitly and input combinations are listed algebraically. Reading down a  V∗
column in a transition list, we find a sequence of 0s and 1s, indicating the value
DO NOT COPY
of  V∗  for various (if we’ve done it right, all) state/input combinations.
A transition equation for a next-state variable  V∗  can be written using a sort
of hybrid canonical sum:
V∗  =  ∑  (transition p-term)
transition-list rows where V∗ =  1
DO NOT COPY
That is, the transition equation has one “transition p-term” for each row of the
transition p-term transition list that contains a 1 in the  V∗  column. A row’s  transition p-term  is the
product of the current state’s minterm and the transition expression.
Based on the transition list in Table 7-17, the transition equation for Q2∗  in
DO NOT COPY
the T-bird machine can be written as the sum of eight p-terms:
Q2∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (HAZ  +  LEFT  ⋅  RIGHT)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (RIGHT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  LEFT′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ)
DO NOT COPY+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ)
DO NOT COPY
Some straightforward algebraic manipulations lead to a simplified transition
equation that combines the first two, second two, and last four p-terms above:
Q2∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (HAZ  +  RIGHT)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2  ⋅  Q0
Transition equations for  Q1∗  and  Q0∗  may be obtained in a similar manner:
Q1∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
=  Q0  ⋅  HAZ′
Q0∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (LEFT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  RIGHT′)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (RIGHT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  LEFT′)
+  Q2’  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
=  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  (LEFT⊕RIGHT)  +  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  HAZ′
DO NOT COPY
Except for  Q1∗, there’s no guarantee that the transition equations above are
in any sense minimal—in fact, the expressions for  Q2∗  and  Q0∗  aren’t even in
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.6  State-Machine Synthesis Using Transition Lists  495
standard sum-of-products or product-of-sums form. The simplified equations, or
the original unsimplified ones, merely provide an unambiguous starting point
for whatever combinational design method you might choose to synthesize the
DO NOT COPY
excitation logic for the state machine—ad hoc,  NAND-NAND, MSI-based, or
whatever. In a PLD-based design, you could simply plug the equations into an
ABEL program and let the compiler calculate the minimal sum-of-products
expressions for the PLD’s  AND-OR  array.
DO NOT COPY
*7.6.2 Excitation Equations
While we’re on the subject of excitation logic, note that so far we have derived
only  transition equations, not  excitation equations. However, if we use  D  flip-
flops as the memory elements in our state machines, then the excitation equa-
tions are trivial to derive from the transition equations, since the characteristicDO NOT COPY
equation of a  D  flip-flop is  Q∗  =  D. Therefore, if the transition equation for a
state variable  Qi∗  is
Qi∗  =  expression
then the excitation equation for the corresponding  D  flip-flop input is
DO NOT COPY
Di  =  expression
Efficient excitation equations for other flip-flop types, especially  J-K, are not so
easy to derive (see Exercise 7.59). For that reason, the vast majority of discrete,
PLD-based, and ASIC-based state-machine designs employ  D  flip-flops.
DO NOT COPY
*7.6.3 Variations on the Scheme
There are other ways to obtain transition and excitation equations from a transi-
tion list. If the column for a particular next-state variable contains fewer 0s than
1s, it may be advantageous to write that variable’s transition equation in terms
DO NOT COPY
of the 0s in its column. That is, we write
V∗′  =  ∑  (transition p-term)
transition-list rows where V∗ = 0
That is,  V∗′  is 1 for all of the p-terms for which  V∗  is 0. Thus, a transition
DO NOT COPY
equation for  Q2∗′  may be written as the sum of seven p-terms:
Q2∗’  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  ((LEFT+  RIGHT+  HAZ)′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (LEFT  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  RIGHT′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (HAZ′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (1)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (1)
DO NOT COPY+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (1)
=  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  HAZ′  ⋅  RIGHT′  +  Q2′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  HAZ′  +  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  +  Q2  ⋅  Q0′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

496  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
To obtain an equation for  Q2∗, we simply complement both sides of the reduced
equation.
To obtain an expression for a next-state variable  V∗  directly using the 0s in
DO NOT COPY
the transition list, we can complement the right-hand side of the general  V∗′
equation using DeMorgan’s theorem, obtaining a sort of hybrid canonical
product:
V∗  =  ∏  (transition s-term)
transition-list rows where V∗ = 0
DO NOT COPY
transition s-term Here, a row’s  transition s-term  is the sum of the maxterm for the current state
and the complement of the transition expression. If the transition expression is a
simple product term, then its complement is a sum, and the transition equation
expresses  V∗  in product-of-sums form.
DO NOT COPY
*7.6.4 Realizing the State Machine
Once you have the excitation equations for a state machine, all you’re left with
is a multiple-output combinational logic design problem. Of course, there are
DO NOT COPY
many ways to realize combinational logic from equations, but the easiest way is
just to type them into an ABEL or VHDL program and use the compiler to
synthesize a PLD, FPGA, or ASIC realization.
Combinational PLDs such as the PAL16L8 and GAL16V8 that we studied
in Section 5.3 can be used to realize excitation equations up to a certain number
DO NOT COPY
of inputs, outputs, and product terms. Better yet, in Section 8.3 we’ll introduce
sequential PLDs that include  D  flip-flops on the same chip with the combina-
tional  AND-OR  array. For a given number of PLD input and output pins, these
sequential PLDs can realize larger state machines than their combinational
DO NOT COPYcounterparts, because the excitation signals never have to go off the chip. In
\secref{PLDtranlist}, we’ll show how to realize the T-bird tail-lights excitation
equations in a sequential PLD.
DO NOT COPY
*7.7 Another State-Machine Design Example
This section gives one more example of state-machine design using a state
diagram. The example provides a basis for further discussion of a few topics:
unused states, output-coded state assignments, and “don’t-care” state codings.
DO NOT COPY
*7.7.1 The Guessing Game
Our final state-machine example is a “guessing game” that can be built as an
amusing lab project:
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.7  Another State-Machine Design Example  497
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with four inputs,  G1–G4, that
are connected to pushbuttons. The machine has four outputs,  L1–L4,
connected to lamps or LEDs located near the like-numbered pushbuttons.
DO NOT COPY
There is also an  ERR  output connected to a red lamp. In normal operation,
the  L1–L4  outputs display a 1-out-of-4 pattern. At each clock tick, the
pattern is rotated by one position; the clock frequency is about 4 Hz.
Guesses are made by pressing a pushbutton, which asserts an input  Gi.
DO NOT COPYWhen any  Gi  input is asserted, the  ERR  output is asserted if the “wrong”
pushbutton was pressed, that is, if the  Gi  input detected at the clock tick
does not have the same number as the lamp output that was asserted before
the clock tick. Once a guess has been made, play stops and the  ERR  output
maintains the same value for one or more clock ticks until the  Gi  input is
DO NOT COPY
negated, then play resumes.
Clearly, we will have to provide four states, one for each position of the
rotating pattern, and we’ll need at least one state to indicate that play has
stopped. A possible state diagram is shown in Figure 7-65. The machine cycles
through statesDO NOT COPY  S1–S4  as long as no  Gi  input is asserted, and it goes to the  STOP
state when a guess is made. Each  Li  output is asserted in the like-numbered state.
•  •  • 
DO NOT COPYG1′  G2′  G3′  G4′  Figure 7-65
First try at a state
diagram for the
S1 G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
guessing game.
L1 = 1
•  •  • 
DO NOT COPYG1′  G2′  G3′  G4′
S2 G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
L2 = 1
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ STOP
DO NOT COPY
S3 G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
L3 = 1
•  •  •  G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
G1′  G2′  G3′  G4′
DO NOT COPYS4
G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
L4 = 1
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

498  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
The only problem with this state diagram is that it doesn’t “remember” in
the  STOP  state whether the guess was correct, so it has no way to control the
ERR  output. This problem is fixed in Figure 7-66, which has two “stopped”
DO NOT COPY
states,  SOK  and  SERR. On an incorrect guess, the machine goes to  SERR,
where  ERR  is asserted; otherwise, it goes to  SOK. Although the machine’s word
description doesn’t require it, the state diagram is designed to go to  SERR  even
if the user tries to fool it by pressing two or more pushbuttons simultaneously, or
by changing guesses while stopped.
DO NOT COPY
A transition list corresponding to the state diagram is shown in Table 7-18,
using a simple 3-bit binary state encoding with Gray-code order for the  S1–S4
cycle. Transition equations for  Q1∗  and  Q0∗  can be obtained from the table as
follows:
Q1∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
=  Q2′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′
Q0∗  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G2  +  G3  +  G4)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1  +  G3  +  G4)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G4)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4)
Using a logic minimization program, the  Q0∗  expression can be reduced to 11
product terms in two-level sum-of-products form. An expression for  Q2∗  is best
formulated in terms of the 0s in the  Q2∗  column of the transition list:
DO NOT COPY
Q2∗′  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
DO NOT COPY
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
=  (Q2′  +  Q1′)  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
The last five columns of Table 7-18 show output values. Thus, output equa-
DO NOT COPY
tions can be developed in much the same way as transition equations. However,
since this example is a Moore machine, outputs are independent of the transition
expressions; only one row of the transition list must be considered for each
current state. The output equations are
DO NOT COPYL1  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0′  L3  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0  ERR  =  Q2  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0
L2  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1′  ⋅  Q0  L4  =  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.7  Another State-Machine Design Example  499
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
Figure 7-66
Correct state diagram
DO NOT COPYG1 • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ S1 G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ for the guessing game.
L1 = 1
G2 + G3 + G4
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
G1′ • G2 • G3′ • G4′ S2 G1 + G3 + G4
DO NOT COPY
L2 = 1
•  •  •  SERR
SOK G1′  G2′  G3′  G4′
ERR=1
G1′ • G2′ • G3 • G4′ S3 G1 + G2 + G4
L3 = 1
DO NOT COPY
G1 + G2 +
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
G3 + G4
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4 S4 G1 + G2 + G3
L4 = 1
DO NOT COPY
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
Ta b l e 7 - 1 8  Transition list for guessing-game machine.
DO NOT COPYCurrent State Next State Output
S  Q2  Q1  Q0  Transition Expression  S∗∗  Q2∗∗  Q1∗∗  Q0∗∗  L1  L2  L3  L4  ERR
S1  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S2  0  0  1  1  0  0  0  0
S1  0  0  0  G1  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  1  0  0  1  0  0  0  0
S1DO NOT COPY  0  0  0  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  1  0  1  1  0  0  0  0
S2  0  0  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S3  0  1  1  0  1  0  0  0
S2  0  0  1  G1′  ⋅  G2  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  0
S2  0  0  1  G1  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  1  0  1  0  1  0  0  0
S3DO NOT COPY  0  1  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S4  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  0
S3  0  1  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3  ⋅  G4′  SOK  1  0  0  0  0  1  0  0
S3  0  1  1  G1  +  G2  +  G4  SERR  1  0  1  0  0  1  0  0
S4  0  1  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  0  0  0  0  0  0  1  0
S4  0  1  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4  SOK  1  0  0  0  0  0  1  0
DO NOT COPY
S4  0  1  0  G1  +  G2  +  G3  SERR  1  0  1  0  0  0  1  0
SOK  1  0  0  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SOK  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0
SOK  1  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0
SERR  1  0  1  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  1  0  1  0  0  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY
SERR  1  0  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

500  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
*7.7.2 Unused States
Our state diagram for the guessing game has six states, but the actual state
machine, built from three flip-flops, has eight. By omitting the unused states
DO NOT COPY
from the transition list, we treated them as “don’t-cares” in a very limited sense:
•  When we wrote equations for  Q1∗  and  Q0∗, we formed a sum of transition
p-terms for state/input combinations that had an explicit 1 in the corre-
sponding columns of the transition list. Although we didn’t consider the
DO NOT COPYunused states, our procedure implicitly treated them as if they had 0s in the
Q1∗  and  Q0∗  columns.
•  Conversely, we wrote the  Q2∗′  equation as a sum of transition p-terms for
state/input combinations that had an explicit 0 in the corresponding col-
umns of the transition list. Unused states were implicitly treated as if they
DO NOT COPY
had 1s in the  Q2∗  column.
As a consequence of these choices, all of the unused states in the guessing-game
machine have a coded next state of 100 for all input combinations. That’s safe,
acceptable behavior should the machine stray into an unused state, since 100 is
DO NOT COPY
the coding for one of the normal states (SOK).
To treat the unused states as true “don’t-cares,” we would have to allow
them to go to any next state under any input combination. This is simple in
principle but may be difficult in practice.
At the end of Section 7.4.4, we showed how to handle unused states as
DO NOT COPY
“don’t-cares” in the Karnaugh-map method for developing transition/excitation
equations. Unfortunately, for all but the smallest problems, Karnaugh maps are
unwieldy. Commercially available logic minimization programs can easily han-
dle larger problems, but many of them don’t handle “don’t-cares” or require the
DO NOT COPYdesigner to insert special code to handle them. In ABEL state machines, don’t-
care next states can be handled fairly easily using the  @DCSET  directive, as we
discuss in the box on page 534. In VHDL, the process is a bit unwieldy.
*7.7.3 Output-Coded State Assignment
DO NOT COPY
Let’s look at another realization of the guessing-game machine. The machine’s
outputs are a function of state only; furthermore, a  different  output combination
is produced in each named state. Therefore, we can use the outputs as state vari-
ables and assign each named state to the required output combination. This sort
output-coded state of  output-coded state assignment  can sometimes result in excitation equations
DO NOT COPY
assignment that are simpler than the set of excitation and output equations obtained with a
state assignment using a minimum number of state variables.
Table 7-19 is the guessing-game transition list that results from an output-
coded state assignment. Each transition/excitation equation has very few transi-
DO NOT COPYtion p-terms because the transition list has so few 1s in the next-state.columns:
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.7  Another State-Machine Design Example  501
Ta b l e 7 - 1 9
Transition list for guessing-game machine using outputs as state variables.
DO NOT COPYCurrent State Next State
S  L1  L2  L3  L4  ERR  Transition Expression  S∗  L1∗  L2∗  L3∗  L4∗  ERR∗
S1  1  0  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S2  0  1  0  0  0
S1  1  0  0  0  0  G1  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
S1  1  0  0  0  0  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
S2  0  1  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S3  0  0  1  0  0
S2  0  1  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S2  0  1  0  0  0  G1  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY
S3  0  0  1  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S4  0  0  0  1  0
S3  0  0  1  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S3  0  0  1  0  0  G1  +  G2  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
S4  0  0  0  1  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
S4  0  0  0  1  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S4  0  0  0  1  0  G1  +  G2  +  G3  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
SOK  0  0  0  0  0  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
SOK  0  0  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
SERR  0  0  0  0  1  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
SERR  0  0  0  0  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
L1∗  =  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
DO NOT COPY
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
L2∗  =  L1  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
L3∗  =  L1′  ⋅  L2  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
DO NOT COPY
L4∗  =  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′)
ERR∗  =  L1  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G2  +  G3  +  G4)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1  +  G3  +  G4)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G4)
DO NOT COPY
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4  ⋅  ERR′  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4)
There are no output equations, of course. The  ERR* equation above is the worst
in the group, requiring 16 terms to express in either minimal sum-of-products or
product-of-sums form.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

502  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
As a group, the equations developed above have just about the same
complexity as the transition and output equations that we developed from
Table 7-18. Even though the output-coded assignment does not produce a
DO NOT COPY
simpler set of equations in this example, it can still save cost in a PLD-based
design, since fewer PLD macrocells or outputs are needed overall.
*7.7.4 “Don’t-Care” State Codings
Out of the 32 possible coded states using five variables, only six are used in
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-19. The rest of the states are unused and have a next state of 00000 if
the machine is built using the equations in the preceding subsection. Another
possible disposition for unused states, one that we haven’t discussed before, is
obtained by careful use of “don’t-cares” in the assignment of coded states to
DO NOT COPYcurrent states.
Table 7-20  shows  one  such  state  assignment  for  the  guessing-game
machine, derived from the output-coded state assignment of the preceding
subsection.  In  this  example,  every  possible  combination  of  current-state
variables corresponds to one of the coded states (e.g., 10111  =  S1, 00101 =  S3).
DO NOT COPYHowever,  next states  are coded using the same unique combinations as in the
preceding subsection. Table 7-21 shows the resulting transition list.
In this approach, each unused current state behaves like a nearby “normal”
state; Figure 7-67 illustrates the concept. The machine is well-behaved and goes
to a “normal state” if it inadvertently enters an unused state. Yet the approach
DO NOT COPY
still allows some simplification of the excitation and output logic by introducing
Ta b l e 7 - 2 0
State  L1  L2  L3  L4  ERR
Current-state assignment
for the guessing-game S1  1  x  x  x  x
DO NOT COPYmachine using don’t-cares.
S2  0  1  x  x  x
S3  0  0  1  x  x
S4  0  0  0  1  x
SOK  0  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPYSERR  0  0  0  0  1
Current coded states  Next coded states
Figure 7-67
State assignment
using don’t-cares forDO NOT COPY
current states.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.7  Another State-Machine Design Example  503
Ta b l e 7 - 2 1
Transition list for guessing-game machine using don’t-care state codings.
DO NOT COPYCurrent State Next State
S  L1  L2  L3  L4  ERR  Transition Expression  S∗∗  L1∗∗  L2∗∗  L3∗∗  L4∗∗  ERR∗∗
S  1  x  x  x  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S2  0  1  0  0  0
S DO NOT COPY1  x  x  x  x  G1  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S  1  x  x  x  x  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
S2  0  1  x  x  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S3  0  0  1  0  0
S2  0  1  x  x  x  G1′  ⋅  G2  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
S2  0  1  x  x  x  G1  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
S3  0  0  1  x  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S4  0  0  0  1  0
S3  0  0  1  x  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3  ⋅  G4′  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S3DO NOT COPY  0  0  1  x  x  G1  +  G2  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
S4  0  0  0  1  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
S4  0  0  0  1  x  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
S4  0  0  0  1  x  G1  +  G2  +  G3  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY
SOK  0  0  0  0  0  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SOK  0  0  0  0  0
SOK  0  0  0  0  0  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
SERR  0  0  0  0  1  G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4  SERR  0  0  0  0  1
DO NOT COPY
SERR  0  0  0  0  1  G1′  ⋅  G2′  ⋅  G3′  ⋅  G4′  S1  1  0  0  0  0
don’t-cares in the transition list. When a row’s transition p-term is written,
current-state variables that are don’t-cares in that row are omitted, for example,
DO NOT COPY
ERR∗  =  L1  ⋅  (G2  +  G3  +  G4)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2  ⋅  (G1  +  G3  +  G4)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G4)
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3)
DO NOT COPY
+  L1′  ⋅  L2′  ⋅  L3′  ⋅  L4′  ⋅  ERR  ⋅  (G1  +  G2  +  G3  +  G4)
Compared with the  ERR∗  equation in the preceding subsection, the one above
still requires 16 terms to express as a sum of products. However, it requires only
five terms in minimal product-of-sums form, which makes its complement more
DO NOT COPY
suitable for realization in a PLD.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

504  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
*7.8 Decomposing State Machines
Just like large procedures or subroutines in a programming language, large state
DO NOT COPYmachines are difficult to conceptualize, design, and debug. Therefore, when
faced with a large state-machine problem, digital designers often look for oppor-
tunities to solve it with a collection of smaller state machines.
state-machine There’s a well-developed theory of  state-machine decomposition  that you
decomposition can use to analyze any given, monolithic state machine to determine whether it
DO NOT COPY
can be realized as a collection of smaller ones. However, decomposition theory
is not too useful for designers who want to avoid designing large state machines
in the first place. Rather, a practical designer tries to cast the original design
problem into a natural, hierarchical structure, so that the uses and functions of
submachines are obvious, making it unnecessary ever to write a state table for
DO NOT COPY
the equivalent monolithic machine.
The simplest and most commonly used type of decomposition is illustrated
main machine in Figure 7-68. A  main machine  provides the primary inputs and outputs and
submachines executes the top-level control algorithm.  Submachines  perform low-level steps
under the control of the main machine, and may optionally handle some of the
DO NOT COPY
primary inputs and outputs.
Perhaps the most commonly used submachine is a counter. The main
machine starts the counter when it wishes to stay in a particular main state for  n
clock ticks, and the counter asserts a  DONE  signal when  n  ticks have occurred.
DO NOT COPYThe main machine is designed to wait in the same state until  DONE  is asserted.
This adds an extra output and input to the main machine (START  and  DONE),
but it saves  n  −  1 states.
An example decomposed state machine designed along these lines is based
on the guessing game of Section 7.7. The original guessing game is easy to win
DO NOT COPY
after a minute of practice because the lamps cycle at a very consistent rate of
Figure 7-68
A typical, hierarchical Submachine 1
START1
state-machine
DO NOT COPYDONE1
structure.
Main
Inputs  Outputs
machine
START2
DONE2
Submachine 2
DO NOT COPY
A REALLY Note that the title of this section has nothing to do with the “buried flip-flops” found
DO NOT COPY
BAD JOKE in some PLDs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.8  Decomposing State Machines  505
CLOCK
guessing game
G1–G4  L1–L4
state machine
DO NOT COPYERR
ENABLE
Figure 7-69
DO NOT COPYLFSR Block diagram of
random-sequence
guessing game with
generator
random delay.
4 Hz. To make the game more challenging, we can double or triple the clock
speed, but allow the lamps to stay in each state for a random length of time. ThenDO NOT COPY
the user truly must guess whether a given lamp will stay on long enough for the
corresponding pushbutton to be pressed.
A block diagram for the enhanced guessing game is shown in Figure 7-69.
The main machine is basically the same as before, except that it only advances
DO NOT COPY
from one lamp state to the next if the enable input  EN is asserted, as shown by the
state diagram in Figure 7-70. The enable input is driven by the output of a
pseudo-random sequence generator, a linear feedback shift register (LFSR).
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-70
State diagram for
G1 • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ S1 G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
guessing machine
L1 = 1
G2 + G3 + G4 with enable.
DO NOT COPY
EN′ • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ EN • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
G1′ • G2 • G3′ • G4′ S2 G1 + G3 + G4
L2 = 1
SERR
DO NOT COPYSOK EN • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
ERR=1
EN′ • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
G1′ • G2′ • G3 • G4′ S3 G1 + G2 + G4
L3 = 1
G1 + G2 +
G1 + G2 + G3 + G4
G3 + G4
DO NOT COPYEN • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
EN′ • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′
G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4 S4 G1 + G2 + G3
L4 = 1
DO NOT COPY
EN • G1′ • G2′ • G3′ • G4′ •  •  •  • 
EN′  G1′  G2′  G3′  G4′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

506  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
A SHIFTY CIRCUIT  LFSR circuits are described in \secref{LFSRctrs}. In Figure 7-69, the low-order bit
of an  n-bit LFSR counter is used as the enable signal. Thus, the length of time that
DO NOT COPY
a particular lamp stays on depends on the counting sequence of the LFSR.
In the best case for the user, the LFSR contains 10…00; in this case the lamp
is on for  n − 1 clock ticks because it takes that long for the single 1 to shift into the
low-order bit position. In the worst case, the LFSR contains 11…11 and shifting
occurs for  n  consecutive clock ticks. At other times, shifting stops for a time deter-
DO NOT COPY
mined by the number of consecutive 0s starting with the low-order bit of the LFSR.
All of these cases are quite unpredictable unless the user has memorized the
n 
shifting cycle (2 − 1 states) or is very fast at Galois-field arithmetic. Obviously, a
large value of  n  (≥  16) provides the most fun.
DO NOT COPY
Another obvious candidate for decomposition is a state machine that per-
forms binary multiplication using the shift-and-add algorithm, or binary division
using the shift-and-subtract algorithm. To perform an  n-bit operation, these
DO NOT COPYalgorithms require an initialization step,  n  computation steps, and possible
cleanup steps. The main machine for such an algorithm contains states for
initialization, generic computation, and cleanup steps, and a modulo-n  counter
can be used as a submachine to control the number of generic computation steps
executed.
DO NOT COPY
*7.9 Feedback Sequential Circuits
The simple bistable and the various latches and flip-flops that we studied earlier
DO NOT COPY
in this chapter are all feedback sequential circuits. Each has one or more feed-
back loops that, ignoring their behavior during state transitions, store a 0 or a 1
at all times. The feedback loops are memory elements, and the circuits’ behavior
depends on both the current inputs and the values stored in the loops.
DO NOT COPY
*7.9.1 Analysis
fundamental-mode Feedback sequential circuits are the most common example of  fundamental-
circuit mode circuits. In such circuits, inputs are not normally allowed to change
simultaneously. The analysis procedure assumes that inputs change one at a
DO NOT COPYtime, allowing enough time between successive changes for the circuit to settle
into a stable internal state. This differs from clocked circuits, in which multiple
inputs can change at almost arbitrary times without affecting the state, and all
input values are sampled and state changes occur with respect to a clock signal.
DO NOT COPY
*This section and all of its subsections are optional.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.9  Feedback Sequential Circuits  507
KEEP YOUR Only rarely does a logic designer encounter a situation where a feedback sequential
FEEDBACK TO circuit must be analyzed or designed. The most commonly used feedback sequential
DO NOT COPY
YOURSELF circuits are the flip-flops and latches that are used as the building blocks in larger
sequential-circuit designs. Their internal design and operating specifications are sup-
plied by an IC manufacturer.
Even an ASIC designer typically does not design gate-level flip-flop or latch
circuits, since these elements are supplied in a “library” of commonly used functions
DO NOT COPY
in the particular ASIC technology. Still, you may be curious about how off-the-shelf
flip-flops and latches “do their thing”; this section will show you how to analyze such
circuits.
DO NOT COPY
Like clocked synchronous state machines, feedback sequential circuits
may be structured as Mealy or Moore circuits, as shown in Figures 7-71.
n 
A circuit with  n  feedback loops has  n  binary state variables and 2 states.
To analyze a feedback sequential circuit, we must break the feedback loops
in Figure 7-71 so that the next value stored in each loop can be predicted as aDO NOT COPY
function  of  the circuit  inputs  and the  current value  stored  in all  loops.
Figure 7-72 shows how to do this for the  NAND  circuit for a  D  latch, which has
only one feedback loop. We conceptually break the loop by inserting a fictional
buffer in the loop as shown. The output of the buffer, named  Y, is the single state
variable for this example.DO NOT COPY
Let us assume that the propagation delay of the fictional buffer is 10 ns (but
any nonzero number will do), and that all of the other circuit components have
zero delay. If we know the circuit’s current state (Y) and inputs (D  and  C), then
we can predict the value  Y  will have in 10 ns. The next value of  Y, denoted  Y∗, is
DO NOT COPY
a combinational function of the current state and inputs. Thus, reading the circuit
diagram, we can write an  excitation equation  for  Y∗: excitation equation
Y∗  = (C  ⋅  D)  +  (C  ⋅  D′  +  Y′)′
=  C  ⋅  D  +  C′  ⋅  Y  +  D  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPY
Mealy machine only 
Figure 7-71
Feedback sequential
circuit structure for
DO NOT COPY
Mealy and Moore
inputs Next-state current state Output
machines.
Logic Logic outputs
F G
feedback
loops
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

508  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
(C • D)′
D
C • D+(C • D′+Y′)′
C Q
Y∗
DO NOT COPYY
Figure 7-72
•  QN
Feedback analysis (C  D′)′  • 
D′ C  D′+Y′
of a  D  latch.
DO NOT COPY
Now the state of the feedback loop (and the circuit) can be written as a function
transition table of the current state and input, and enumerated by a  transition table  as shown in
Figure 7-73. Each cell in the transition table shows the fictional-buffer output
DO NOT COPY
value that will occur 10 ns (or whatever delay you’ve assumed) after the corre-
sponding state and input combination occurs.
C D
DO NOT COPYFigure 7-73
Y  00  01  11  10
Transition table for the
D  latch in Figure 7-72. 0  0  0  1  0
1  1  1  1  0
DO NOT COPY
Y*
A transition table has one row for each possible combination of the state
n 
variables, so a circuit with  n  feedback loops has 2 rows in its transition table.
The table has one column for each possible input combination, so a circuit with
DO NOT COPY
m 
m  inputs has 2 columns in its transition table.
By definition, a fundamental-mode circuit such as a feedback sequential
circuit does not have a clock to tell it when to sample its inputs. Instead, we can
imagine that the circuit is evaluating its current state and input  continuously  (or
DO NOT COPYevery 10 ns, if you prefer). As the result of each evaluation, it goes to a next state
predicted by the transition table. Most of the time, the next state is the same as
the current state; this is the essence of fundamental-mode operation. We make
some definitions below that will help us study this behavior in more detail.
DO NOT COPY
JUST ONE LOOP  The way the circuit in Figure 7-72 is drawn, it may look like there are two feedback
loops. However, once we make one break as shown, there are no more loops. That
is, each signal can be written as a combinational function of the other signals, not
DO NOT COPYincluding itself.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.9  Feedback Sequential Circuits  509
C D
S  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-74
S0  S0  S0  S1  S0
State table for the  D
S1  S1  S1  S1  S0 latch in Figure 7-72.
showing stable total
S* states.
DO NOT COPY
In a fundamental-mode circuit, a  total state  is a particular combination of total state
internal state  (the values stored in the feedback loops) and  input state  (the cur- internal state
rent value of the circuit inputs). A  stable total state  is a combination of internal input state
state and input state such that the next internal state predicted by the transitionDO NOT COPYstable total state
table is the same as the current internal state. If the next internal state is different,
then the combination is an  unstable total state. We have rewritten the transition unstable total state
table for the  D  latch in Figure 7-74 as a  state table, giving the names  S0  and  S1 state table
to the states and drawing a circle around the stable total states.
DO NOT COPYTo complete the analysis of the circuit, we must also determine how the
outputs behave as functions of the internal state and inputs. There are two
outputs, and hence two  output equations: output equation
Q  =  C  ⋅  D  +  C′  ⋅  Y  +  D  ⋅  Y
DO NOT COPYQN  =  C  ⋅  D′  +  Y′
Note that  Q  and  QN  are  outputs, not state variables. Even though the circuit has
two outputs, which can theoretically take on four combinations, it has only one
state variable  Y, and hence only two states.
The output values predicted by the  Q  and  QN  equations can be incorpor-
DO NOT COPY
ated in a combined state and output table that completely describes the operation
of the circuit, as shown in Figure 7-75. Although  Q  and  QN  are normally com-
plementary, it is possible for them to have the same value (1) momentarily,
during the transition from  S0  to  S1  under the  C D  = 11 column of the table.
DO NOT COPYWe can now predict the behavior of the circuit from the transition and
output table. First of all, notice that we have written the column labels in our
state tables in “Karnaugh map” order, so that only a single input bit changes
DO NOT COPYC D Figure 7-75
S  00  01  11  10 State and output table
for the  D  latch.
S0  S0  , 01 S0 , 01  S1 , 11 S0 , 01
S1  S1 , 10 S1 , 10 S1 , 10  S0, 01
DO NOT COPY
S*, Q QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

510  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
C D
S  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
S0  S0  , 01 S0 , 01  S1 , 11 S0 , 01
Figure 7-76 S1  S1 , 10 S1 , 10 S1 , 10  S0, 01
Analysis of the  D  latch
for a few transitions. S*, Q QN
DO NOT COPY
between adjacent columns of the table. This layout helps our analysis because
we assume that only one input changes at a time, and that the circuit always
reaches a stable total state before another input changes.
At any time, the circuit is in a particular internal state and a particular input
DO NOT COPY
is applied to it; we called this combination the total state of the circuit. Let us
start at the stable total state “S0/00” (S =  S0, C D  = 00), as shown in Figure 7-76.
Now suppose that we change  D  to 1. The total state moves to one cell to the right;
we have a new stable total state,  S0/01. The  D  input is different, but the internal
DO NOT COPYstate and output are the same as before. Next, let us change C  to 1. The total state
moves one cell to the right to  S0/11, which is unstable. The next-state entry in
this cell sends the circuit to internal state  S1, so the total state moves down one
cell, to  S1/11. Examining the next-state entry in the new cell, we find that we
have reached a stable total state. We can trace the behavior of the circuit for any
DO NOT COPYdesired sequence of single input changes in this way.
Now we can revisit the question of simultaneous input changes. Even
though “almost simultaneous” input changes may occur in practice, we must
assume that nothing happens simultaneously in order to analyze the behavior of
sequential circuits. The impossibility of simultaneous events is supported by the
DO NOT COPY
varying delays of circuit components themselves, which depend on voltage,
temperature, and fabrication parameters. What this tells us is that a set of  n
inputs that appear to us to change “simultaneously” may actually change in any
of  n! different orders from the point of view of the circuit operation.
For example, consider the operation of the D  latch as shown in Figure 7-77.
DO NOT COPY
Let us assume that it starts in stable total state  S1/11. Now suppose that  C  and  D
Figure 7-77 C D
Multiple input changes
S  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
with the D latch.
S0  S0  , 01 S0 , 01  S1 , 11 S0 , 01
S1  S1 , 10 S1 , 10 S1 , 10  S0, 01
DO NOT COPYS*, Q QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.9  Feedback Sequential Circuits  511
are both “simultaneously” set to 0. In reality, the circuit behaves as if one or the
other input went to 0 first. Suppose that  C  changes first. Then the sequence of
two left-pointing arrows in the table tells us that the circuit goes to stable total
DO NOT COPY
state  S1/00. However, if  D  changes first, then the other sequence of arrows tells
us that the circuit goes to stable total state  S0/00. So the final state of the circuit
is unpredictable, a clue that the feedback loop may actually become metastable
if we set  C  and  D  to 0 simultaneously. The time span over which this view of
simultaneity is relevant is the setup- and hold-time window of the  D  latch.
DO NOT COPY
Simultaneous input changes don’t always cause unpredictable behavior.
However, we must analyze the effects of all possible orderings of signal changes
to determine this; if all orderings give the same result, then the circuit output is
predictable. For example, consider the behavior of the  D  latch starting in total
stateDO NOT COPY  S0/00 with C  and  D  simultaneously changing from 0 to 1; it always ends up
in total state  S1/11.
*7.9.2 Analyzing Circuits with Multiple Feedback Loops
In circuits with multiple feedback loops, we must break all of the loops, creating
one fictional buffer and state variable for each loop that we break. There areDO NOT COPY
many possible ways, which mathematicians call  cut sets, to break the loops in a cut set
given circuit, so how do we know which one is best? The answer is that any
minimal cut set—a cut set with a minimum number of cuts—is fine. Mathema- minimal cut set
ticians can give you an algorithm for finding a minimal cut set, but as a digital
DO NOT COPY
designer working on small circuits, you can just eyeball the circuit to find one.
Different cut sets for a circuit lead to different excitation equations, transi-
tion tables, and state/output tables. However, the stable total states derived from
one minimal cut set correspond one-to-one to the stable total states derived from
any other minimal cut set for the same circuit. That is, state/output tables derived
DO NOT COPY
from different minimal cut sets display the same input/output behavior, with
only the names and coding of the states changed.
If you use more than the minimal number of cuts to analyze a feedback
sequential circuit, the resulting state/output table will still describe the circuit
m 
correctly. However, it will use 2 times as many states as necessary, where  m  is
DO NOT COPY
the number of extra cuts. Formal state-minimization procedures can be used to
reduce this larger table to the proper size, but it’s a much better idea to select a
minimal cut set in the first place.
A good example of a sequential circuit with multiple feedback loops is the
commercial circuit design for a positive edge-triggered TTLDO NOT COPY  D  flip-flop that we
showed in Figure 7-20. The circuit is redrawn in simplified form in Figure 7-78,
assuming that the original circuit’s  PR_L  and  CLR_L  inputs are never asserted,
and also showing fictional buffers to break the three feedback loops. These three
loops give rise to eight states, compared with the minimum of four states used by
the two-loop design in Figure 7-19. We’ll address this curious difference later.DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

512  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Y2 • D + Y1 • CLK
Y1 Y1 • CLK + Y3 • (Y1 • CLK′ + Y2 • D)
DO NOT COPYY1∗
(Y1 • CLK)′
Q
DO NOT COPYY3 Y3∗
Y1 • CLK + CLK′ + Y2 • D
= Y1 + CLK′  + Y2 • D
QN
CLK
DO NOT COPY
Y2 Y2∗
Figure 7-78 (Y3 • (Y1 + CLK′ + Y2 • D))′
Simplified positive = Y3′ + Y1′ • Y2′ • CLK + Y1′ • CLK • D′
edge-triggered
D  flip-flop for analysis. D • 
(Y2  D)′
DO NOT COPY
The following excitation and output equations can be derived from the
logic diagram in Figure 7-78:
Y1∗  =  Y2  ⋅  D  +  Y1  ⋅  CLK
Y2∗  =  Y1  +  CLK′  +  Y2  ⋅  D
DO NOT COPY
Y3∗  =  Y1  ⋅  CLK  +  Y1  ⋅  Y3  +  Y3  ⋅  CLK′  +  Y2  ⋅  Y3  ⋅  D
Q  =  Y1  ⋅  CLK  +  Y1  ⋅  Y3  +  Y3  ⋅  CLK′  +  Y2  ⋅  Y3  ⋅  D
QN  =  Y3′  +  Y1′  ⋅  Y2’  ⋅  CLK  +  Y1′  ⋅  CLK  ⋅  D′
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-79 CLK D
Transition table Y1 Y2 Y3  00  01  11  10
for the  D  flip-flop
in Figure 7-78. 000  010  010  000  000
DO NOT COPY001  011  011  000  000
010  010  110  110  000
011  011  111  111  000
100  010  010  111  111
DO NOT COPY
101  011  011  111  111
110  010  110  111  111
111  011  111  111  111
DO NOT COPY
Y1*  Y2*  Y3*
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.9  Feedback Sequential Circuits  513
CLK D
Y1 Y2 Y3  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
000  010  010  000  000
001  011  011  000  000
010  010  110  110  000
Figure 7-80
DO NOT COPY
011  011  111  111  000 Portion of the  D  flip-flop
transition table showing
Y1*  Y2*  Y3* a noncritical race.
The corresponding transition table is shown in Figure 7-79, with the stable totalDO NOT COPY
states circled. Before going further, we must introduce the concept of “races.”
*7.9.3 Races
In a feedback sequential circuit, a  race  is said to occur when multiple internal race
variables change state as a result of a single input changing state. In the exampleDO NOT COPY
of Figure 7-79, a race occurs in stable total state 011/00 when  CLK  is changed
from 0 to 1. The table indicates that the next internal state is 000, a 2-variable
change from 011.
As we’ve discussed previously, logic signals never really change “simulta-
DO NOT COPY
neously.” Thus, the internal state may make the change 011→000 as either
011→001→000 or 011→010→000. Figure 7-80 indicates that the example
circuit, starting in total state 011/00, should go to total state 000/10 when
CLK  changes from 0 to 1. However, it may temporarily visit total state 001/10 or
010/10 along the way. That’s OK, because the next internal state for both of
DO NOT COPY
these temporary states is 000; therefore, even in the temporary states, the excita-
tion logic continues to drive the feedback loops toward the same stable total
state, 000/10. Since the final state does not depend on the order in which the state
variables change, this is called a  noncritical race. noncritical race
DO NOT COPYNow suppose that the next-state entry for total state 010/10 is changed to
110, as shown in Table 7-81, and consider the case that we just analyzed.
Starting in stable total state 011/00 and changing  CLK  to 1, the circuit may end
up in internal state 000 or 111 depending on the order and speed of the internal
variable changes. This is called a  critical race. critical race
DO NOT COPY
WATCH OUT FOR When you design a feedback-based sequential circuit, you must ensure that its tran-
CRITICAL RACES! sition table does not contain any critical races. Otherwise, the circuit may operate
unpredictably, with the next state for racy transitions depending on factors like tem-
DO NOT COPY
perature, voltage, and the phase of the moon.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

514  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
CLK D
Y1 Y2 Y3  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
000  010  010  000  000
001  011  011  000  000
010  010  110  110  110
DO NOT COPY
011  011  111  111  000
100  010  010  111  111
101  011  011  111  111
DO NOT COPY
110  010  110  111  111
Figure 7-81
111  011  111  111  111
A transition table
containing a critical race. Y1*  Y2*  Y3*
DO NOT COPY
*7.9.4 State Tables and Flow Tables
Analysis of the real transition table, Figure 7-79, for our example  D  flip-flip
circuit, shows that it does not have any critical races; in fact, it has no races
except the noncritical one we identified earlier. Once we’ve determined this fact,
DO NOT COPY
we no longer need to refer to state variables. Instead, we can name the state-
variable combinations and determine the output values for each state/input
combination to obtain a state/output table such as Figure 7-82.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-82 CLK D
State/output table S  00 01 11 10
for the  D  flip-flop in
Figure 7-78. S0  S2  , 01 S2  , 01 S0  , 01 S0  , 01
DO NOT COPYS1  S3  , 10 S3  , 10 S0  , 10 S0  , 10
S2  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S6  , 01 S0  , 01
S3  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10 S0  , 01
S4  S2  , 01 S2  , 01 S7  , 11 S7  , 11
DO NOT COPY
S5  S3  , 10 S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10
S6  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S7  , 11 S7  , 11
S7  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10
DO NOT COPY
S* ,  Q QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.9  Feedback Sequential Circuits  515
CLK D
S  00 01 11 10
DO NOT COPY
S0  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S0  , 01 S0  , 01
S2  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 ––  , – S0  , 10
S3  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 ––  , – S0  , 01
DO NOT COPY
S6  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S7  , 11 ––  , –
Figure 7-83
Flow and output table
S7  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10
for the  D  flip-flop in
S* ,  Q QN Figure 7-78.
DO NOT COPY
The state table shows that for some single input changes, the circuit takes
multiple “hops” to get to a new stable total state. For example, in state  S0/11, an
input change to 01 sends the circuit first to state  S2  and then to stable total state
S6/01. A  flow table  eliminates multiple hops and shows only the ultimate desti- flow table
DO NOT COPY
nation for each transition. The flow table also eliminates the rows for unused
internal states—ones that are stable for no input combination—and eliminates
the next-state entries for total states that cannot be reached from a stable total
state as the result of a single input change. Using these rules, Figure 7-83 shows
the flow table for ourDO NOT COPY  D  flip-flop example.
The flip-flop’s edge-triggered behavior can be observed in the series of
state transitions shown in Figure 7-84. Let us assume that the flip-flop starts in
internal state  S0/10. That is, the flip-flop is storing a 0 (since  Q  =  0),  CLK  is 1,
and  D  is 0. Now suppose that  D  changes to 1; the flow table shows that we move
one cell to the left, still a stable total state with the same output value. WeDO NOT COPY
can change  D  between 0 and 1 as much as we want, and just bounce back and
forth between these two cells. However, once we change  CLK  to 0, we move to
DO NOT COPYCLK D Figure 7-84
S  00 01 11 10 Flow and output table
showing the  D  flip-flop’s
edge-triggered behavior.
S0  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S0  , 01 S0  , 01
S2  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 ––  , – S0  , 10
DO NOT COPY
S3  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 ––  , – S0  , 01
S6  S2  , 01 S6  , 01 S7  , 11 ––  , –
S7  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10
DO NOT COPY
S* ,  Q QN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

516  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
CLK D
S  00 01 11 10
DO NOT COPY
SB  SB  , 01 S6  , 01 SB  , 01 SB  , 01
S3  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 ––  , – SB  , 01
Figure 7-85
S6  SB  , 01 S6  , 01 S7  , 11 ––  , –
Reduced flow and
DO NOT COPY
output table for a S7  S3  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10 S7  , 10
positive edge-triggered
D  flip-flop. S* ,  Q QN
internal state  S2  or  S6, depending on whether  D  was 0 or 1 at the time; but still
DO NOT COPY
the output is unchanged. Once again, we can change  D  between 0 and 1 as much
as we want, this time bouncing between  S2  and  S6  without changing the output.
The moment of truth finally comes when  CLK  changes to 1. Depending on
whether we are in  S2 or  S6, we go back to  S0 (leaving  Q  at 0) or to  S7 (setting  Q
DO NOT COPYto 1). Similar behavior involving  S3  and  S7  can be observed on a rising clock
edge that causes  Q  to change from 1 to 0.
In Figure 7-19, we showed a circuit for a positive edge-triggered  D  flip-
flop with only two feedback loops and hence four states. The circuit that we just
analyzed has three loops and eight states. Even after eliminating unused states,
DO NOT COPYthe flow table has five states. However, a formal state-minimization procedure
can be used to show that states  S0  and  S2  are “compatible,” so that they can be
merged into a single state  SB  that handles the transitions for both original states,
as shown in Figure 7-85. Thus, the job really could have been done by a four-
state circuit. In fact, in Exercise 7.62 you’ll show that the circuit in Figure 7-19
DO NOT COPY
does the job specified by the reduced flow table.
*7.9.5 CMOS D Flip-Flop Analysis
CMOS flip-flops typically use transmission gates in their feedback loops. For
example, Figure 7-86 shows the circuit design of the “FD1” positive-edge-
DO NOT COPY
triggered  D  flip-flop in LSI Logic’s LCA10000 series of CMOS gate arrays.
Such a flip-flop can be analyzed in the same way as a purely logic-gate based
design, once you recognize the feedback loops. Figure 7-86 has two feedback
loops, each of which has a pair of transmission gates in a mux-like configuration
controlled by  CLK  and  CLK′, yielding the following loop equations:
DO NOT COPY
Y1∗  =  CLK′  ⋅  D′  +  CLK  ⋅  Y1
Y2∗  =  CLK  ⋅  Y1′  +  CLK′  ⋅  Y2
Except for the double inversion of the data as it goes from  D  to  Y2∗  (once in the
DO NOT COPYY1∗  equation and again in the  Y2∗  equation), these equations are very reminis-
cent of the master/slave-latch structure of the D flip-flop in Figure 7-15.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  517
QN
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPYY1*  Y1  Y2*  Y2 
D Q
CLK
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-86  Positive edge-triggered CMOS  D  flip-flop for analysis.
Completing the formal analysis of the circuit is left as an exercise (7.69). Note,
however, that since there are just two feedback loops, the resulting state and flow
tables will have the minimum of just four states.DO NOT COPY
FEEDBACKFEEDBACK The feedback sequential circuits that we’ve analyzed in this section exhibit quite
CIRCUIT DESIGN reasonable behavior since, after all, they are latch and flip-flop circuits that have been
DO NOT COPY
used for years. However, if we throw together a “random” collection of gates and
feedback loops, we won’t necessarily get “reasonable” sequential circuit behavior. In
a few rare cases, we may not get a sequential circuit at all (see Exercise 7.63), and in
many cases, the circuit may be unstable for some or all input combinations (see
Exercise 7.68). Thus, the design of feedback sequential circuits continues to be
DO NOT COPYsomething of a black art, and is practiced only by a small fraction of digital designers.
Still, the next section introduces basic concepts that help you do simple designs.
DO NOT COPY
*7.10 Feedback Sequential Circuit Design
It’s sometimes useful to design a small feedback sequential circuit, such as a
specialized latch or a pulse catcher; this section will show you how. It’s even
possible that you might go on to be an IC designer, and be responsible for
designing high-performance latches and flip-flops from scratch. This sectionDO NOT COPY
will serve as an introduction to the basic concepts you’ll need, but you’ll still
need considerably more study, experience, and finesse to do it right.
*7.10.1 Latches
DO NOT COPY
Although the design of feedback sequential circuits is generally a hard problem,
some circuits can be designed pretty easily. Any circuit with one feedback loop
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

518  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
control inputs
excitation logic  Q
DO NOT COPY
feedback loop
Figure 7-87
General structure
Q  Q∗
of a latch.
DO NOT COPY
is just a variation of an  S-R  or  D  latch. It has the general structure shown in
Figure 7-87, and an excitation equation with the following format:
Q*  =  (forcing term)  +  (holding term)  ⋅  Q
DO NOT COPY
For example, the excitation equations for  S-R  and  D  latches are
Q∗  =  S  +  R′ ⋅  Q
Q∗  =  C  ⋅  D  +  C′ ⋅  Q
Corresponding circuits are shown in Figure 7-88(a) and (b).
DO NOT COPY
hazard-free excitation In general, the excitation logic in a feedback sequential circuit must be haz-
logic ard free;  we’ll demonstrate this fact by way of an example. Figure 7-89(a) is a
Karnaugh map for the  D-latch excitation circuit of Figure 7-88(b). The map
exhibits a static-1 hazard when  D  and  Q  are 1 and  C  is changing. Unfortunately,
DO NOT COPYthe latch’s feedback loop may not hold its value if a hazard-induced glitch
occurs. For example, consider what happens when  D  and  Q  are 1 and  C  changes
from 1 to 0; the circuit should latch a 1. However, unless the inverter is very fast,
the output of the top  AND  gate goes to 0 before the output of the bottom one goes
to 1, the  OR-gate output goes to 0, and the feedback loop stores a 0.
DO NOT COPY
D
Figure 7-88
C  Q
Latch circuits:
(a)  S-R  latch;
(b) unreliableDO NOT COPY  D  latch;
(c) hazard-free  D  latch.
(b)
S D
Q
DO NOT COPYC
R
Q
(a)
DO NOT COPY
(c)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  519
(a)  C (b) C
C D C D
•  • 
00  01  11  10 C  D 00  01  11  10 C  D
Q Q
Figure 7-89
DO NOT COPY0 1 0 1
Karnaugh maps for
1 1 1  1 Q 1 1 1  1 Q D-latch excitation
functions: (a) original,
C′ • Q C′ • Q D • Q
D D containing a static-1
hazard; (b) hazard
DO NOT COPYQ∗ =  C • D  +  C′ • Q  Q∗ =  C • D  +  C′ • Q  +  D • Q
eliminated.
Hazards can be eliminated using the methods described in Section 4.5. In
the  D  latch, we simply include the consensus term in the excitation equation:
DO NOT COPYQ∗  =  C  ⋅  D  +  C′  ⋅  Q  +  D  ⋅  Q
Figure 7-88(c) shows the corresponding hazard-free, correct  D-latch circuit.
Now, suppose we need a specialized “D” latch with three data inputs,  D1–
D3, that stores a 1 only if  D1–D3  = 010. We can convert this word description
into an excitation equation that mimics the equation for a simple  D  latch:
DO NOT COPY
Q∗  =  C  ⋅  (D1′  ⋅  D2  ⋅  D3′)  +  C′  ⋅  Q
Eliminating hazards, we get
Q∗  =  C  ⋅  D1′  ⋅  D2  ⋅  D3′  +  C′  ⋅  Q  +  D1′  ⋅  D2  ⋅  D3′  ⋅  Q
DO NOT COPY
The hazard-free excitation equation can be realized with discrete gates or in a
PLD, as we’ll show in Section 8.2.6.
*7.10.2 Designing Fundamental-Mode Flow Table
To design feedback sequential circuits more complex than latches, we must firstDO NOT COPY
convert the word description into a flow table. Once we have a flow table, we
can turn the crank (with some effort) to obtain a circuit.
When we construct the flow table for a feedback sequential circuit, we give
each state a meaning in the context of the problem, much like we did in the
DO NOT COPY
PRODUCT-TERM In some cases, the need to cover hazards can cause an explosion in the number of
EXPLOSION product terms in a two-level realization of the excitation logic. For example, suppose
we need a specialized latch with two control inputs, C1 and  C2, and three data inputs
DO NOT COPYas before. The latch is to be “open” only if both control inputs are 1, and is to store
a 1 if any data input is 1. The minimal excitation equation is
Q∗ =  C1  ⋅  C2  ⋅  (D1  +  D2  +  D3)  +  (C1  ⋅  C2)′  ⋅  Q
=  C1  ⋅  C2  ⋅  D1  +  C1  ⋅  C2  ⋅  D2  +  C1  ⋅  C2  ⋅  D3  +  C1′  ⋅  Q  +  C2′  ⋅  Q
However, it takes six consensus terms to eliminate hazards (see Exercise 7.71).
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

520  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
P
R
DO NOT COPY
Z
Figure 7-90  Typical functional behavior of a pulse-catching circuit.
DO NOT COPYdesign of clocked state machines. However, it’s easier to get confused when con-
structing the flow table for a feedback sequential circuit, because not every total
state is stable. Therefore, the recommended procedure is to construct a  primitive
primitive flow table flow table—one that has only one stable total state in each row. Since there is
only one stable state per row, the output may be shown as a function of state only.
DO NOT COPY
In a primitive flow table, each state has a more precise “meaning” than it
might otherwise have, and the table’s structure clearly displays the underlying
fundamental-mode assumption: inputs change one at a time, with enough time
between changes for the circuit to settle into a new stable state. A primitive flow
table usually has extra states, but we can “turn the crank” later to minimize the
DO NOT COPY
number of states once we have a flow table that we believe to be correct.
We’ll use the following problem, a “pulse-catching” circuit, to demon-
strate flow-table design:
Design a feedback sequential circuit with two inputs,  P  (pulse) and  R  (re-
DO NOT COPY
set), and a single output  Z  that is normally 0. The output should be set to 1
whenever a 0-to-1 transition occurs on  P, and should be reset to 0 whenev-
er  R  is 1. Typical functional behavior is shown in Figure 7-90.
Figure 7-91 is a primitive flow table for the pulse catcher. Let’s walk through
DO NOT COPYhow this table was developed.
We assume that the pulse catcher is initially idle, with  P  and  R  both 0; this
is the  IDLE  state, with  Z  =  0. In this state, if reset occurs (R  =  1), we could prob-
ably stay in the same state, but since this is supposed to be a  primitive  flow table,
we create a new state,  RES1, so as not to have two stable total states in the same
DO NOT COPY
row. On the other hand, if a pulse occurs (P  =  1) in the  IDLE  state, we definitely
want to go to a different state, which we’ve named  PLS1, since we’ve caught a
pulse and we must set the output to 1. Input combination 11 is not considered in
the  IDLE  state, because of the fundamental-mode assumption that only one input
changes at a time; we assume the circuit always makes it to another stable state
DO NOT COPY
before input combination 11 can occur.
Next, we fill in the next-state entries for the newly created  RES1  state. If
reset goes away, we can go back to the  IDLE  state. If a pulse occurs, we must
remain in a “reset” state since, according to the timing diagram, a 0-to-1 transi-
tion that occurs while  R  is 1 is ignored. Again, to keep the flow table in primitive
DO NOT COPY
form, we must create a new state for this case,  RES2.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  521
P R
Meaning  S 00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
Idle, waiting for pulse IDLE  IDLE  RES1  ––  PLS1  0
Reset, no pulse RES1  IDLE  RES1  RES2  ––  0
Got pulse, output on PLS1  PLS2  __  RES2  PLS1  1
DO NOT COPY
Reset, got pulse RES2  ––  RES1  RES2  PLSN  0
Pulse gone, output on PLS2  PLS2  RES1  __  PLS1  1
Got pulse, but output off  PLSN IDLE  ––  RES2  PLSN  0
DO NOT COPY
S*
Figure 7-91  Primitive flow table for pulse-catching circuit.
Now that we have one stable total state in each column, we may be able to
go to existing states for more transitions, instead of always defining new states.DO NOT COPY
Sure enough, starting in stable total state  PLS1/10, for  R  =  1  we can go to  RES2,
which fits the requirement of producing a 0 output. On the other hand, where
should we go for  P  =  0?  IDLE  is a stable total state in the 00 column, but it pro-
duces the wrong output value. In  PLS1, we’ve gotten a pulse and haven’t seen a
DO NOT COPY
reset, so if the pulse goes away, we should go to a state that still has  Z  =  1. Thus,
we must create a new state  PLS2  for this case.
In RES2, we can safely go to  RES1 if the pulse goes away. However, we’ve
got to be careful if reset goes away, as shown in the timing diagram. Since we’ve
already passed the pulse’s 0-to-1 transition, we can’t go to the  PLS1  state, since
DO NOT COPY
that would give us a 1 output. Instead, we create a new state  PLSN  with a 0
output.
Finally, we can complete the next-state entries for  PLS2 and  PLSN without
creating any new states. Notice that starting in  PLS2, we bounce back and forth
betweenDO NOT COPY  PLS2 and  PLS1 and maintain a continuous 1 output if we get a series of
pulses without an intervening reset input.
*7.10.3 Flow-Table Minimization
As we mentioned earlier, a primitive flow table usually has more states than
required. However, there exists a formal procedure, discussed in the References,DO NOT COPY
for minimizing the number of states in a flow table. This procedure is often com-
plicated by the existence of don’t-care entries in the flow table.
Fortunately, our example flow table is small and simple enough to mini-
mize by inspection. States  IDLE  and  RES1  produce the same output, and they
DO NOT COPY
have the same next-state entry for input combinations where they are both spec-
ified. Therefore, they are compatible and may be replaced by a single state
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

522  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
P R
S  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
IDLE  IDLE  IDLE  RES  PLS  0
PLS  PLS  IDLE  RES  PLS  1
Figure 7-92
Reduced flow table RES  IDLE  IDLE  RES  RES  0
for pulse-catching
DO NOT COPY
circuit. S*
(IDLE) in a reduced flow table. The same can be said for states  PLS1  and  PLS2
(replaced by  PLS) and for  RES2  and  PLSN  (replaced by  RES). The resulting
DO NOT COPYreduced flow table, which has only three states, is shown in Figure 7-92.
*7.10.4 Race-Free State Assignment
The next somewhat creative (read “difficult”) step in feedback sequential circuit
design is to find a race-free assignment of coded states to the named states in the
DO NOT COPY
reduced flow table. Recall from Section 7.9.3 that a race occurs when multiple
internal variables change state as a result of a single input change. A feedback-
based sequential circuit must not contain any critical races; otherwise, the circuit
may operate unpredictably. As we’ll see, eliminating races often necessitates
increasing  the number of states in the circuit.
DO NOT COPY
A circuit’s potential for having races in its transition table can be analyzed
state adjacency by means of a  state adjacency diagram  for its flow table. The adjacency diagram
diagram is a simplified state diagram that omits self-loops and does not show the direc-
tion of other transitions (A→B  is drawn the same as  B→A), or the input
DO NOT COPYcombinations that cause them. Figure 7-93 is an example fundamental-mode
flow table and Figure 7-94(a) is the corresponding adjacency diagram.
adjacent states Two states are said to be  adjacent  if there is an arc between them in the
state adjacency diagram. For race-free transitions, adjacent coded states must
differ in only one bit. If two states  A  and B  are adjacent, it doesn’t matter whether
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-93 X Y
Example flow table for S  00  01  11  10
the state-assignment
problem. A  A  B  A  B
DO NOT COPY
B  B  B  D  B
C  C  A  A  C
D  D  B  D  C
DO NOT COPY
S*
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  523
A  B
A  B
10 11 10  11
DO NOT COPY
(a) (b) (c)
C  D
D  C 00  01
00  01
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-94  State-assignment example: (a) adjacency diagram; (b) a 2-cube;
(c) one of eight possible race-free state assignments.
the original flow table had transitions from  A  to  B, from  B  to  A, or both. Any one
of these transitions is a race if  A  and  B  differ in more than one variable. That’s
DO NOT COPY
why we don’t need to show the direction of transitions in an adjacency diagram.
The problem of finding a race-free assignment of states to  n  state variables
is equivalent to the problem of mapping the nodes and arcs of the adjacency dia-
gram onto the nodes and arcs of an  n-cube. In Figure 7-94, the problem is to map
the adjacency diagram (a) onto a 2-cube (b). You can visually identify eightDO NOT COPY
ways to do this (four rotations times two flips), one of which produces the state
assignment shown in (c).
Figure 7-95(a) is an adjacency diagram for our pulse-catching circuit,
based on the reduced flow table in Figure 7-92. Clearly, there’s no way to map
this “triangle” of states onto a 2-cube. At this point, we can only go back andDO NOT COPY
modify the original flow table. In particular, the flow table tells us the destina-
tion state that we  eventually must reach for each transition, but it doesn’t prevent
us from going through other states on the way. As shown in Figure 7-96, we can
create a new state  RESA  and make the transition from  PLS  to  RES  by going
DO NOT COPY
through  RESA. The modified state table has the new adjacency diagram shown
in Figure 7-95(b), which has many race-free assignments possible. A transition
table based on the assignment in (c) is shown in Figure 7-98. Note that the
PLS→RESA→RES  transition will be slower than the other transitions in the
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-95  Adjacency diagrams for the pulse catcher: (a) using original flow
table; (b) after adding a state; (c) showing one of eight possible
race-free state assignments.
IDLE  RES
DO NOT COPYIDLE  RES IDLE  RES 00  10
(a) (b) (c)
DO NOT COPY
PLS RESA
PLS PLS RESA
01 11
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

524  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
P R
S  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
IDLE  IDLE  IDLE  RES  PLS  0
PLS  PLS  IDLE  RESA  PLS  1
Figure 7-96
RESA  ––  ––  RES  ––  –
State table allowing a
DO NOT COPY
race-free assignment RES  IDLE  IDLE  RES  RES  0
for the pulse-catching
circuit. S*
original flow table because it requires two internal state changes, with two prop-
DO NOT COPY
agation delays through the feedback loops.
Even though we added a state in the previous example, we still got by with
just two state variables. However, we may sometimes have to add one or more
state variables to make a race-free assignment. Figure 7-97(a) shows the worst
DO NOT COPYpossible adjacency diagram for four states—every state is adjacent to every
other state. Clearly, this adjacency diagram cannot be mapped onto a 2-cube.
However, there is a race-free assignment of states to a 3-cube, shown in (b),
where each state in the original flow table is represented by two equivalent states
in the final state table. Both states in a pair, such as  A1 and  A2, are equivalent and
DO NOT COPYproduce the same output. Each state is adjacent to one of the states in every other
pair, so a race-free transition may be selected for each next-state entry.
n 
HANDLING In the general case of a flow table with 2 rows, it can be shown that a race-free
DO NOT COPYTHE GENERAL assignment can be obtained using 2n−1 state variables (see References). However,
ASSIGNMENT there aren't many applications for fundamental-mode circuits with more than a few
CASE states, so the general case is of little more than academic interest.
DO NOT COPYD2 C2
Figure 7-97
110 111
A worst-case
scenario: (a) 4-state
A1  B1
adjacency diagram; A  B
010 011
(b) assignment using
DO NOT COPY
pairs of equivalent (a) (b)
states.
C1  D1
D  C
000 001
DO NOT COPYB2 A2
100 101
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  525
P R
Y1 Y2  00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
00  00  00  10  01  0
01  01  00  11  01  1
11  ––  ––  10  ––  – Figure 7-98
DO NOT COPY
Race-free transition
10  00  00  10  10  0
table for the pulse-
Y1*  Y2* catching circuit.
DO NOT COPY
*7.10.5 Excitation Equations
Once we have a race-free transition table for a circuit, we can just “turn the
crank” to obtain excitation equations for the feedback loops. Figure 7-99 shows
Karnaugh maps derived from Figure 7-98, the pulse catcher’s transition table.
Notice that “don’t-care” next-state and output entries give rise to corresponding
DO NOT COPY
entries in the maps, simplifying the excitation and output logic. The resulting
minimal sum-of-products excitation and output equations are as follows:
Y1∗  =  P  ⋅  R  +  P  ⋅  Y1
Y2∗  =  Y2  ⋅  R′  +  Y1′  ⋅  Y2  ⋅  P  +  Y1′  ⋅  P  ⋅  R′
DO NOT COPY
Z  =  Y2
Recall that the excitation logic in a feedback sequential circuit must be
hazard free. The sum-of-products expressions we derived happen to be hazard
free as well as minimal. The logic diagram of Figure 7-100 uses these expres-
DO NOT COPY
sions to build the pulse-catching circuit.
Figure 7-99  Karnaugh maps for pulse-catcher excitation and output logic.
•  Y1′ • Y2 • P  Y1′ • P • R′  Y2
DO NOT COPYP  R
P P Y1
Y1∗ P R Y2∗ P R
Z
Y1 Y2 00  01  11  10 Y1 Y2 00  01  11 10 0  1
00 0 0 1  0 00 0  0  0  1 0 0  0
DO NOT COPY
01 0  0 1 0 01 1  0  1  1 Y2 1 1  d
Y2 Y2
11 d d 1 d 11 d  d  0  d
Y1 Y1
10 0 0 1 1 10 0  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
R R
P • Y1 Y2 • R′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

526  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
P
P
R
R
P Y1
DO NOT COPY
Y1
Y2
R_L R′
Y1′
DO NOT COPY
Y2 Y2 
Z
P
Y1_L Y1′
P
Figure 7-100 R′
Pulse-catching
DO NOT COPY
circuit.
*7.10.6 Essential Hazards
After all this effort, you’d think that we’d have a pulse-catching circuit that
DO NOT COPYwould operate reliably all of the time. Unfortunately, we’re not quite there yet.
A fundamental-mode circuit must generally satisfy five requirements for proper
operation:
1.  Only one input signal may change at a time, with a minimum bound
DO NOT COPYbetween successive input changes.
2.  There must be a maximum propagation delay through the excitation logic
and feedback paths; this maximum must be less than the time between
successive input changes.
3.  The state assignment (transition table) must be free of critical races.
DO NOT COPY
4.  The excitation logic must be hazard free.
5.  The minimum propagation delay through the excitation logic and feedback
paths must be greater than the maximum timing skew through the “input
logic.”
DO NOT COPY
Without the first requirement, it would be impossible to satisfy the major
premise of fundamental-mode operation—that the circuit has time to settle into
a stable total state between successive input changes. The second requirement
says that the excitation logic is fast enough to do just that. The third requirement
DO NOT COPYensures that the proper state changes are made even if the excitation circuits for
different state variables have different delays. The fourth requirement ensures
that state variables that aren’t supposed to change on a particular transition
don’t.
The last requirement deals with subtle timing-dependent errors that can
DO NOT COPYoccur in fundamental-mode circuits, even ones that satisfy the first four
essential hazard requirements. An  essential hazard  is the possibility of a circuit going to an
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *7.10  Feedback Sequential Circuit Design  527
1 → 0  1 → 0
P 0
0  0
R
1 → 0 Y1 1 → 0
DO NOT COPY1 → 0
1 → 0
0 ⇒ 1
0 ⇒ 1
R_L 1 C
0 →→ 1
DO NOT COPYPD 
a long, slow path 1 ⇒⇒  0 0 ⇒ 1 0 ⇒ 1 ⇒⇒  0 Y2 0 →→ 1 ⇒ 1 ⇒⇒ 1
B Z
1 ⇒⇒  0
1 → 0  Y1_L 0 →→ 1 0 →→ 1
1 ⇒⇒  0 0 →→ 1 ⇒⇒  0
A
1
DO NOT COPY
Figure 7-101  Physical conditions in pulse-catching circuit for exhibiting an essential hazard.
erroneous next state as the result of a single input change; the error occurs if theDO NOT COPY
input change is not seen by all of the excitation circuits before the resulting state-
variable transition(s) propagate back to the inputs of the excitation circuits. In a
world where “faster is better” is the usual rule, a designer may sometimes have
to  slow down  excitation logic to mask these hazards.
DO NOT COPYEssential hazards are best explained in terms of an example, our pulse-
catching circuit. Suppose we built our circuit on a PCB or a chip, and we (or,
more likely, our CAD system) inadvertently connected input signal  P  through a
long, slow path at the point shown in Figure 7-101. Let’s assume that this delay
is longer than the propagation delay of the  AND-OR  excitation logic.
DO NOT COPY
Now consider what can happen if  P R  =  10, the circuit is in internal state
10, and  P  changes from 1 to 0. According to the transition table, repeated in
Figure 7-102, the circuit should go to internal state 00, and that’s that. But let’s
look at the actual operation of the circuit, as traced in Figure 7-101:
•DO NOT COPY  (Changes shown with “→”) The first thing that happens after  P  changes is
that  Y1  changes from 1 to 0. Now the circuit is in internal state 00.
•  (Changes shown with “→→”) Y1_L changes from 0 to 1. The change in  Y1_L
at  AND  gate  A  causes its output to go to 1, which in turn forces  Y2  to 1.
Whoops, now the circuit is in internal state 01.
DO NOT COPY
•  (Changes shown with “⇒”) The change in  Y2 at  AND  gates  B  and  C  causes
their outputs to go to 1, reinforcing the 1 output at  Y2. All this time, we’ve
been waiting for the 1-to-0 change in  P  to appear at point  PD.
•  (Changes shown with “⇒⇒”) Finally,  PD  changes from 1 to 0, forcing the
DO NOT COPYoutputs of  AND  gates  A  and  B  to 0. However,  AND  gate  C  still has a 1
output, and the circuit remains in state 01—the wrong state.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

528  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
P R
Y1 Y2 00  01  11  10  Z
DO NOT COPY
00  00  00  10  01  0
01  01  00  11  01  1
Figure 7-102
11  —  —  10  —  —
Transition table for the
DO NOT COPYpulse-catching circuit,
10  00  00  10  10  0
exhibiting an
essential hazard. Y1*  Y2*
The only way to avoid this erroneous behavior in general is to ensure that
DO NOT COPY
changes in  P  arrive at the inputs of all the excitation circuits before any changes
in state variables do. Thus, the inevitable difference in input arrival times, called
timing skew timing skew, must be less than the propagation delay of the excitation circuits
and feedback loops. This timing requirement can generally be satisfied only by
careful design  at the electrical circuit level.
DO NOT COPY
In the example circuit, it would appear that the hazard is easily masked,
even by non-electrical engineers, since the designer need only ensure that a
straight wire has shorter propagation delay than an  AND-OR  structure, easy in
most technologies.
Still, many feedback sequential circuits, such as the TTL edge-triggered  D
DO NOT COPY
flip-flop in Figure 7-19, have essential hazards in which the input skew paths
include inverters. In such cases, the input inverters must be guaranteed to be fast-
er than the excitation logic; that’s not so trivial in either board-level or IC design.
For example, if the excitation circuit in Figure 7-101 were physically built using
DO NOT COPYAND-OR-INVERT  gates, the delay from input changes to  Y1_L  could be very
short indeed, as short as the delay through a single inverter.
Essential hazards can be found in most but not all fundamental-mode
circuits. There’s an easy rule for detecting them; in fact, this is the definition of
“essential hazard” in some texts:.
DO NOT COPY
•  A fundamental-mode flow table contains an essential hazard for a stable
total state  S  and an input variable  X  if, starting in state  S, the stable total
state reached after three successive transitions in  X  is different from the
stable total state reached after one transition in  X.
DO NOT COPY
THESE HAZARDS Essential hazards are called “essential” because they are inherent in the flow table for
ARE, WELL, a particular sequential function, and will appear in any circuit realization of that func-
ESSENTIAL! tion. They can be masked only by controlling the delays in the circuit. Compare with
static hazards in combinational logic, where we could eliminate hazards by adding
DO NOT COPY
consensus terms to a logic expression.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  529
Thus, the essential hazard in the pulse catcher is detected by the arrows in
Figure 7-102, starting in internal state 10 with  P R  =  10.
A fundamental-mode circuit must have at least three states to have an
DO NOT COPY
essential hazard, so latches don’t have them. On the other hand, all flip-flops
(circuits that sample inputs on a clock edge) do.
*7.10.7 Summary
In summary, you use the following steps to design a feedback sequential circuit:
DO NOT COPY
1.  Construct a primitive flow table from the circuit’s word description.
2.  Minimize the number of states in the flow table.
3.  Find a race-free assignment of coded states to named states, adding auxil-
iary states or splitting states as required.
DO NOT COPY
4.  Construct the transition table.
5.  Construct excitation maps and find a hazard-free realization of the excita-
tion equations.
6.  Check for essential hazards. Modify the circuit if necessary to ensure that
DO NOT COPY
minimum excitation and feedback delays are greater than maximum
inverter or other input-logic delays.
7.  Draw the logic diagram.
Also note that some circuits routinely violate the basic fundamental-mode
DO NOT COPY
assumption that inputs change one at a time. For example, in a positive-edge-
triggered  D  flip-flop, the  D  input may change at the same time that  CLK  changes
from 1 to 0, and the flip-flop still operates properly. The same thing certainly
cannot be said at the 0-to-1 transition of  CLK. Such situations require analysis of
the transition table and circuit on a case-by-case basis if proper operation in
DO NOT COPY
“special cases” is to be guaranteed.
A FINAL Given the difficulty of designing fundamental-mode circuits that work properly, let
DO NOT COPYQUESTION alone ones that are fast or compact, how did anyone ever come up with the 6-gate, 8-
state, commercial  D  flip-flop design in Figure 7-20? Don’t ask me, I don’t know!
DO NOT COPY
7.11 ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features
7.11.1 Registered Outputs
ABEL has several features that support the design of sequential circuits. As
we’ll show in Section 8.3, most PLD outputs can be configured by the user to be
registeredDO NOT COPY  outputs  that provide a  D  flip-flop following the  AND-OR  logic, as in registered output
Figure 7-103. To configure one or more outputs to be registered, an ABEL
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

530  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
CLK  OE
DO NOT COPYD  Q output pin
Q
Figure 7-103
PLD registered output.
DO NOT COPY
program’s pin declarations normally must contain an  istype  clause using the
reg keyword “reg” (rather than “com”) for each registered output. Table 7-22 is an
example program that has three registered outputs and two combinational
outputs.
As suggested by Figure 7-103, a registered output has at least two other
DO NOT COPY
attributes associated with it. The three-state buffer driving the output pin has an
output-enable input  OE, and the flip-flop itself has a clock input  CLK. As shown
in Table 7-22, the signals that drive these inputs are specified in the equations
.CLK section of the program. Each input signal is specified as the corresponding main
.OEDO NOT COPYoutput signal name followed by an attribute suffix, .CLK  or .OE. Some PLDs
.PR have flip-flops with additional controllable inputs; for example, preset and clear
.RE inputs have attribute suffixes  .PR  and  .RE  (reset). And some PLDs provide flip-
flop types other than  D; their inputs are specified with suffixes like  .J  and  .K.
Within the  equations  section of the ABEL program, the logic values for
clocked assignmentDO NOT COPYregistered outputs are established using the  clocked assignment operator, :=.
operator, := When the PLD is compiled, the expression on the right-hand-side will be applied
to the  D  input of the output flip-flop. All of the same rules as for combinational
outputs apply to output polarity control, don’t-cares, and so on. In Table 7-22,
the state bits  Q1–Q3  are registered outputs, so they use clocked assignment,
DO NOT COPY
“:=”. The  UNLK  and  HINT  signals are Mealy outputs, combinational functions
of current state and input, so they use unclocked assignment, “=”. A machine
with pipelined outputs (Figure 7-37 on page 454), would instead use clocked
assignment for such outputs.
ABEL’s truth-table syntax (Table 4-16 on page 255) can also be used with
DO NOT COPY
clocked truth-table registered outputs. The only difference is that “->” operator between input and
operator, :> output items is changed to “:>”.
DO NOT COPY
IS  istype Older devices, such as the PAL16Rx family, contain a fixed, preassigned mix of
ESSENTIAL? combinational and registered outputs and are not configurable. With these devices,
the compiler can deduce each output’s type from its pin number and the  istype
statement is not necessary. Even with configurable outputs, some compilers can cor-
rectly the output type from the equations. Still, it’s a good idea to include the  istype
DO NOT COPYinformation anyway, both as a double check and to enhance design portability.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  531
module CombLock Ta b l e 7 - 2 2
Title 'Combination-Lock State Machine' ABEL program using
registered outputs.
DO NOT COPY
" Input and Outputs
X, CLOCK  pin;
UNLK, HINT  pin istype 'com';
Q1, Q2, Q3  pin istype 'reg';
Q = [Q1..Q3];
DO NOT COPY
Equations
Q.CLK = CLOCK; Q.OE = 1;
" State variablesDO NOT COPY
Q1 := Q1 & !Q2 & X  #  !Q1 & Q2 & Q3 & !X  #  Q1 & Q2 & !Q3;
Q2 := !Q2 & Q3 & X  #  Q2 & !Q3 & X;
Q3 := Q1 & !Q2 & !Q3  #  Q1 & Q3 & !X  #  !Q2 & !X
#  !Q1 & !Q3 & !X  #  Q2 & !Q3 & X;
DO NOT COPY
" Mealy outputs
UNLK = Q1 & Q2 & Q3 & !X;
HINT = !Q1 & !Q2 & !Q3 & !X  #  Q1 & !Q2 & X  #  !Q2 & Q3 & X
#  Q2 & Q3 & !X  #  Q2 & !Q3 & X;
end CombLockDO NOT COPY
You can also design feedback sequential circuits in ABEL, without using
any of the language’s sequential-circuit features. For example, in Section 8.2.6
we show how to specify latches using ABEL.
DO NOT COPY
7.11.2 State Diagrams
The state-machine example in the previous subsection is just a transcription of
the combination-lock machine that we synthesized by hand in Section 7.4.6
beginning on page 484. However, most PLD programming languages have a
DO NOT COPY
notation for defining, documenting, and synthesizing state machines directly,
without ever writing a state, transition, or excitation table or deriving excitation
equations by hand. Such a notation is called a  state-machine description state-machine
language. In ABEL, this notation is called a “state diagram,” and the ABEL description language
compiler does all the work of generating excitation equations that realize theDO NOT COPY
specified machine.
In ABEL, the keyword state_diagram  indicates the beginning of a state- state_diagram
machine definition. Table 7-23 shows the textual structure of an ABEL “state
diagram.” Here  state-variables  is an ABEL set that lists the state variables of the state-variables
machine. If there areDO NOT COPY  n  variables in the set, then the machine has 2n  possible
n 
states corresponding to the 2 different assignments of constant values to
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

532  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 2 3 state_diagram  state-variables
Structure of a “state
state  state-value 1  :transition statement;
diagram” in ABEL.
state  state-value 2  : transition statement;
DO NOT COPY
...
n 
state  state-value 2 :  transition statement;
variables in the set. States are usually given symbolic names in an ABEL pro-
DO NOT COPYgram; this makes it easy to try different assignments simply by changing the
constant definitions.
An equation for each state variable is developed according to the informa-
state tion in the “state diagram.” The keyword  state  indicates that the next states and
state-value current outputs for a particular current state are about to be defined; a  state-value
DO NOT COPY
equation is a constant that defines state-variable values for the current state. A  transition
statement  defines the possible next states for the current state.
GOTO  statement ABEL has two commonly used transition statements. The GOTO  statement
IF  statement unconditionally specifies the next state, for example “GOTO INIT”. The IF  state-
ment  defines the possible next states as a function of an arbitrary logic
DO NOT COPY
expressions. (There’s also a seldom-used  CASE  statement which we don’t cover.)
Table 7-24 shows the syntax of the ABEL  IF  statement. Here  TrueState
and  FalseState  are state values that the machine will go to if  LogicExpression  is
true or false, respectively. These statements can be nested:  FalseState  can itself
DO NOT COPYbe another  IF  statement, and  TrueState  can be an  IF statement if it is enclosed in
braces. When multiple next states are possible, a nested  IF-THEN-ELSE  struc-
ture eliminates the ambiguities that can occur in hand-drawn state diagrams,
where the transition conditions leaving a state can overlap (Section 7.5).
Our first example using ABEL’s “state diagram” capability is based on our
DO NOT COPYfirst state-machine design example from Section 7.4.1 on page 466. A state table
for this machine was developed in Figure 7-49 on page 469. It is adapted to
ABEL in Table 7-25. Several characteristics of this program should be noted:
•  The definition of  QSTATE  uses three variables to encode state.
DO NOT COPY•  The definitions of  INIT–XTRA3  determine the individual state encodings.
•  IF-THEN-ELSE  statements are nested. A particular next state may appear
in multiple places in one set of nested  IF-THEN-ELSE  clauses (e.g., see
states  OK0  and  OK1).
•  Expressions like “(B==1)*(A==0)” were used instead of equivalents like
DO NOT COPY
“B*!A” only because the former are a bit more readable.
Ta b l e 7 - 2 4 IF  LogicExpression  THEN
Structure of an ABEL TrueState;
DO NOT COPYIF  statement. ELSE
FalseState;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  533
module SMEX1 Ta b l e 7 - 2 5
title 'PLD Version of Example State Machine' An example of ABEL’s
state-diagram
" Input and output pinsDO NOT COPY
notation.
CLOCK, RESET_L, A, B  pin;
Q1..Q3  pin istype 'reg';
Z  pin istype 'com';
" Definitions
QSTATE = [Q1,Q2,Q3];  " State variables
DO NOT COPY
INIT  = [ 0, 0, 0];
A0  = [ 0, 0, 1];
A1  = [ 0, 1, 0];
OK0  = [ 0, 1, 1];
OK1  = [ 1, 0, 0];
XTRA1DO NOT COPY  = [ 1, 0, 1];
XTRA2  = [ 1, 1, 0];
XTRA3  = [ 1, 1, 1];
RESET = !RESET_L;
state_diagram QSTATE
state INIT: IF RESET THEN INITDO NOT COPY
ELSE IF (A==0) THEN A0
ELSE A1;
state A0:  IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF (A==0) THEN OK0
DO NOT COPYELSE A1;
state A1:  IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF (A==0) THEN A0
ELSE OK1;
state OK0:  IF RESET THEN INIT
DO NOT COPY
ELSE IF (B==1)&(A==0) THEN OK0
ELSE IF (B==1)&(A==1) THEN OK1
ELSE IF (A==0) THEN OK0
ELSE IF (A==1) THEN A1;
state OK1:  IF RESET THEN INIT
DO NOT COPYELSE IF (B==1)&(A==0) THEN OK0
ELSE IF (B==1)&(A==1) THEN OK1
ELSE IF (A==0) THEN A0
ELSE IF (A==1) THEN OK1;
state XTRA1: GOTO INIT;
state XTRA2: GOTO INIT;DO NOT COPY
state XTRA3: GOTO INIT;
equations
QSTATE.CLK = CLOCK; QSTATE.OE = 1;
Z = (QSTATE == OK0) # (QSTATE == OK1);
DO NOT COPY
END SMEX1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

534  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 2 6 Q1 := (!Q2.FB & !Q3.FB & RESET_L
Reduced equations # Q1.FB & RESET_L);
for  SMEX1  PLD. Q1.C = (CLOCK);
DO NOT COPY
Q1.OE = (1);
Q2 := (Q1.FB & !Q3.FB & RESET_L & !A
# Q1.FB & Q3.FB & RESET_L & A
# Q1.FB & Q2.FB & RESET_L & B);
Q2.C = (CLOCK);
DO NOT COPY
Q2.OE = (1);
Q3 := (!Q2.FB & !Q3.FB & RESET_L & A
# Q1.FB & RESET_L & A);
Q3.C = (CLOCK);
Q3.OE = (1);
DO NOT COPY
Z = (Q2 & Q1);
•  The first  IF  statement in each of states  INIT–OK1  ensures that the machine
goes to the  INIT  state if  RESET  is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
•  Next-state  equations are given  for  XTRA1–XTRA3  to ensure  that the
machine goes to a “safe” state if it somehow gets into an unused state.
•  The single equation in the “equations” section of the program determines
the behavior of the Moore-type output.
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-26 shows the resulting excitation and output equations produced
by ABEL compiler (the reverse-polarity equations are not shown). Notice the
use of variable names like “Q1.FB” in the right-hand sides of the equations.
Here, the “.FB” attribute suffix refers to the “feedback” signal into the  AND-OR
DO NOT COPYarray coming from the flip-flop’s  Q  output. This is done to make it clear that the
signal is coming from the flip-flop, not from the corresponding PLD output pin,
which can be selected in some complex PLDs. As shown in Figure 7-104, ABEL
actually allows you to select among three possible values on the right-hand side
of an equation using an attribute suffix on the signal name:
DO NOT COPY
USE IT OR ABEL’s  IF-THEN-ELSE  structure eliminates the transition ambiguity that can
ELSE occur in state diagrams. However, the ELSE clause of an IF statement is optional.
If it is omitted, the next state for some input combinations will be unspecified.
DO NOT COPY
Usually this is not the designer’s intention.
Nevertheless, if you can guarantee that the unspecified input combinations
will never occur, you may be able to reduce the size of the transition logic. If the
@DCSET  directive is given, the ABEL compiler treats the transition outputs for
the unspecified state/input combinations as “don’t-cares.” In addition, it treats
DO NOT COPYtransitions out of unused states as “don’t-cares.”
all 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  535
.PR
.OE
DO NOT COPY
D  Q
output pin
.CLK
.Q  .FB  .PIN
Figure 7-104
.RE
Output selection
DO NOT COPYcapability in a
fuse-controlled
complex PLD.
output-select multiplexer
.Q  The actual flip-flop output pin before any programmable inversion. .Q
DO NOT COPY
.FB  A value equal to the value that the output pin would have if enabled. .FB
.PIN  The actual signal at the PLD output pin. This signal is floating or driven .PIN
by another device if the three-state driver is not enabled.
Obviously, the .PIN value should not be used in a state-machine excitation equa-
DO NOT COPY
tion since it is not guaranteed always to equal the state variable.
Despite the use of “high-level language,” the program’s author still had to
refer to the original, hand-constructed state table in Figure 7-49 to come up with
ABEL version in Table 7-25. A different approach is shown in Table 7-27. This
program was developed directly from the word description of the state machine,DO NOT COPY
which is repeated below:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  A  and  B, and
a single output  Z  that is 1 if:
–  A  had the same value at each of the two previous clock ticks,  or
DO NOT COPY
–  B  has been 1 since the last time that the first condition was true.
Otherwise, the output should be 0.
A key idea in the new approach is to remove the last value of  A  from the
state definitions, and instead to have a separate flip-flop that keeps track of itDO NOT COPY
(LASTA). Then only two non-INIT  states must be defined:  LOOKING  (“still
looking for a match”) and  OK  (“got a match or  B  has been 1 since last match”).
The  Z  output is a simple combinational decode of the  OK  state.
DO NOT COPY
PHANTOM Real CPLDs typically have only a two-input output-select multiplexer and omit
(OF THE) the  .FB  input shown in Figure 7-104. When an equation calls for a signal with
OPERAND the  .FB  attribute, the ABEL compiler uses the corresponding  .Q signal and sim-
DO NOT COPYply adjusts it with the appropriate inversion (or not).
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

536  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 2 7 module SMEX2
A more “natural” title 'Alternate Version of Example State Machine'
ABEL program for
DO NOT COPY" Input and output pins
the example state
CLOCK, RESET_L, A, B  pin;
machine.
LASTA, Q1, Q2  pin istype 'reg';
Z  pin istype 'com';
" Definitions
DO NOT COPYQSTATE  = [Q1,Q2];  " State variables
INIT  = [ 0, 0];  " State encodings
LOOKING = [ 0, 1];
OK  = [ 1, 0];
XTRA  = [ 1, 1];
RESET = !RESET_L;
DO NOT COPY
state_diagram QSTATE
state INIT:  IF RESET THEN INIT ELSE LOOKING;
state LOOKING: IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF (A == LASTA) THEN OK
DO NOT COPY
ELSE LOOKING;
state OK:  IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF B THEN OK
ELSE IF (A == LASTA) THEN OK
ELSE LOOKING;
DO NOT COPY
state XTRA:  GOTO INIT;
equations
LASTA.CLK = CLOCK; QSTATE.CLK = CLOCK; QSTATE.OE = 1;
LASTA := A;
DO NOT COPY
Z = (QSTATE == OK);
END SMEX2
DO NOT COPY*7.11.3 External State Memory
In some situations, the state memory of a PLD-based state machine may be
kept in flip-flops external to the PLD. ABEL provides a special version of the
state_diagram  statement to handle this situation:
state_diagram  current-state-variables  ->  next-state variables
DO NOT COPY
current-state-variables Here  current-state-variables  is an ABEL set that lists the input signals which
next-state-variables represent the current state of the machine, and  next-state-variables  is a set that
lists the corresponding output signals which are the excitation for external  D
flip-flops holding the state of the machine, for example,
DO NOT COPY
state_diagram [CURQ1, CURQ2] -> [NEXTQ1, NEXTQ2]
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  537
state_diagram  state-variables  Ta b l e  7 - 2 8
Structure of an ABEL
state  state-value 1  :
optional equation; state diagram with
DO NOT COPYoptional equation; Moore outputs
. . . defined.
transition statement;
state  state-value 2  :
optional equation;
optional equation;
DO NOT COPY
. . .
transition statement;
...
n 
state  state-value 2  :
optional equation;
DO NOT COPYoptional equation;
. . .
transition statement;
*7.11.4 Specifying Moore Outputs
The outputDO NOT COPY  Z  in our example state machine is a Moore output, a function of state
only, and we defined this output in Tables 7-25 and 7-27 using an appropriate
equation in the  equations  section of the program. Alternatively, ABEL allows
Moore outputs to be specified along with the state definitions themselves. The
transition statement in a  state  definition may be preceded by one or more
DO NOT COPY
optional equations, as shown in Table 7-28. To use this capability with the
machine in Table 7-27, for example, we would eliminate the  Z  equation in the
equations  section, and rewrite the state diagram as shown in Table 7-29.
As in other ABEL equations, when a variable such as  Z  appears on the left-
hand side of multiple equations, the right-hand sides are  OR’ed together to form
DO NOT COPY
the final result (as discussed in Section 4.6.3). Also notice that  Z  is still specified
state_diagram QSTATE Ta b l e 7 - 2 9
State machine with
state INIT:  Z = 0;
DO NOT COPYembedded Moore
IF RESET THEN INIT ELSE LOOKING;
output definitions.
state LOOKING: Z = 0;
IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF (A == LASTA) THEN OK
ELSE LOOKING;
DO NOT COPY
state OK:  Z = 1;
IF RESET THEN INIT
ELSE IF B THEN OK
ELSE IF (A == LASTA) THEN OK
ELSE LOOKING;
state XTRA:  Z = 0;
DO NOT COPY
GOTO INIT;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

538  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
as a combinational, not registered, output. If  Z  were a registered output, the
desired output value would occur one clock tick after the machine visited the
corresponding state.
DO NOT COPY
*7.11.5 Specifying Mealy and Pipelined Outputs with  WITH
Some state-machine outputs are functions of the inputs as well as state. In
Section 7.3.2, we called them Mealy outputs or pipelined outputs, depending on
whether they occurred immediately upon an input change or only after a clock
DO NOT COPY
WITH  statement edge. ABEL’s WITH  statement  provides a way to specify these outputs side-by-
side with the next states, rather than separately in the  equations  section of the
program.
As shown in Table 7-30, the syntax of the  WITH  statement is very simple.
DO NOT COPYAny next-state value which is part of a transition statement can be followed by
the keyword  WITH  and a bracketed list of equations that are “executed” for the
specified transition. Formally, let “E” an excitation expression that is true only
when the specified transition is to be taken. Then for each equation in the  WITH’s
bracketed list, the right-hand side is  AND’ed with  E  and assigned to the left-hand
DO NOT COPYside. The equations can use either unclocked or clocked assignment to create
Mealy or pipelined outputs, respectively.
Ta b l e 7 - 3 0 next-state  WITH  {
Structure of ABEL equation;
DO NOT COPY
WITH  statement. equation;
. . .
}
DO NOT COPYWe developed an example “combination lock” state machine with Mealy
outputs in Table 7-14 on page 484. The same state machine is specified by the
ABEL program in Table 7-31, using  WITH  statements for the Mealy outputs.
Note that closing brackets take the place of the semicolons that normally end the
transition statements for the states.
DO NOT COPYBased on the combination lock’s word description, it is not possible to
realize  UNLK  and  HINT  as pipelined outputs, since they depend on the current
value of  X. However, if we redefine  UNLK to be asserted for the entire “unlocked”
state, and  HINT  to be the actual recommended next value of  X, we can create a
new machine with pipelined outputs, as shown in Table 7-32. Notice that we
DO NOT COPY
used the clocked assignment operator for the outputs. More importantly, notice
that the values of  UNLK  and  HINT  are different than in the Mealy example, since
they have to “look ahead” one clock tick.
Because of “lookahead,” pipelined outputs can be more difficult than
Mealy outputs to design and understand. In the example above, we even had to
DO NOT COPY
modify  the problem  statement  to  accommodate  them.  The  advantage  of
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  539
module SMEX4 Ta b l e 7 - 3 1
title 'Combination-Lock State Machine' State machine with
embedded Mealy
" Input and output pinsDO NOT COPY
CLOCK, X  pin; output definitions.
Q1..Q3  pin istype 'reg';
UNLK, HINT  pin istype 'com';
" Definitions
S  = [Q1,Q2,Q3];  " State variables
ZIPDO NOT COPY  = [ 0, 0, 0];  " State encodings
X0  = [ 0, 0, 1];
X01  = [ 0, 1, 0];
X011  = [ 0, 1, 1];
X0110  = [ 1, 0, 0];
X01101  = [ 1, 0, 1];
X011011  = [ 1, 1, 0];
X0110111 = [ 1, 1, 1];DO NOT COPY
state_diagram S
state ZIP:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
ELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
state X0:DO NOT COPY  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
ELSE X01  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
state X01:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
ELSE X011  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
state X011:  IF X==0 THEN X0110 WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
DO NOT COPYELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
state X0110:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
ELSE X01101  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
state X01101:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
ELSE X011011  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
DO NOT COPY
state X011011:  IF X==0 THEN X0110 WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
ELSE X0110111  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 1}
state X0110111: IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK = 1; HINT = 1}
ELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK = 0; HINT = 0}
DO NOT COPY
equations
S.CLK = CLOCK;
END SMEX4
DO NOT COPY
pipelined outputs is that, since they are connected directly to register outputs,
they are valid a few gate-delays sooner after a state change than Moore or Mealy
outputs, which normally include additional combinational logic. In the combi-
nation-lock example, it’s probably not that important to open your lock or see
your hint a few nanoseconds earlier. However, shaving off a few gate delays can
DO NOT COPY
be quite important in high-speed applications.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

540  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 3 2 module SMEX5
State machine with title 'Combination-Lock State Machine'
embedded pipelined
DO NOT COPY" Input and output pins
output definitions. CLOCK, X  pin;
Q1..Q3  pin istype 'reg';
UNLK, HINT  pin istype 'reg';
" Definitions
S  = [Q1,Q2,Q3];  " State variables
DO NOT COPYZIP  = [ 0, 0, 0];  " State encodings
X0  = [ 0, 0, 1];
X01  = [ 0, 1, 0];
X011  = [ 0, 1, 1];
X0110  = [ 1, 0, 0];
X01101  = [ 1, 0, 1];
X011011  = [ 1, 1, 0];
DO NOT COPYX0110111 = [ 1, 1, 1];
state_diagram S
state ZIP:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 0}
DO NOT COPYstate X0:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE X01  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
state X01:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE X011  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 0}
state X011:  IF X==0 THEN X0110 WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
DO NOT COPYELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 0}
state X0110:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE X01101  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
state X01101:  IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE X011011  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
DO NOT COPY
state X011011:  IF X==0 THEN X0110 WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE X0110111  WITH {UNLK := 1; HINT := 0}
state X0110111: IF X==0 THEN X0  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 1}
ELSE ZIP  WITH {UNLK := 0; HINT := 0}
DO NOT COPY
equations
S.CLK = CLOCK; UNLK.CLK = CLOCK; HINT.CLK = CLOCK;
END SMEX5
DO NOT COPY7.11.6 Test Vectors
Test vectors for sequential circuits in ABEL have the same uses and limitations
as test vectors for combinational circuits, as described in Section 4.6.7. One
.C., clock edge important addition to their syntax is the use of the constant “.C.” to denote a
clock edge, 0→1→0. Thus, Table 7-33 is an ABEL program, with test vectors,
DO NOT COPY
for a simple 8-bit register with a clock-enable input. A variety of vectors are used
to test loading and holding different input values.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  541
module REG8EN Ta b l e 7 - 3 3
title '8-bit register with clock enable' ABEL program with
test vectors for a
" Input and output pinsDO NOT COPY
CLK, EN, D1..D8  pin; simple 8-bit register.
Q1..Q8  pin istype 'reg';
" Sets
D = [D1..D8];
Q = [Q1..Q8];
DO NOT COPY
equations
Q.CLK = CLK;
WHEN EN == 1 THEN Q := D ELSE Q := Q;
test_vectors ([CLK, EN,DO NOT COPY  D  ] -> [ Q  ])
[.C.,  1, ^h00] -> [^h00]; " 0s in every bit
[.C.,  0, ^hFF] -> [^h00]; " Hold capability, EN=0
[.C.,  1, ^hFF] -> [^hFF]; " 1s in every bit
[.C.,  0, ^h00] -> [^hFF]; " Hold capability
[.C.,  1, ^h55] -> [^h55]; " Adjacent bits shorted
[.C.,  0, ^hAA] -> [^h55]; " Hold capability
DO NOT COPY[.C.,  1, ^hAA] -> [^hAA]; " Adjacent bits shorted
[.C.,  1, ^h55] -> [^h55]; " Load with quick setup
[.C.,  1, ^hAA] -> [^hAA]; " Again
END REG8EN
DO NOT COPYA typical approach to testing state machines is to write vectors that not
only cause the machine to visit every state, but also to exercise every transition
from every state. A key difference and challenge compared to combinational-
circuit test vectors is that the vectors must first drive the machine into the desired
state before testing a transition, and then come back again for each different
DO NOT COPY
transition from that state.
Thus, Table 7-34 shows test vectors for the state machine in Table 7-27.
It’s important to understand that, unlike combinational vectors, these vectors
work only if applied in exactly the order they are written. Notice that the vectors
were written to be independent of the state encoding. As a result, they don’t have
DO NOT COPY
to be modified if the state encoding is changed.
We encounter another challenge if we attempt to create test vectors for the
combination-lock state machine of Table 7-31 on page 539. This machine has a
major problem when it comes to testing—it has no reset input. Its starting state
at power-up may be different in PLD devices and technologies—the individual
DO NOT COPY
flip-flops may be all set, all reset, or all in random states. In the machine’s actual
application, we didn’t necessarily need a reset input, but for testing purposes we
somehow have to get to a known starting state.
Luckily, the combination-lock machine has a  synchronizing sequence—a synchronizing sequence
fixed sequence of one or more input values that will always drive it to a certainDO NOT COPY
known state. In particular, starting from any state, if we apply  X=1 to the
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

542  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Ta b l e 7 - 3 4  Test vectors for the state machine in Table 7-27.
test_vectors
DO NOT COPY([RESET_L, CLOCK, A, B] -> [QSTATE , LASTA, Z])
[  0  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [INIT  ,  0  , 0]; " Check -->INIT (RESET)
[  0  ,  .C. , 1, 0] -> [INIT  ,  1  , 0]; "  and LASTA flip-flop
[  1  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [LOOKING,  0  , 0]; " Come out of initialization
[  0  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [INIT  ,  0  , 0]; " Check LOOKING-->INIT (RESET)
[  1  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [LOOKING,  0  , 0]; " Come out of initialization
DO NOT COPY[  1  ,  .C. , 1, 0] -> [LOOKING,  1  , 0]; " --> LOOKING since 0!=1
[  1  ,  .C. , 1, 0] -> [OK  ,  1  , 1]; " --> OK since 1==1
[  0  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [INIT  ,  0  , 0]; " Check OK-->INIT (RESET)
[  1  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [LOOKING,  0  , 0]; " Go back towards OK ...
[  1  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [OK  ,  0  , 1]; " --> OK since 0==0
[  1  ,  .C. , 1, 1] -> [OK  ,  1  , 1]; " --> OK since B, even though 1!=0
DO NOT COPY
[  1  ,  .C. , 1, 0] -> [OK  ,  1  , 1]; " --> OK since 1==1
[  1  ,  .C. , 0, 0] -> [LOOKING,  0  , 0]; " --> LOOKING since 0!=1
machine for four ticks, we will always be in state  ZIP  by the fourth tick. This is
DO NOT COPYthe approach taken by the first four vectors in Table 7-35. Until we get to the
known state, we indicate the next-state on the right-hand side of the vector as
being “don’t care,” so the simulator or the physical device tester will not flag a
random state as an error.
Once we get going, we encounter something else that’s new—Mealy
DO NOT COPYoutputs that must be tested. As shown by the fourth and fifth vectors, we don’t
have to transition the clock in every test vector. Instead, we can keep the clock
fixed at 0, where the last transition left it, and observe the Mealy output values
produced by the two input values of  X. Then we can test the next state transition.
For the state transitions, we list the expected next state but we show the
DO NOT COPY
output values as don’t-cares. For a correct test vector, the outputs must show the
values attained  after  the transition, a function of the  next  state. Although it’s
possible to figure them out and include them, the complexity is enough to give
you a headache, and they will be tested by the next  CLOCK=0 vectors anyway.
Creating test vectors for a state machine by hand is a painstaking process,
DO NOT COPY
and no matter how careful you are, there’s no guarantee that you’ve tested all its
functions and potential hardware faults. For example, the vectors in Table 7-34
do not test (A  LASTA) = 10 in state  LOOKING, or (A  B  LASTA) = 100 in state  OK.
Thus, generating a complete set of test vectors for fault-detection purposes is a
DO NOT COPYprocess best left to an automatic test-generation program. In Table 7-35, we
SYNCHRONIZING We lucked out with the combination-lock; not all state machines have syn-
SEQUENCES AND chronizing sequences. This is why most state machines are designed with a
DO NOT COPY
RESET INPUTS reset input, which in effect allows a synchronizing sequence of length one.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.11  ABEL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  543
Ta b l e 7 - 3 5  Test vectors for the combination-lock state machine of Table 7-31.
test_vectors
([CLOCK, X] -> [DO NOT COPY  S  , UNLK, HINT])
[ .C. , 1] -> [.X.  , .X. , .X. ]; " Since no reset input, apply
[ .C. , 1] -> [.X.  , .X. , .X. ]; "  a 'synchronizing sequence'
[ .C. , 1] -> [.X.  , .X. , .X. ]; "  to reach a known starting
[ .C. , 1] -> [ZIP  , .X. , .X. ]; "  state
[  0  , 0] -> [ZIP  ,  0  ,  1  ]; " Test Mealy outputs for both
[  DO NOT COPY0  , 1] -> [ZIP  ,  0  ,  0  ]; "  values of X
[ .C. , 1] -> [ZIP  , .X. , .X. ]; " Test ZIP-->ZIP (X==1)
[ .C. , 0] -> [X0  , .X. , .X. ]; "  and ZIP-->X0 (X==0)
[  0  , 0] -> [X0  ,  0  ,  0  ]; " Test Mealy outputs for both
[  0  , 1] -> [X0  ,  0  ,  1  ]; "  values of X
[ .C. , 0] -> [X0  , .X. , .X. ]; " Test X0-->X0 (X==0)
DO NOT COPY
[ .C. , 1] -> [X01  , .X. , .X. ]; "  and X0-->X01 (X==1)
[  0  , 0] -> [X01  ,  0  ,  0  ]; " Test Mealy outputs for both
[  0  , 1] -> [X01  ,  0  ,  1  ]; "  values of X
[ .C. , 0] -> [X0  , .X. , .X. ]; " Test X01-->X0 (X==0)
[ .C. , 1] -> [X01  , .X. , .X. ]; " Get back to X01
[ .C. , 1] -> [X011DO NOT COPY  , .X. , .X. ]; " Test X01-->X011 (X==1)
petered out after writing vectors for the first few states; completing the test
vectors is left as an exercise (7.87). Still, on the functional testing side, writing a
few vectors to exercise the machine’s most basic functions can weed out obvious
design errors early in the process. More subtle design errors are best detected byDO NOT COPY
a thorough system-level simulation.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

544  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
7.12 VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features
DO NOT COPY
References
The problem of metastability has been around for a long time. Greek philoso-
DO NOT COPYphers wrote about the problem of indecision thousands of years ago. A group of
modern philosophers named Devo sang about metastability in the title song of
their  Freedom of Choice  album. And the U.S. Congress still can’t decide how to
“save” Social Security.
Scan capability can also be added to  D  latches; see McCluskey.
DO NOT COPY
Most ASICs and MSI-based designs use the sequential-circuit types
described in this chapter. However, there are other types that are used in both
older discrete designs %(going all the way back to vacuum-tube logic) and in
modern, custom VLSI designs.
For example, clocked synchronous state machines are a special case of a
DO NOT COPY
pulse-mode circuit more general class of  pulse-mode circuits. Such circuits have one or more  pulse
pulse input inputs  such that (a) only one pulse occurs at a time; (b) nonpulse inputs are stable
when a pulse occurs; (c) only pulses can cause state changes; and (d) a pulse
causes at most one state change. In clocked synchronous state machines, the
DO NOT COPYclock is the single pulse input, and a “pulse” is the triggering edge of the clock.
However, it is also possible to build circuits with multiple pulse inputs, and it is
possible to use storage elements other than the familiar edge-triggered flip-flops.
These possibilities are discussed thoroughly by Edward J. McCluskey in  Logic
Design Principles  (Prentice Hall, 1986).
DO NOT COPYA particularly important type of pulse-mode circuit discussed by McClus-
two-phase latch key and others is the  two-phase latch machine. The rationale for a two-phase
machine clocking approach in VLSI circuits is discussed by Carver Mead and Lynn Con-
way in  Introduction to VLSI Systems  (Addison-Wesley, 1980).
Fundamental-mode circuits need not use feedback loops as the memory
DO NOT COPY
elements. For example, McCluskey’s  Introduction to the Theory of Switching
Circuits  (McGraw-Hill, 1965) gives several examples of fundamental-mode cir-
cuits built from  SR  flip-flops. His 1986 book shows how transmission gates are
used to create memory in CMOS latches and flip-flops, and such circuits are
analyzed.
DO NOT COPY
Methods for reducing both completely and incompletely-specified state
tables are described in advanced logic design texts, including McCluskey’s 1986
book. A more mathematical discussion of these methods and other “theoretical”
topics in sequential machine design appears in  Switching and Finite Automata
Theory, 2nd ed., by Zvi Kohavi (McGraw-Hill, 1978).
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  545
As we showed in this chapter, improperly constructed state diagrams may
yield an ambiguous description of next-state behavior. The “IF-THEN-ELSE”
structures in HDLs like ABEL and VHDL can eliminate these ambiguities, but
DO NOT COPY
they were not the first to do so.  Algorithmic-state-machine (ASM)  notation, a algorithmic state
flowchart-like equivalent of nested  IF-THEN-ELSE  statements, has been around machine (ASM)
for over 25 years.
So-called  ASM charts  were pioneered at Hewlett-Packard Laboratories by ASM chart
Thomas E. Osborne and were further developed by Osborne’s colleague Christo-
DO NOT COPY
pher R. Clare in a book,  Designing Logic Systems Using State Machines
(McGraw-Hill, 1973). Design and synthesis methods using ASM charts subse-
quently found a home in many digital design texts, including  The Art of Digital
Design  by F. P. Prosser and D. E. Winkel (Prentice-Hall, 1987, 2nd ed.) and  Dig-
ital DesignDO NOT COPY  by M. Morris Mano (Prentice-Hall, 1984), as well as in the first two
editions of this book. Another notation for describing state machines, an exten-
sion of “traditional” state-diagram notation, is the mnemonic documented state
(MDS) diagram developed by William I. Fletcher in  An Engineering Approach
to Digital Design  (Prentice-Hall, 1980). All of these pioneering methods have
now been largely replaced by HDLs and their compilers.DO NOT COPY
Say something about CAD state-diagram entry tools. Too bad they’re not
ASM.
DO NOT COPY
Drill Problems
7.1  Give three examples of metastability that occur in everyday life, other than ones
discussed in this chapter.
7.2  Sketch the outputs of an  SR  latch of the type shown in Figure 7-5 for the input
DO NOT COPYwaveforms shown in Figure 7.2. Assume that input and output rise and fall times
are zero, that the propagation delay of a  NOR  gate is 10 ns, and that each time
division below is 10 ns.
S
DO NOT COPY
R
Figure X7.2
DO NOT COPY
7.3  Repeat Drill 7.2 using the input waveforms shown in Figure 7.3. Although you
may find the result unbelievable, this behavior can actually occur in real devices
whose transition times are short compared to their propagation delay.
7.4  Figure 7-34 showed how to build a T  flip-flop with enable using a  D flip-flop and
combinational logic. Show how to build a  D  flip-flop using a  T  flip-flop with
DO NOT COPY
enable and combinational logic.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

546  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
S
DO NOT COPY
R
Figure X7.3
7.5  Show how to build a JK  flip-flop using a T flip-flop with enable and combination-
DO NOT COPYal logic.
7.6  Show how to build an  SR  latch using a single 74x74 positive-edge-triggered  D
flip-flop and  no  other components.
7.7  Show how to build a flip-flop equivalent to the 74x109 positive-edge-triggered
JKN  flip-flop using a 74x74 positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop and one or more
DO NOT COPY
gates from a 74x00 package.
7.8  Show how to build a flip-flop equivalent to the 74x74 positive-edge-triggered  D
flip-flop using a 74x109 positive-edge-triggered  JKN  flip-flop and  no  other
components.
7.9  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.9. Write excitation
DO NOT COPY
equations, excitation/transition table, and state/output table (use state names  A–D
for  Q1 Q2  =  00–11).
X
Z
DO NOT COPYQ1  Q2
D  Q D  Q
CLK Q CLK Q
DO NOT COPYCLK
Figure X7.9
7.10  Repeat Drill 7.9, swapping  AND  and  OR  gates in the logic diagram. Is the new
state/output table the “dual” of the original one? Explain.
DO NOT COPY
7.11  Draw a state diagram for the state machine described by Table 7-6.
7.12  Draw a state diagram for the state machine described by Table 7-12.
7.13  Draw a state diagram for the state machine described by Table 7-14.
7.14  Construct a state and output table equivalent to the state diagram in Figure 7.14.
Note that the diagram is drawn with the convention that the state does not change
DO NOT COPY
except for input conditions that are explicitly shown.
7.15  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.15. Write excitation
equations, excitation/transition table, and state table (use state names  A–H for  Q2
Q1 Q0  =  000–111).
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  547
A  X B
Z1 Z2 = 11 Z1 Z2 = 10
DO NOT COPY
X′ • Y
X
E  Y F
Z1 Z2 = 01 Z1 Z2 = 00
DO NOT COPYX X
G  Y H
Z1 Z2 = 10 Z1 Z2 = 11
X
X′ • Y
DO NOT COPYC  X D
Z1 Z2 = 00 Z1 Z2 = 01
Figure X7.14
Q2
DO NOT COPYQ1
DO NOT COPY
D  Q D  Q D  Q
CLK CLK CLK Q0
CLK
DO NOT COPYFigure X7.15
7.16  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.16. Write excitation
equations, excitation/transition table, and state/output table (use state names  A–H
for  Q1 Q2 Q3  =  000–111).
Q1
DO NOT COPY
Q2
Y
X D  Q D  Q D  Q Q3
CLK CLK Q CLK
DO NOT COPY
CLK
Figure X7.16
7.17  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.17. Write excitation
DO NOT COPY
equations, transition equations, transition table, and state/output table (use state
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

548  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
names A–D for Q1 Q2 = 00–11). Draw a state diagram, and draw a timing diagram
for  CLK,  X,  Q1, and  Q2  for 10 clock ticks, assuming that the machine starts in
state 00 and  X  is continuously 1.
DO NOT COPY
Q1
X
J  J 
Q Q Q2
CLK CLK
DO NOT COPYK K Q
CLK
Figure X7.17
DO NOT COPY
7.18  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.18. Write excitation
equations, transition equations, transition table, and state/output table (use state
names A–D for Q1 Q0 = 00–11). Draw a state diagram, and draw a timing diagram
for  CLK,  EN,  Q1, and  Q0  for 10 clock ticks, assuming that the machine starts in
state 00 and  EN  is continuously 1.
DO NOT COPY
EN MAX
JK1 
J  Q0  J  Q1
Q Q
CLK CLK
Q Q
K K
DO NOT COPY
CLK
Figure X7.18
7.19  Analyze the clocked synchronous state machine in Figure 7.19. Write excitation
DO NOT COPYequations, excitation/transition table, and state/output table (use state names  A–D
for  Q1  Q2  =  00–11).
X
DO NOT COPY
Q1  Q2
Y EN  Q EN  Q
Z
T Q T Q
CLK
DO NOT COPY
Figure X7.19
7.20  All of the state diagrams in Figure X7.20 are ambiguous. List all of the ambigu-
ities in these state diagrams. (Hint:  Use Karnaugh maps where necessary to find
uncovered and double-covered input combinations.)
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  549
W  + X
(b) 
(a)
W
X A  B
DO NOT COPYA  B
X + Z′ X′ • Z W • Z
X′  Y 1
X + Y
DO NOT COPY1 C  D
C  D • 
X  Y
W + Z
DO NOT COPYW′ X X′
X X • Z′ (d)
(c) 
X′ • Y′ A  X′ • Y′ • Z′  W′ • Y′ • Z′ B
A  B
•  • 
DO NOT COPYX′  Y Z  X  Z′ W  Y
Z X • Y
•  •  •  • 
Z′ C  W′  X′  Y′  W′  X′  Z′ D
C  D
DO NOT COPYZ′ Z Y′
X +  Y′
Figure X7.20
7.21  Synthesize a circuit for the state diagram of Figure 7-64 using six variables to
encode the state, where the  LA–LC  and  RA–RC  outputs equal the state variables
DO NOT COPY
themselves. Write a transition list, a transition equation for each state variable as
a sum of p-terms, and simplified transition/excitation equations for a realization
using  D  flip-flops. Draw a circuit diagram using SSI and MSI components.
7.22  Starting with the transition list in Table 7-18, find a minimal sum-of-products
expression for  Q2∗, assuming that the next states for the unused states are true
DO NOT COPY
don’t-cares.
7.23  Modify the state diagram of Figure 7-64 so that the machine goes into hazard
mode immediately if  LEFT and  RIGHT are asserted simultaneously during a turn.
Write the corresponding transition list.
DO NOT COPY
Exercises
7.24  Explain how metastability occurs in a  D  latch when the setup and hold times are
not met, analyzing the behavior of the feedback loop inside the latch.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

550  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
7.25  What is the minimum setup time of a pulse-triggered flip-flop such as a master/
slave  J-K  or  S-R  flip-flop? (Hint:  It depends on certain characteristics of the
clock.)
DO NOT COPY
7.26  Describe a situation, other than the metastable state, in which the  Q  and /Q  out-
puts of a 74x74 edge-triggered  D  flip-flop may be noncomplementary for an
arbitrarily long time.
7.27  Compare the circuit in Figure 7.27 with the  D  latch in Figure 7-12. Prove that the
circuits function identically. In what way is Figure 7.27, which is used in some
DO NOT COPY
commercial  D  latches, better?
D
C Q
DO NOT COPY
/Q
Figure X7.27
DO NOT COPY
7.28  Suppose  that  a  clocked  synchronous  state  machine  with  the  structure  of
Figure 7-35 is designed using  D  latches with active-high  C  inputs as storage ele-
ments. For proper next-state operation, what relationships must be satisfied
among the following timing parameters?
DO NOT COPY
tFmin ,  tFmax  Minimum and maximum propagation delay of the next-state logic.
tCQmin ,  tCQmax  Minimum and maximum clock-to-output delay of a  D latch.
tDQmin,  tDQmax  Minimum and maximum data-to-output delay of a  D latch.
tsetup , thold  Setup and hold times of a  D  latch.
DO NOT COPYt ,  t Clock HIGH and  LOW  times.
H L 
7.29  Redesign the state machine in Drill 7.9 using just three inverting gates—NAND
or  NOR—and no inverters.
7.30  Draw a state diagram for a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,
DO NOT COPYINIT  and  X, and one Moore-type output Z. As long as  INIT is asserted, Z  is contin-
uously 0. Once  INIT  is negated,  Z  should remain 0 until  X  has been 0 for two
successive ticks and 1 for two successive ticks, regardless of the order of occur-
rence. Then  Z  should go to 1 and remain 1 until  INIT  is asserted again. Your state
diagram should be neatly drawn and planar (no crossed lines). (Hint:  No more
DO NOT COPYthan ten states are required).
7.31  Design a clocked synchronous state machine that checks a serial data line for even
parity. The circuit should have two inputs,  SYNC  and  DATA, in addition to
CLOCK, and one Moore-type output,  ERROR. Devise a state/output table that
does the job using just four states, and include a description of each state's mean-
DO NOT COPYing in the table. Choose a 2-bit state assignment, write transition and excitation
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  551
equations, and draw the logic diagram. Your circuit may use D flip-flops, J-K flip-
flops, or one of each.
7.32  Design a clocked synchronous state machine with the state/output table shown in
DO NOT COPY
Table 7.32, using  D  flip-flops. Use two state variables,  Q1 Q2, with the state
assignment  A = 00, B = 01, C = 11, D = 10.
Ta b l e X 7 . 3 2  X
DO NOT COPYS  0  1  Z
A  B  D  0
B  C  B  0
C  B  A  1
DO NOT COPYD  B  C  0
S*
7.33  Repeat Exercise 7.32 using  J-K  flip-flops.
7.34DO NOT COPY  Write a new transition table and derive minimal-cost excitation and output equa-
tions for the state table in Table 7-6 using the “simplest” state assignment in
Table 7-7 and  D  flip-flops. Compare the cost of your excitation and output logic
(when realized with a two-level  AND-OR  circuit) with the circuit in Figure 7-54.
7.35  Repeat Exercise 7.34 using the “almost one-hot” state assignment in Table 7-7.
DO NOT COPY
7.36  Suppose that the state machine in Figure 7-54 is to be built using 74LS74  D  flip-
flops. What signals should be applied to the flip-flop preset and clear inputs?
7.37  Write new transition and excitation tables and derive minimal-cost excitation and
output equations for the state table in Table 7-6 using the “simplest” state assign-
ment in Table 7-7 and  J-K  flip-flops. Compare the cost of your excitation and
DO NOT COPY
output logic (when realized with a two-level  AND-OR  circuit) with the circuit in
Figure 7-56.
7.38  Repeat Exercise 7.37 using the “almost one-hot” state assignment in Table 7-7.
7.39  Construct an application table similar to Table 7-10 for each of the following flip-
flop types: (a)  S-R; (b)  T with enable; (c)  D with enable. Discuss the unique prob-
DO NOT COPY
lem that you encounter when trying to make the most efficient use of don’t-cares
with one of these flip-flops.
7.40  Construct a new excitation table and derive minimal-cost excitation and output
equations for the state machine of Table 7-8 using  T  flip-flops with enable inputs
(Figure 7-33). Compare the cost of your excitation and output logic (when real-
DO NOT COPY
ized with a two-level  AND-OR circuit) with the circuit in Figure 7-54.
7.41  Determine the full 8-state table of the circuit in Figure 7-54. Use the names  U1,
U2, and  U3  for the unused states (001, 010, and 011). Draw a state diagram and
explain the behavior of the unused states.
7.42  Repeat Exercise 7.41 for the circuit of Figure 7-56.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

552  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
7.43  Write a transition table for the nonminimal state table in Figure 7-51(a) that
results from assigning the states in binary counting order,  INIT–OKA1  =  000–110.
Write corresponding excitation equations for  D  flip-flops, assuming a minimal-
DO NOT COPYcost disposition of the unused state 111. Compare the cost of your equations with
the minimal-cost equations for the minimal state table presented in the text.
7.44  Write the application table for a  T  flip-flop with enable.
7.45  In many applications, the outputs produced by a state machine during or shortly
after reset are irrelevant, as long as the machine begins to behave correctly a short
DO NOT COPY
time after the reset signal is removed. If this idea is applied to Table 7-6, the  INIT
state can be removed and only two state variables are needed to code the remain-
ing four states. Redesign the state machine using this idea. Write a new state
table, transition table, excitation table for  D  flip-flops, minimal-cost excitation
and output equations, and logic diagram. Compare the cost of the new circuit with
DO NOT COPYthat of Figure 7-54.
7.46  Repeat Exercise 7.45 using  J-K  flip-flops, and use Figure 7-56 to compare cost.
7.47  Redesign the 1s-counting machine of Table 7-12, assigning the states in binary
counting order (S0–S3  = 00, 01, 10, 11). Compare the cost of the resulting sum-
of-products excitation equations with the ones derived in the text.
DO NOT COPY
7.48  Repeat Exercise 7.47 using  J-K  flip-flops.
7.49  Repeat Exercise 7.47 using  T  flip-flops with enable.
7.50  Redesign the combination-lock machine of Table 7-14, assigning coded states in
Gray-code order (A–H  =  000, 001, 011, 010, 110, 111, 101, 100). Compare the
cost of the resulting sum-of-products excitation equations with the ones derived
DO NOT COPY
in the text.
7.51  Find a 3-bit state assignment for the combination-lock machine of Table 7-14 that
results in less costly excitation equations than the ones derived in the text. (Hint:
Use the fact that inputs 1–3 are the same as inputs 4–6 in the required input
sequence.)
DO NOT COPY
7.52  What changes would be made to the excitation and output equations for the com-
bination-lock machine in Section 7.4.6 as the result of performing a formal
multiple-output minimization procedure (Section 4.3.8) on the five functions?
You need not construct 31 product maps and go through the whole procedure; you
should be able to “eyeball” the excitation and output maps in Section 7.4.6 to see
DO NOT COPY
what savings are possible.
7.53  Synthesize a circuit for the ambiguous state diagram in Figure 7-62. Use the state
assignment in Table 7-16. Write a transition list, a transition equation for each
state variable as a sum of p-terms, and simplified transition/excitation equations
for a realization using  D  flip-flops. Determine the actual next state of the circuit,
DO NOT COPY
starting from the  IDLE  state, for each of the following input combinations on
(LEFT,  RIGHT, HAZ): (1,0,1), (0,1,1), (1,1,0), (1,1,1). Comment on the machine’s
behavior in these cases.
7.54  Suppose that for a state  SA  and an input combination  I, an ambiguous state dia-
gram indicates that there are two next states, SB and  SC. The actual next state  SD
DO NOT COPY
for this transition depends on the state machine’s realization. If the state machine
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  553
is synthesized using the  V∗  =  Σp-terms where  V∗  =  1) method to obtain transi-
tion/excitation equations for  D  flip-flops, what is the relationship between the
coded states for  SB,  SC, and  SD? Explain.
DO NOT COPY
7.55  Repeat Exercise 7.54, assuming that the machine is synthesized using the  V∗′  =
Σp-terms where  V∗  =  0) method.
7.56  Suppose that for a state  SA  and an input combination  I, an ambiguous state dia-
gram does not define a next state. The actual next state  SD  for this transition
depends on the state machine’s realization. Suppose that the state machine is syn-
DO NOT COPY
thesized using the  V∗  =  Σp-terms where  V∗  =  1) method to obtain transition/
excitation equations for  D  flip-flops. What coded state is  SD? Explain.
7.57  Repeat Exercise 7.56, assuming that the machine is synthesized using the  V∗′  =
Σp-terms where  V∗  =  0) method.
7.58  Given the transition equations for a clocked synchronous state machine that is to
DO NOT COPY
be built using master/slave S-R flip-flops, how can the excitation equations for the
S  and  R  inputs be derived? (Hint:  Show that any transition equation,  Qi∗  =  expr,
can be written in the form Qi∗ =  Qi ⋅ expr1 +  Qi′ ⋅ expr2, and see where that leads.)
7.59  Repeat Exercise 7.58 for  J-K flip-flops. How can the “don’t-cares” that are possi-
ble in a  J-K  design be specified?
DO NOT COPY
7.60  Draw a logic diagram for the output logic of the guessing-game machine in
Table 7-18 using a single 74x139 dual 2-to-4 decoder. (Hint:  Use active-low
outputs.)
7.61  What does the personalized license plate in Figure 7-60 stand for? (Hint:  It’s a
computer engineer’s version of OTTFFSS.)
DO NOT COPY
7.62  Analyze the feedback sequential circuit in Figure 7-19, assuming that the  PR_L
and CLR_L  inputs are always 1. Derive excitation equations, construct a transition
table, and analyze the transition table for critical and noncritical races. Name the
states, and write a state/output table and a flow/output table. Show that the flow
table performs the same function as Figure 7-85.
DO NOT COPY
7.63  Draw the logic diagram for a circuit that has one feedback loop, but that is  not  a
sequential circuit. That is, the circuit's output should be a function of its current
input only. In order to prove your case, break the loop and analyze the circuit as
if it were a feedback sequential circuit, and demonstrate that the outputs for each
input combination do not depend on the “state.”
DO NOT COPY
7.64  A BUT flop may be constructed from a single NBUT gate as shown in Figure 7.64. BUT  flop
(An NBUT  gate  is simply a  BUT  gate with inverted outputs; see Exercise 5.31 for NBUT  flop
the definition of a  BUT  gate.) Analyze the BUT  flop as a feedback sequential cir-
cuit and obtain excitation equations, transition table, and flow table. Is this circuit
good for anything, or is it a flop?
DO NOT COPY
7.65  Repeat Exercise 7.64 for the  BUT  flop in Figure 7.65.
7.66  A clever student designed the circuit in Figure 7.66 to create a  BUT  gate. But the
circuit didn't always work correctly. Analyze the circuit and explain why.
7.67  Show that a 4-bit ones’-complement adder with end-around carry is a feedback
DO NOT COPYsequential circuit.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

554  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
Q1
X1 
DO NOT COPY
X2
Q2
Figure X7.64
DO NOT COPY
Q1
X1 
X2
Q2
DO NOT COPY
Figure X7.65
74LS139
1  4
1G 1Y0
5
DO NOT COPY1Y1
2 6 74LS04
A1 1A 1Y2
3 7  1 2
B1 1B 1Y3 Z1
U2
15  12
2G 2Y0
11
DO NOT COPY2Y1
14 10 74LS04
A2 2A 2Y2
13 9 3 4
B2 2B 2Y3 Z2
U1 U2
Figure X7.66
DO NOT COPY
7.68  Analyze the feedback sequential circuit in Figure 7.68. Break the feedback loops,
write excitation equations, and construct a transition and output table, showing
the stable total states. What application might this circuit have?
7.69  Complete the analysis of the positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop in Figure 7-86,
DO NOT COPY
including transition/output, state/output, and flow/output tables. Show that its
behavior is equivalent to that of the  D  flip-flop in Figure 7-78.
7.70  We claimed in Section 7.10.1 that all single-loop feedback sequential circuits
have an excitation equation of the form
DO NOT COPYQ∗  =  (forcing term)  +  (holding term)  ⋅  Q
Why aren’t there any practical circuits whose excitation equation substitutes  Q′
for  Q  above?
7.71  Design a latch with two control inputs,  C1  and  C2, and three data inputs,  D1,  D2,
and D3. The latch is to be “open” only if both control inputs are 1, and it is to store
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  555
DO NOT COPY
Y1
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Y2
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Y3
DO NOT COPY
a 1 if any of the data inputs is 1. Use hazard-free two-level sum-of-products cir-
cuits for the excitation functions.
7.72DO NOT COPY  Repeat Exercise 7.71, but minimize the number of gates required; the excitation
circuits may have multiple levels of logic.
7.73  Redraw the timing diagram in Figure 7-90, showing the internal state variables of
the pulse-catching circuit of Figure 7-100, assuming that it starts in state 00.
n 
7.74  The general solution for obtaining a race-free state assignment of 2 states using
DO NOT COPY2n−1  state variables yields the adjacency diagram shown in Figure 7.74 for the  n
= 2 case. Compare this diagram with Figure 7-97. Which is better, and why?
7.75  Design a fundamental-mode flow table for a pulse-catching circuit similar to the
one described in Section 7.10.2, except that the circuit should detect both 0-to-1
and 1-to-0 transitions on  P.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

556  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles
C2 D2
110 111
DO NOT COPY
B1  B2
010 011
A1  A2
DO NOT COPY
000 001
C1 D1
100 101
DO NOT COPYFigure X7.74
7.76  Design a fundamental-mode flow table for a double-edge-triggered  D  flip-flop,
one that samples its inputs and changes its outputs on both edges of the clock
signal.
7.77  Design a fundamental-mode flow table for a circuit with two inputs,  EN  and
DO NOT COPY
CLKIN, and a single output, CLKOUT, with the following behavior. A clock period
is defined to be the interval between successive rising edges of  CLKIN. If  EN  is
asserted during an entire given clock period, then CLKOUT  should be “on” during
the next clock period; that is, it should be identical to CLKIN. If EN is negated dur-
ing an entire given clock period, then  CLKOUT  should be “off” (constant 1)
DO NOT COPYduring the next clock period. If  EN  is both asserted and negated during a given
clock period, then CLKOUT  should be on in the next period if it had been off, and
off if it had been on. After writing the fundamental-mode flow table, reduce it by
combining “compatible” states if possible.
7.78  Design a circuit that meets the specifications of Exercise 7.77 using edge-trig-
DO NOT COPYgered D flip-flops (74LS74) or JK flip-flops (74LS109) and NAND and NOR gates
without feedback loops. Give a complete circuit diagram and word description of
how your circuit achieves the desired behavior.
7.79  Which of the circuits of the two preceding exercises is (are) subject to metasta-
bility, and under what conditions?
DO NOT COPY
7.80  For the flow table in Table 7-36, find an assignment of state variables that avoids
all critical races. Additional states may be added as necessary, but use as few state
variables as possible. Assign the all-0s combination to state A. Draw the adjacen-
cy diagram for the original flow table, and write the modified flow table and
another adjacency diagram to support your final state-variable assignment.
DO NOT COPY
7.81  Prove that the fundamental-mode flow table of any flip-flop that samples input(s)
and change(s) outputs on the rising edge only of a clock signal  CLK  contains an
essential hazard.
7.82  Locate the essential hazard(s) in the flow table for a positive-edge-triggered  D
flip-flop, Figure 7-85.
DO NOT COPY
7.83  Identify the essential hazards, if any, in the flow table developed in Exercise 7.76.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 7.12  VHDL Sequential-Circuit Design Features  557
Ta b l e 7 - 3 6
X Y
S  00  01  11  10
DO NOT COPY
A  B  C  ––  A
B  B  E  ––  B
C  F  C  ––  E
DO NOT COPY
D  D  F  ––  B
E  D  E  ––  E
F  F  F  ––  A
DO NOT COPY
S*
7.84  Identify the essential hazards, if any, in the flow table developed in Exercise 7.77.
7.85  Build a verbal flip-flop—a logical word puzzle that can be answered correctly in
either of two ways depending on state. How might such a device be adapted to the
DO NOT COPYpolitical arena?
7.86  Modify the ABEL program in Table 7-27 to use an output-coded state assign-
ment, thereby reducing the total number of PLD outputs required by one.
7.87  Finish writing the test vectors, started in Table 7-35, for the combination-lock
state machine of Table 7-31. The complete set of vectors should test all of the
DO NOT COPY
state transitions and all of the output values for every state and input combination.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

558  Chapter 7  Sequential Logic Design Principles

--- Page Break ---

74x163
2
CLK
1 c h a p t e r
CLR
DO NOT
9
LD
7
ENP
8
10
ENT
3 14
A QA
4 13
B QB
5 12 COPY
C QC
6 11
D QD 
15
RCO
DO NOT
Sequential Logic Design
PracticesCOPY
he purpose of this chapter is to familiarize you with the most
commonly  used  and  dependable  sequential-circuit  design
DO NOT
methods. Therefore, we will emphasize  synchronous systems, that
T
is, systems in which all flip-flops are clocked by the same,
common clock signal. Although it’s true that all the world does not march to
the tick of a common clock, within the confines of a digital system or
subsystem we can make it so. When we interconnect digital systems orCOPY
subsystems that use different clocks, we can usually identify a limited
number of asynchronous signals that need special treatment, as we’ll show
later.
We begin this chapter with a quick summary of sequential circuit
documentation standards. After revisiting the most basic building blocks ofDO NOT
sequential-circuit design—latches and flip-flops—we describe some of the
most  flexible  building  blocks—sequential PLDs. Next  we  show  how
counters and shift registers are realized in both MSI devices and PLDs, and
show some of their applications. Finally, we show how these elements come
COPY
together in synchronous systems and how the inevitable asynchronous
inputs are handled.
DO NOT
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 561
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

562  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.1 Sequential Circuit Documentation Standards
8.1.1 General Requirements
DO NOT COPYBasic documentation standards in areas like signal naming, logic symbols, and
schematic layout, which we introduced in Chapter 5, apply to digital systems as
a whole and therefore to sequential circuits in particular. However, there are
several ideas to highlight for system elements that are specifically “sequential”:
DO NOT COPY•  State-machine layout. Within a logic diagram, a collection of flip-flops and
combinational logic that forms a state machine should be drawn together
in a logical format on the same page, so the fact that it is a state machine is
obvious. (You shouldn’t have to flip pages to find the feedback path!)
•  Cascaded elements.  In a similar way, registers, counters, and shift registers
DO NOT COPY
that use multiple ICs should have the ICs grouped together in the schematic
so that the cascading structure is obvious.
•  Flip-flops.  The  symbols  for  individual  sequential-circuit  elements,
especially flip-flops, should rigorously follow the appropriate drawing
standards, so that the type, function, and clocking behavior of the elements
DO NOT COPY
are clear.
•  State-machine descriptions.  State machines should be described by state
tables, state diagrams, transition lists, or text files in a state-machine
description language such as ABEL or VHDL.
DO NOT COPY
•  Timing diagrams.  The documentation package for sequential circuits
should include timing diagrams that show the general timing assumptions
and timing behavior of the circuit.
•  Timing specifications.  A sequential circuit should be accompanied by a
DO NOT COPYspecification of the timing requirements for proper internal operation (e.g.,
maximum clock frequency), as well as the requirements for any externally
supplied inputs (e.g., setup- and hold-time requirements with respect to the
system clock, minimum pulse widths, etc.).
DO NOT COPY8.1.2 Logic Symbols
We introduced traditional symbols for flip-flops in Section 7.2. Flip-flops are
always drawn as rectangular-shaped symbols, and follow the same general
guidelines as other rectangular-shaped symbols—inputs on the left, outputs on
the right, bubbles for active levels, and so on. In addition, some specific guide-
DO NOT COPYlines apply to flip-flop symbols:
•  A dynamic indicator is placed on edge-triggered clock inputs.
•  A postponed-output indicator is placed on master/slave outputs that change
at the end interval during which the clock is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
•  Asynchronous preset and clear inputs may be shown at the top and bottom
of a flip-flop symbol—preset at the top and clear at the bottom.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.1  Sequential Circuit Documentation Standards  563
The logic  symbols for larger-scale  sequential elements, such as the
counters and shift register described later in this chapter, are generally drawn
with all inputs, including presets and clears, on the left, and all outputs on the
DO NOT COPY
right. Bidirectional signals may be drawn on the left or the right, whichever is
convenient.
Like individual flip-flops, larger-scale sequential elements use a dynamic
indicator to indicate edge-triggered clock inputs. In “traditional” symbols, the
names of the inputs and outputs give a clue of their function, but they are some-
DO NOT COPY
times ambiguous. For example, two elements described later in this chapter, the
74x161 and 74x163 4-bit counters, have exactly the same traditional symbol,
even though the behavior of their  CLR  inputs is completely different.
DO NOT COPY
IEEE STANDARD IEEE standard symbols, which we show in Appendix A for all of the sequential
SYMBOLS elements in this chapter, have a rich set of notation that can provide an unambiguous
definition of every signal’s function.
DO NOT COPY
8.1.3 State-Machine Descriptions
So far we have dealt with six different representations of state machines:
•  Word descriptions
•DO NOT COPY  State tables
•  State diagrams
•  Transition lists
•  ABEL programs
•DO NOT COPY  VHDL programs
You might think that having all these different ways to represent state machines
is a problem—too much for you to learn! Well, they’re not all that difficult to
learn, but there  is  a subtle problem here.
Consider a similar problem in programming, where high-level “pseudo-
DO NOT COPY
code” or perhaps a flowchart might be used to document how a program works.
The pseudo-code may express the programmer’s intentions very well, but errors,
misinterpretations, and typos can occur when the pseudo-code is translated into
real code. In any creative process, inconsistencies can occur when there are
multiple representations of how things work.DO NOT COPY
The same kind of inconsistencies can occur in state-machine design. A inconsistent
logic designer may document a machine’s desired behavior with a 100%-correct state-machine
representations
hand-drawn state diagram, but you can make mistakes translating the diagram
into a program, and there are  lots  of opportunities to mess up if you have to
“turning the crank” manually to translate the state diagram into a state table,DO NOT COPY
transition table, excitation equations, and logic diagram.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

564  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
The solution to this problem is similar to the one adopted by programmers
who write self-documenting code using a high-level language. The key is to
select a representation that is both expressive of the designer’s intentions  and
DO NOT COPY
that can be translated into a physical realization using an error-free, automated
process. (You don’t hear many programmers screaming “Compiler bug!” when
their programs don’t work the first time.)
The best solution (for now, at least) is to write state-machine “programs”
directly in a high-level state-machine description language like ABEL or
DO NOT COPY
VHDL, and to avoid alternate representations, other than general, summary
word descriptions. Languages like ABEL and VHDL are easily readable and
allow automatic conversion of the description into a PLD-, FPGA-, or ASIC-
based realization. Some CAD tools allow state machines to be specified and
DO NOT COPYsynthesized using state diagrams, or even using sample timing diagrams, but
these can often lead to ambiguities and unanticipated results. Thus, we’ll use
ABEL/VHDL approach exclusively for the rest of this book.
8.1.4 Timing Diagrams and Specifications
DO NOT COPYWe showed many examples of timing diagrams in Chapters 5 and 7. In the
design of synchronous systems, most timing diagrams show the relationship
between the clock and various input, output, and internal signals.
Figure 8-1 shows a fairly typical timing diagram that specifies the require-
ments and characteristics of input and output signals in a synchronous circuit.
DO NOT COPY
The first line shows the system clock and its nominal timing parameters. The
remaining lines show a range of delays for other signals.
For example, the second line shows that flip-flops change their outputs at
some time between the rising edge of  CLOCK  and time  tffpd  afterward. External
circuits that sample these signals should not do so while they are changing. The
DO NOT COPY
timing diagram is drawn as if the minimum value of  tffpd  is zero; a complete
CLOCK
Figure 8-1
A detailed timing t t
DO NOT COPYH L
t
diagram showing clk
propagation delays flip-flop
and setup and hold outputs
times with respect to t
ffpd
the clock.
DO NOT COPYcombinational
outputs
tcomb
flip-flop
inputs
DO NOT COPY
setup-time margin tsetup thold
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.1  Sequential Circuit Documentation Standards  565
documentation package would include a timing table indicating the actual
minimum, typical, and maximum values of  tffpd  and all other timing parameters.
The third line of the timing diagram shows the additional time,  tcomb ,
DO NOT COPY
required for the flip-flop output changes to propagate through combinational
logic elements, such as flip-flop excitation logic. The excitation inputs of flip-
flops and other clocked devices require a setup time of t setup, as shown in the
fourth line. For proper circuit operation we must have  tclk − tffpd − tcomb  >  tsetup .
Timing margins indicate how much “worse than worst-case” the individual timing margin
DO NOT COPY
components of a circuit can be without causing the circuit to fail. Well-designed
systems have positive, nonzero timing margins to allow for unexpected circum-
stances (marginal components, brown-outs, engineering errors, etc.) and clock
skew (Section 8.8.1).
DO NOT COPYThe value tclk − tffpd(max) − tcomb(max) − tsetup  is called the  setup-time margin; setup-time margin
if this is negative, the circuit won’t work. Note that  maximum  propagation delays
are used to calculate setup-time margin. Another timing margin involves the
hold-time requirement  thold ; the sum of the  minimum  values of  tffpd  and  tcomb
must be greater than  thold , and the  hold-time margin  is  tffpd(min) + tcomb(min) − thold . hold-time margin
DO NOT COPYThe timing diagram in Figure 8-1 does not show the timing differences
between different flip-flop inputs or combinational-logic signals, even though
such differences exist in most circuits. For example, one flip-flop’s  Q  output
may be connected directly to another flip-flop’s  D  input, so that  tcomb  for
that path is zero, while another’s may go the ripple-carry path of a 32-bit
DO NOT COPY
adder before reaching a flip-flop input. When proper synchronous design
methodology is used, these relative timings are not critical, since none of these
signals affect the state of the circuit until a clock edge occurs. You merely have
to find the longest delay path in one clock period to determine whether the
circuit will work. However, you may have to analyze several different paths in
DO NOT COPY
order to find the worst-case one.
Another, perhaps more common, type of timing diagram shows only
functional behavior and is not concerned with actual delay amounts; an example
is shown in Figure 8-2. Here, the clock is “perfect.” Whether to show signal
changes as vertical or slanted lines is strictly a matter of personal taste in this and
DO NOT COPY
all other timing diagrams, unless rise and fall times must be explicitly indicated.
Clock transitions are shown as vertical lines in this and other figures in keeping
with the idea that the clock is a “perfect” reference signal.
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
Figure 8-2
Functional timing of a
SYNC_L
synchronous circuit.
SIG1
DO NOT COPY
DBUS  DATA1  DATA2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

566  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
NOTHING’S In reality, there’s no such thing as a perfect clock signal. One imperfection that most
PERFECT designers of high-speed digital circuits have to deal with is “clock skew.” As we
DO NOT COPY
show in Section 8.8.1, a given clock edge arrives at different circuit inputs at differ-
ent times because of differences in wiring delays, loading, and other effects.
Another imperfection, a bit beyond the scope of this text, is “clock jitter.” A
10-MHz clock does not have a period of exactly 100 ns on every cycle—it may be
100.05 ns in one cycle, and 99.95 ns in the next. This is not a big deal in such a slow
DO NOT COPY
circuit, but in a 500-MHz circuit, the same 0.1 ns of jitter eats up 5% of the 2-ns
timing budget. And the jitter in some clock sources is even higher!
The other signals in Figure 8-2 may be flip-flop outputs, combinational
DO NOT COPYoutputs, or flip-flop inputs. Shading is used to indicate “don’t-care” signal
values; cross-hatching as in Figure 8-1 on the preceding page could be used
instead. All of the signals are shown to change immediately after the clock edge.
In reality, the outputs change sometime later, and inputs may change just barely
before the next clock edge. However, “lining up” everything on the clock edge
DO NOT COPY
allows  the  timing  diagram  to  display  more  clearly  which  functions  are
performed during each clock period. Signals that are lined up with the clock are
simply understood to change sometime  after  the clock edge, with timing that
meets the setup- and hold-time requirements of the circuit. Many timing
diagrams of this type appear in this chapter.
DO NOT COPY
Table 8-1 shows manufacturer’s timing parameters for commonly used
flip-flops, registers, and latches in CMOS and TTL. “Typical” values are for
Ta b l e 8 - 1  Propagation delay in ns of selected CMOS flip-flops, registers, and latches.
DO NOT COPY74HCT 74AHCT 74FCT 74LS
Part Parameter Typ.  Max.  Typ.  Max.  Min.  Max.  Typ.  Max.
’74  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  or  Q  35  44  6.3  10  25  40
tpd ,  PR↓  or  CLR↓  to  Q  or  Q  40  50  8.1  13  25  40
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  12  15  5  20
DO NOT COPY
th,  D  from  CLK↑  3  3  0  5
trec ,  CLK↑  from  PR↑  or  CLR↑  6  8  3.5
tw,  CLK  low or high  18  23  5  25
tw,  PR  or  CLR  low  16  20  5  25
’174DO NOT COPY  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  40  50  6.3  10  21  30
tpd ,  CLR↓  to  Q  44  55  8.1  13  23  35
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  16  20  5  20
th,  D  from  CLK↑  5  5  0  5
trec ,  CLK↑  from  CLR↑  12  15  3.5  25
DO NOT COPYtw,  CLK  low or high  20  25  5  20
tw,  CLR  low  25  31  5  20
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.1  Sequential Circuit Documentation Standards  567
Ta b l e 8 - 1  (continued) Propagation delay in ns of selected CMOS flip-flops, registers, and latches.
74HCT 74AHCT 74FCT 74LS
PartDO NOT COPYParameter Typ.  Max.  Typ.  Max.  Min.  Max.  Typ.  Max.
’175  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  or  Q  33  41  21  30
tpd ,  CLR↓  to  Q  or  Q  35  44  23  35
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  20  25  20
t ,  D  from  CLK↑  5  5  5
DO NOT COPYh
trec ,  CLK↑  from  CLR↑  5  5  25
tw,  CLK  low or high  20  25  20
tw,  CLR  low  20  25  20
’273  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  30  38  6.8  11  2  7.2  18  27
DO NOT COPYt ,  CLR↓  to  Q  32  40  8.5  12.6  2  7.2  18  27
pd 
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  12  15  5  2  20
th,  D  from  CLK↑  3  3  0  1.5  5
trec ,  CLK↑  from  CLR↑  10  13  2.5  2  25
tw,  CLK  low or high  20  25  6.5  4  20
DO NOT COPY
tw,  CLR  low  12  15  6  5  20
’373  tpd ,  C↑  to  Q  35  44  8.5  14.5  2  8.5  24  36
tpd ,  D  to  Q  32  40  5.9  10.5  1.5  5.2  18  27
ts,  D  to  C↓  10  13  1.5  2  0
DO NOT COPYth,  D  from  C↓  5  5  3.5  1.5  10
tpHZ ,  OE  to  Q  35  44  12  1.5  6.5  12  20
tpLZ ,  OE  to  Q  35  44  12  1.5  6.5  16  25
tpZH ,  OE  to  Q  35  44  13.5  1.5  5.5  16  28
tpZL ,  OE  to  Q  35  44  13.5  1.5  5.5  22  36
DO NOT COPY
tw,  C  low or high  16  20  6.5  5  15
’374  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  33  41  6.4  11.5  2  6.5  22  34
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  12  15  2.5  2  20
th,  D  from  CLK↑  5  5  2.5  1.5  0
DO NOT COPYtpHZ ,  OE  to  Q  28  35  12  1.5  6.5  18
tpLZ ,  OE  to  Q  28  35  12  1.5  6.5  24
tpZH ,  OE  to  Q  30  38  12.5  1.5  5.5  28
tpZL ,  OE  to  Q  30  38  12.5  1.5  5.5  36
tw,  CLK  low or high  16  20  6.5  5  15
DO NOT COPY
’377  tpd ,  CLK↑  to  Q  38  48  2  7.2  18  27
ts,  D  to  CLK↑  12  15  2  20
th,  D  from  CLK↑  3  3  1.5  5
ts,  EN  to  CLK↑  12  15  2  25
DO NOT COPYth,  EN  from  CLK↑  5  5  1.5  5
tw,  CLK  low or high  20  25  6  20
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

568  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
devices operating at 25ºC but, depending on the logic family, they could be for a
typical part and nominal power-supply voltage, or they could be for a worst-case
part at worst-case supply voltage. “Maximum” values are generally valid over
DO NOT COPY
the commercial operating range of voltage and temperature, except TTL values,
which are specified at 25ºC. Also note that the “maximum” values of  ts ,  th,  trec,
or  tw  are the maximum values of the  minimum  setup time, hold time, recovery
time, or pulse width that the specified part will exhibit.
Different manufacturers may use slightly different definitions for the same
DO NOT COPY
timing parameters, and they may specify different numbers for the same part. A
given manufacturer may even use different definitions for different families or
part numbers in the same family. Thus, all of the specifications in Table 8-1 are
merely representative; for exact numbers  and  their definitions, you must consult
DO NOT COPYthe data sheet for the particular part and manufacturer.
8.2 Latches and Flip-Flops
8.2.1 SSI Latches and Flip-Flops
DO NOT COPYSeveral different types of discrete latches and flip-flops are available as SSI
parts. These devices are sometimes used in the design of state machines and
“unstructured” sequential circuits that don’t fall into the categories of shift
registers, counters, and other sequential MSI functions presented later in this
chapter. However, SSI latches and flip-flops have been eliminated to a large
DO NOT COPY
extent in modern designs as their functions are embedded in PLDs and FPGAs.
Nevertheless, a handful of these discrete building blocks still appear in many
digital systems, so it’s important to be familiar with them.
Figure 8-3 shows the pinouts for several SSI sequential devices. The only
74x375 latch in the figure is the  74x375,  which contains four  D  latches, similar in
DO NOT COPY
function to the “generic”  D  latches described in Section 7.2.4. Because of pin
limitations, the latches are arranged in pairs with a common  C  control line for
each pair.
74x74 Among the devices in Figure 8-3, the most important is the  74x74,  which
contains two independent positive-edge-triggered  D  flip-flops with preset and
DO NOT COPY
clear inputs. We  described the  functional operation, timing, and internal
structure of edge-triggered  D  flip-flops in general, and the 74x74 in particular, in
Section 7.2.5. Besides the 74x74’s use in “random” sequential circuits, fast
74F74 versions of the part, such as the  74F74  and  74ACT74, find application in
74ACT74DO NOT COPYsynchronizers for asynchronous input signals, as discussed in Section 8.9.
74x109 The  74x109  is a positive-edge-triggered  J-K  flip-flop with an active-low  K
input (named  K  or  K_L). We discussed the internal structure of the ’109 in
74x112 Section 7.2.10. Another  J-K  flip-flop is the  74x112,  which has an active-low
clock input.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  569
4 5 4
74x74 74x109 74x112 74x375
2 PR 5 2 PR 6 3 PR 5 4
D  Q J Q J Q 1,2C 3
DO NOT COPY4 CLK 1 CLK 1 1Q
3 1D 2
CLK 6 3  7 2  6 1Q 
Q K Q K Q 5
CLR CLR CLR 7 2Q
2D 6
2Q
1 1 15 12
3,4C 11
9 3Q
3D 10
DO NOT COPY10 11 10 3Q
74x74 74x109 74x112 13
15 4Q
12 PR 9 14 PR 10 11 PR 9 4D 14
D  Q J Q J Q 4Q
12 13
11 CLK CLK
CLK 8 13  9 12  7
Q K Q K Q
CLR CLR CLR
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-3
13 15 14
Pinouts for SSI
latches and flip-flops.
*8.2.2 Switch Debouncing
DO NOT COPY
A common application of simple bistables and latches is switch debouncing.
We’re all familiar with electrical switches from experience with lights, garbage
disposals, and other appliances. Switches connected to sources of constant logic
0 and 1 are often used in digital systems to supply “user inputs.” However, in
digital logic applications we must consider another aspect of switch operation,
DO NOT COPY
the time dimension. A simple make or break operation, which occurs instantly
as far as we slow-moving humans are concerned, actually has several phases that
are discernible by high-speed digital logic.
Figure 8-4(a) shows how a single-pole, single-throw (SPST) switch might
be used to generate a single logic input. A pull-up resistor provides a logic-1DO NOT COPY
value when the switch is opened, and the switch contact is tied to ground to
provide a logic-1 value when the switch is pushed.
As shown in (b), it takes a while after a push for the wiper to hit the bottom
contact. Once it hits, it doesn’t stay there for long; it bounces a few times before
finally settling. The result is that several transitions are seen on theDO NOT COPY  SW_L  and
DSW  logic signals for each single switch push. This behavior is called  contact contact bounce
bounce. Typical switches bounce for 10–20 ms, a very long time compared to the
switching speeds of logic gates.
Contact bounce may or may not be a problem, depending on the switch
DO NOT COPY
application. For example, some computers have configuration information
specified by small switches, called  DIP switches  because they are the same size DIP switch
as a dual in-line package (DIP). Since DIP switches are normally changed only
when the computer is inactive, there’s no problem. Contact bounce  is  a problem
DO NOT COPY
* Throughout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

570  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
+5V
(a) push
DO NOT COPY
74LS04
SW_L  DSW
DO NOT COPY
first contact  bounce
push 
(b)
+5V
SW_L
GND
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-4
Switch input without 1
DSW
debouncing.
0
if a switch is being used to count or signal some event (e.g., laps in a race). Then
DO NOT COPYwe must provide a circuit (or, in microprocessor-based systems, software) to
debounce debounce  the switch—to provide just one signal change or pulse for each
external event.
*8.2.3 The Simplest Switch Debouncer
DO NOT COPYSwitch debouncing is a good application for the simplest sequential circuit, the
bistable element of Section 7.1, which can be used as shown in Figure 8-5. This
circuit uses a single-pole, double-throw (SPDT) switch. The switch contacts and
wiper have a “break before make” behavior, so the wiper terminal is “floating”
at some time halfway through the switch depression. i
DO NOT COPY
Before the button is pushed, the top contact holds  SW  at 0 V, a valid logic
0, and the top inverter produces a logic 1 on  SW_L  and on the bottom contact.
When the button is pushed and contact is broken, feedback in the bistable holds
SW  at  VOL  ( ≤  0.5 V for LS-TTL), still a valid logic 0.
Next, when the wiper hits the bottom contact, the circuit operates quite
DO NOT COPY
unconventionally for a moment. The top inverter in the bistable is trying to
maintain a logic 1 on the  SW_L signal; the top transistor in its totem-pole output
is “on” and connecting  SW_L  through a small resistance to  +5 V. Suddenly,
the switch contact makes a metallic connection of  SW_L  to ground, 0.0 V. Not
DO NOT COPYsurprisingly, the switch contact wins.
A short time later (30 ns for the 74LS04), the forced logic 0 on  SW_L
propagates through the two inverters of the bistable, so that the top inverter gives
up its vain attempt to drive a 1, and instead drives a logic 0 onto  SW_L. At this
point, the top inverter output is no longer shorted to ground, and feedback in the
DO NOT COPYbistable maintains the logic 0 on  SW_L  even if the wiper bounces off the bottom
contact, as it does. (It does not bounce far enough to touch the top contact again.)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  571
74LS04  74LS04
push SW  SW_L DSW
(a)
DO NOT COPY
SW_L SW
V push
DO NOT COPYOH
SW
VOL
GND
first contact 
bounce
(b)
VOH
SW_L
DO NOT COPYV
OL Figure 8-5
GND
Switch input using
1 a bistable for
DSW 
debouncing
0
DO NOT COPY
Advantages of this circuit compared to other debouncing approaches are
that it has a low chip count (one-third of a 74LS04), no pull-up resistors are
required, and both polarities of the input signal (active-high and active-low)
are produced. In situations where momentarily shorting gate outputs must be
avoided, a similar circuit can be designed using a  S-R  latch and pull-up resistors,
DO NOT COPY
as suggested in Figure 8-6.
+5 V
Figure 8-6
DO NOT COPYSwitch input using
74LS00 an  S-R  latch for
SWU_L
DSW_L debouncing.
push
+5 V
DO NOT COPY
DSW
SWD_L
DO NOT COPYWHERE WIMPY The circuit in Figure 8-5, while elegant, should not be used with high-speed CMOS
WORKS WELL devices, like the 74ACT04, whose outputs are capable of sourcing large amounts of
current in the  HIGH  state. While shorting such outputs to ground momentarily will
not cause any damage, it will generate a noise pulse on power and ground signals that
may trigger improper operation of the circuit elsewhere. The debouncing circuit in
DO NOT COPYthe figure works well with wimpy logic families like HCT and LS-TTL.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

572  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
*8.2.4 Bus Holder Circuit
In Sections 3.7.3 and 5.6 we described three-state outputs and how they are tied
together to create three-state buses. At any time, at most one output can drive the
DO NOT COPY
bus; sometimes, no output is driving the bus, and the bus is “floating.” When
high-speed CMOS inputs are connected to a bus that is left floating for a long
time (in the fastest circuits, more than a clock tick or two), bad things can
happen. In particular, noise, crosstalk, and other effects can drive the high-
impedance floating bus signals to a voltage level near the CMOS devices’ input
DO NOT COPY
switching threshold, which in turn allows excessive current to flow in the device
outputs. For this reason, it is desirable and customary to provide pull-up resistors
that quickly pull a floating bus to a valid  HIGH  logic level.
Pull-up resistors aren’t all goodness—they cost money and they occupy
DO NOT COPYvaluable printed-circuit-board real estate. A big problem they have in very high-
speed circuits is the choice of resistance value. If the resistance is too high, when
a bus goes from  LOW  to floating, the transition from  LOW  to pulled-up (HIGH)
will be slow due to the high  RC  time constant, and input levels may spend too
much time near the switching threshold. If the pull-up resistance is too low,
DO NOT COPYdevices trying to pull the bus  LOW  will have to sink too much current.
The solution to this problem is to eliminate pull-up resistors in favor of an
bus holder circuit active  bus holder circuit, shown in Figure 8-7. This is nothing but a bistable with
a resistor  R  in one leg of the feedback loop. The bus holder’s  INOUT  signal is
connected to the three-state bus line which is to be held. When the three-state
DO NOT COPY
output currently driving the line  LOW  or  HIGH  changes to floating, the bus
holder’s right-hand inverter holds the line in its current state. When a three-state
output tries to change the line from  LOW  to  HIGH  or vice versa, it must source or
sink a small amount of additional current through  R  to overcome the bus holder.
This additional current flow persists only for the short time that it takes for the
DO NOT COPY
bistable to flip into its other stable state.
The choice of the value of R  in the bus holder is a compromise between low
override current (high  R) and good noise immunity on the held bus line (low  R).
A typical example, bus holder circuits in the 3.3-V CMOS LVC family specify a
DO NOT COPYmaximum override current of 500 μA, implying  R  ≈  3.3 / 0.0005 = 6.6KΩ.
Bus holder circuits are often built into another MSI device, such as an octal
CMOS bus driver or transceiver. They require no extra pins and require very
little chip area, so they are essentially free. And there’s no real problem in having
multiple (n) bus holders on the same signal line, as long as the bus drivers can
DO NOT COPYprovide  n  times the override current for a few nanoseconds during switching.
Note that bus holders normally are not effective on buses that have TTL inputs
attached to them (see Exercise 8.14).
Figure 8-7
DO NOT COPY
Bus holder circuit. R
INOUT
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  573
8.2.5 Multibit Registers and Latches
A collection of two or more  D  flip-flops with a common clock input is called a
register. Registers are often used to store a collection of related bits, such as a register
DO NOT COPY
byte of data in a computer. However, a single register can also be used to store
unrelated bits of data or control information; the only real constraint is that all
of the bits are stored using the same clock signal.
Figure 8-8 shows the logic diagram and logic symbol for a commonly used
MSI register, the  74x175.  The 74x175 contains four edge-triggered  D  flip-flops 74x175
DO NOT COPY
with a common clock and asynchronous clear inputs. It provides both active-
high and active-low outputs at the external pins of the device.
The individual flip-flops in a ’175 are negative-edge triggered, as indicated
by the inversion bubbles on their  CLK  inputs. However, the circuit also contains
an inverter that makes the flip-flops positive-edge triggered with respect to theDO NOT COPY
device’s external  CLK  input pin. The common, active-low, clear signal (CLR_L)
is connected to the asynchronous clear inputs of all four flip-flops. Both  CLK and
CLR_L  are buffered before fanning out to the four flip-flops, so that a device
driving one of these inputs sees only one unit load instead of four. This is
especially important if a common clock or clear signal must drive many suchDO NOT COPY
registers.
(4)  (2)
1D D  Q 1Q Figure 8-8
DO NOT COPY(3)
CLK Q 1Q_L The 74x175 4-bit register:
CLR (a) (a) logic diagram, including
pin numbers for a standard
16-pin dual in-line package;
(b) traditional logic symbol.
(5)  (7)
DO NOT COPY
2D D  Q 2Q
(6)
CLK Q 2Q_L
CLR
74x175
(b) 9
DO NOT COPYCLK
(12)  (10) 1
3D D  Q 3Q CLR
2
(11) 4 1Q
CLK Q 3Q_L 1D  3
1Q 
CLR 7
5 2Q 
2D 6
DO NOT COPY2Q
10
12 3Q 
(13) (15) 3D 11
4D D  Q 4Q 3Q
15
(14) 13 4Q
(9) CLK Q 4Q_L 4D 14
CLK 4Q
CLR
DO NOT COPY(1)
CLR_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

574  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
74x174 The logic symbol for the  74x174,  6-bit register is shown in Figure 8-9. The
9 internal structure of this device is similar to the 74x175’s, is similar, except that
CLK
1 it eliminates the active-low outputs and provides two more flip-flops instead.
CLR
DO NOT COPY
Many digital systems, including computers, telecommunications devices,
3 2
1D  1Q
4 5 and stereo equipment, process information 8, 16, or 32 bits at a time; as a result,
2D 2Q 
6 7 ICs that handle eight bits are very popular. One such MSI IC is the  74x374  octal
3D 3Q 
11 10 edge-triggered  D  flip-flop, also known simply as an 8-bit register. (Once again,
4D 4Q
13 12 “octal” means that the device has eight sections.)
DO NOT COPY5D 5Q 
14 15 As shown in Figure 8-10, the 74x374 contains eight edge-triggered  D  flip-
6D 6Q
flops that all sample their inputs and change their outputs on the rising edge of a
common  CLK  input. Each flip-flop output drives a three-state buffer that in turn
Figure 8-9
Logic symbol for the drives an active-high output. All of the three-state buffers are enabled by a
74x174 6-bit register.DO NOT COPY
(1)
OE_L
(a)
(3)
1D D
(2)
CLK Q 1Q
Figure 8-10
DO NOT COPY
The 74x374 8-bit register:
(a) logic diagram, including pin (4)
2D D
numbers for a standard 20-pin (5)
CLK Q 2Q
dual in-line package;
(b) traditional logic symbol.
DO NOT COPY(7) D
3D 
(6)
CLK Q 3Q
(8)
4D  D
(b) (9)
DO NOT COPYCLK Q 4Q
74x374
11 (13)
CLK 5D  D
1 (12)
OE CLK Q 5Q
3 2
DO NOT COPY1D  1Q
4 5 (14)
2D 2Q  6D  D
7 6
3D 3Q  (15)
CLK
8 9 Q 6Q
4D 4Q
13 12
5D 5Q 
(17)
14 15 D
6D 6Q 7D 
DO NOT COPY17  16 (16)
7D 7Q CLK Q 7Q
18  19
8D 8Q
(18)
8D  D
(19)
CLK Q 8Q
(11)
DO NOT COPYCLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  575
common, active-low  OE_L  (output enable) input. As in the other registers that
we’ve studied, the control inputs (CLK  and  OE_L) are buffered so that they
present only one unit load to a device that drives them.
DO NOT COPY
One variation of the 74x374 is the  74x373,  whose symbol is shown in
Figure 8-11. The ’373 uses  D  latches instead of edge-triggered flip-flops. There-
fore, its outputs follow the corresponding inputs whenever  C  is asserted, and
latch the last input values when  C  is negated. Another variation is the  74x273,
shown in Figure 8-12. This octal register has non-three-state outputs and no
DO NOT COPY
OE_L  input; instead it uses pin 1 for an asynchronous clear input  CLR_L.
The  74x377, whose symbol is shown in Figure 8-13(a), is an edge-
triggered register like the ’374, but it does not have three-state outputs. Instead,
pin 1 is used as an active-low clock enable input  EN_L. If  EN_L  is asserted
(LOWDO NOT COPY) at the rising edge of the clock, then the flip-flops are loaded from the data
inputs; otherwise, they retain their present values, as shown logically in (b).
74x373 74x273
Figure 8-11 Figure 8-12
11 11
C Logic symbol for the C Logic symbol for the
1 1
DO NOT COPYOE 74x373 8-bit latch. CLR 74x273 8-bit register.
3 2 3 2
1D  1Q 1D  1Q
4 5 4 5
2D 2Q  2D 2Q 
7 6 7 6
3D 3Q  3D 3Q 
8 9 8 9
4D 4Q 4D 4Q
DO NOT COPY13 12 13 12
5D 5Q  5D 5Q 
14 15 14 15
6D 6Q 6D 6Q
17  16 17  16
7D 7Q 7D 7Q
18  19 18  19
8D 8Q 8D 8Q
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-13  The 74x377 8-bit register with gated clock:
(a) logic symbol; (b) logical behavior of one bit.
(a)  (b)
74x377
11DO NOT COPY
CLK
1
EN
(19)
3 2 D Q 8Q
1D  1Q
4 5 (18) CK
2D 2Q  8D
7 6
DO NOT COPY3D 3Q 
8 9
4D 4Q
13 12
5D 5Q  (1)
14 15 EN_L
6D 6Q
17  16
7D 7Q
18  19 (11)
DO NOT COPY8D 8Q CLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

576  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
High pin-count surface-mount packaging supports even wider registers,
drivers, and transceivers. Most common are 16-bit devices, but there are also
devices with 18 bits (for byte parity) and 32 bits. Also, the larger packages can
DO NOT COPY
offer more control functions, such as clear, clock enable, multiple output
enables, and even a choice of latching vs. registered behavior all in one device.
8.2.6 Registers and Latches in ABEL and PLDs
As we showed in Section 7.11, registers are very easy to specify in ABEL. For
DO NOT COPY
example, Table 7-33 on page 543 showed an ABEL program for an 8-bit register
with enable. Obviously, ABEL allows the functions performed at the  D  inputs of
register to be customized in almost any way desired, limited only by the number
of inputs and product terms in the targeted PLD. We describe sequential PLDs
DO NOT COPYin Section 8.3.
With most sequential PLDs, few if any customizations can be applied to a
register’s clock input (e.g, polarity choice) or to the asynchronous inputs (e.g.,
different preset conditions for different bits). However, ABEL does provide
appropriate syntax to apply these customizations in devices that support them, as
DO NOT COPYdescribed in Section 7.11.1.
Very few PLDs have latches built in; edge-triggered registers are much
more common, and generally more useful. However, you can also synthesize a
latch using combinational logic and feedback. For example, the excitation equa-
tion for an  S-R  latch is
DO NOT COPYQ∗  =  S  +  R′ ⋅ Q
Thus, you could build an  S-R  latch using one combinational output of a PLD,
using the ABEL equation “Q  =  S  #  !R  &  Q.” Furthermore, the  S  and  R  signals
above could be replaced with more complex logic functions of the PLD’s inputs,
DO NOT COPYlimited only by the availability of product terms (seven per output in a 16V8C
or 16L8) to realize the final excitation equation. The feedback loop can be
created only when  Q  is assigned to a bidirectional pin (in a 16V8C or 16L8, pins
IO2–IO7, not  O1  or  O8). Also, the output pin must be continuously output-
enabled; otherwise, the feedback loop would be broken and the latch’s state lost.
DO NOT COPYProbably the handiest latch to build out of a combinational PLD is a  D
latch. The basic excitation equation for a  D  latch is
Q∗  =  C ⋅ D  +  C′ ⋅ Q
However, we showed in Section 7.10.1 that this equation contains a static haz-
DO NOT COPYard, and the corresponding circuit does not latch data reliably. To build a reliable
D  latch, we must include a consensus term in the excitation equation:
Q∗  =  C ⋅ D  +  C′ ⋅ Q  +  D ⋅ Q
The  D  input in this equation may be replaced with a more complicated expres-
sion, but the equation’s structure remains the same:
DO NOT COPY
Q∗  =  C ⋅ expression  +  C′ ⋅ Q  +  expression ⋅ Q
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  577
ABUS  ADDR1  ADDR2
AVALID
DO NOT COPY
READ_L
ROMCS_L Figure 8-14
Timing diagram for a
DO NOT COPY
DBUS  DATA1  DATA2 microprocessor read
from ROM  from a different device operation.
It is also possible to use a more complex expression for the  C  input, as we
showed in Section 7.10.1. In any case, it is very important for the consensus termDO NOT COPY
to be included in the PLD realization. The compiler can work against you in this
case, since its minimization step will find that the consensus term is redundant
and remove it.
Some versions of the ABEL compiler let you prevent elimination of
DO NOT COPY
consensus terms by including a keyword “retain” in the property list of the retain  property
istype  declaration for any output which is not to be minimized. In other
versions, your only choice is to turn off minimization for the entire design.
Probably the most common use of a PLD-based latch is to simultaneously
decode and latch addresses in order to select memory and I/O devices in micro-
DO NOT COPY
processor systems. Figure 8-14 is a timing diagram for this function in a typical
system. The microprocessor selects a device and a location within the device by
placing an address on its address bus (ABUS) and asserting an “address valid”
signal (AVALID). A short time later, it asserts a read signal (READ_L), and the
selected device responds by placing data on the data bus (DO NOT COPYDBUS).
Notice that the address does not stay valid on  ABUS  for the entire opera-
tion. The microprocessor bus protocol expects the address to be latched using
AVALID  as an enable, then decoded, as shown in Figure 8-15. The decoder
selects different devices to be enabled or “chip-selected” according to the high-
order bits of the address (the 12 high-order bits in this example). The low-orderDO NOT COPY
bits are used to address individual locations of a selected device.
decoder
32-bit latch to individual Figure 8-15
device Microprocessor
DO NOT COPYQ[31:20]
chip-select address latching and
inputs
decoding circuit.
ABUS[31:0] D[31:0]
to device
Q[19:0] address
DO NOT COPYAVALID G inputs
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

578  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
WHY A LATCH?  The microprocessor bus protocol in Figure 8-14 raises several questions:
DO NOT COPY•  Why not keep the address valid on  ABUS  for the entire operation? In a real
system using this protocol, the functions of  ABUS  and  DBUS  are combined
(multiplexed) onto one three-state bus to save pins and wires.
•  Why not use  AVALID  as the clock input to a positive-edge-triggered register to
capture the address? There isn’t enough setup time; in a real system, the address
DO NOT COPYmay first be valid at or slightly after the rising edge of  AVALID.
•  OK, so why not use  AVALID  to clock a negative-edge-triggered register? This
works, but the latched outputs are available sooner; valid values on ABUS  flow
through a latch immediately, without waiting for the falling clock edge. This
relaxes the access-time requirements of memories and other devices driven by
DO NOT COPYthe latched outputs.
Using a PLD, the latching and decoding functions for the high-order bits
can be combined into a single device, yielding the block diagram in Figure 8-16.
DO NOT COPYCompared with Figure 8-15, the “latching decoder” saves devices and pins, and
may produce a valid chip-select output more quickly (see Exercise 8.1).
Table 8-2 is an ABEL program for the latching decoder. Since it operates
on only the high-order bits  ABUS[31..20], it can decode addresses only in
20 
1-Mbyte or larger chunks (2  = 1M). A read-only memory (ROM) is located
DO NOT COPY
in the highest 1-Mbyte chunk, addresses  0xfff00000–0xffffffff, and is
selected by  ROMCS. Three 16-Mbyte banks of read/write memory (RAM) are
located at lower addresses, starting at addresses  0x00000000,  0x00100000, and
0x00200000, respectively. Notice how don’t-cares are used in the definitions of
the RAM bank address ranges to decode a chunk larger than 1 Mbyte. Other
DO NOT COPY
approaches to these definitions are also possible (e.g., see Exercise 8.2).
The equations in Table 8-2 for the chip-select outputs follow the  D-latch
template that we gave on page 576. The expressions that select a device, such as
“ABUS==ROM,” each generate a single product term, and each equation generates
three product terms. Notice the use of the “retain” property in the pin declara-
DO NOT COPY
tions to prevent the compiler from optimizing away the consensus terms.
Figure 8-16 latching
to individual
ABUS[31:20] decoder
Using a combined device
address latching andDO NOT COPYchip-select
G inputs
decoding circuit.
20-bit latch
ABUS[19:0] D[19:0]
to device
Q[19:0] address
inputs
DO NOT COPYAVALID G
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  579
module latchdec Ta b l e 8 - 2
title 'Latching Microprocessor Address Decoder' ABEL program
for a latching
DO NOT COPY
" Inputs address decoder.
AVALID, ABUS31..ABUS20  pin;
" Latched and decoded outputs
ROMCS, RAMCS0, RAMCS1, RAMCS2  pin istype 'com,retain';
ABUS = [ABUS31..ABUS20];
DO NOT COPY
ROM = ^hFFF;
RAMBANK0 = [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,0,.X.,.X.,.X.,.X.];
RAMBANK1 = [0,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,.X.,.X.,.X.,.X.];
RAMBANK2 = [0,0,0,0,0,0,1,0,.X.,.X.,.X.,.X.];
equationsDO NOT COPY
ROMCS  = AVALID & (ABUS==ROM) # !AVALID & ROMCS
# (ABUS==ROM) & ROMCS;
RAMCS0 = AVALID & (ABUS==RAMBANK0) # !AVALID & RAMCS0
# (ABUS==RAMBANK0) & RAMCS0;
DO NOT COPY
RAMCS1 = AVALID & (ABUS==RAMBANK1) # !AVALID & RAMCS1
# (ABUS==RAMBANK1) & RAMCS1;
RAMCS2 = AVALID & (ABUS==RAMBANK2) # !AVALID & RAMCS2
# (ABUS==RAMBANK2) & RAMCS2;
end latchdecDO NOT COPY
After seeing how easy it is to build  S-R  and  D  latches using combinational
PLDs, you might be tempted to go further and try to build an edge-triggered  D
flip-flop. Although this is possible, it is expensive because an edge-triggered
DO NOT COPY
flip-flop has four internal states and thus two feedback loops, consuming two
PLD outputs. Furthermore, the setup and hold times and propagation delays of
such a flip-flop would be quite poor compared to those of a discrete flip-flop in
the same technology. Finally, as we discussed in Section 7.10.6, the flow tables
of all edge-triggered flip-flops contain essential hazards, which can be masked
DO NOT COPY
only by controlling path delays, difficult in a PLD-based design.
8.2.7 Registers and Latches in VHDL
Register and latch circuits can be specified using structural VHDL. For example,
Table 8-3 is a structural VHDL program corresponding to theDO NOT COPY  D  latch circuit of
Figure 7-12 on page 443. However, writing structural programs is not really our
motivation for using VHDL; our goal is to use behavioral programs to model the
operation of circuits more intuitively.
Table 8-4 is a process-based behavioral architecture for the  D  latch that
requires, in effect, just one line of code to describe the latch’s behavior. Note thatDO NOT COPY
the VHDL compiler “infers” a latch from this description—since the code
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

580  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 3  VHDL structural program for the  D  latch in Figure 7-12.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vdlatch is
port (D, C: in STD_LOGIC;
Q, QN: buffer STD_LOGIC );
end Vdlatch;
DO NOT COPYarchitecture Vdlatch_s of Vdlatch is
signal DN, SN, RN: STD_LOGIC;
component inv port (I: in STD_LOGIC; O: out STD_LOGIC ); end component;
component nand2b port (I0, I1: in STD_LOGIC; O: buffer STD_LOGIC ); end component;
begin
U1: inv port map (D,DN);
DO NOT COPY
U2: nand2b port map (D,C,SN);
U3: nand2b port map (C,DN,RN);
U4: nand2b port map (SN,QN,Q);
U5: nand2b port map (Q,RN,QN);
end Vdlatch_s;
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 4  VHDL behavioral architecture for a  D  latch.
architecture Vdlatch_b of Vdlatch is
DO NOT COPYbegin
process(C, D, Q)
begin
if (C='1') then Q <= D; end if;
QN <= not Q;
end process;
DO NOT COPYend Vdlatch_b;
inferred latch doesn’t say what to do if  C  is not 1, the compiler creates an  inferred latch  to
retain the value of  Q  between process invocations. In general, a VHDL compiler
DO NOT COPYinfers a latch for a signal that is assigned a value in an  if or  case statement if not
all input combinations are accounted for.
In order to describe edge-triggered behavior of flip-flops, we need to use
event  attribute one of VHDL’s predefined signal attributes, the event  attribute. If “SIG” is a
signal name, then the construction “SIG'event” returns the value  true  at any
DO NOT COPY
delta time when  SIG  changes from one value to another, and  false  otherwise.
Using the  event  attribute, we can model a positive-edge triggered flip-flop
as shown in Table 8-6. In the  IF  statement, “CLK'event” returns true on any
clock edge, and “CLK='1'” ensures that  D  is assigned to  Q  only on a  rising  edge.
Note that the process sensitivity list includes only  CLK; changes on  D  at other
DO NOT COPY
times are not relevant in this functional model.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.2  Latches and Flip-Flops  581
BUFFS ‘N’ STUFF  Note that in Table 8-3 we defined the type of  Q and  QN  to be  buffer  rather than  out,
since these signals are used as inputs as well as outputs in the architecture definition.
DO NOT COPY
Then we had to define a special 2-input NAND gate nand2b with output type buffer,
to avoid having a type mismatch (out  vs.  buffer) in the component instantiations
for  U4  and  U5. Alternatively, we could have used internal signals to get around the
problem as shown in Table 8-5. As you know by now, VHDL has many different
ways to express the same thing.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 5  Alternative VHDL structural program for the  D  latch in Figure 7-12.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity Vdlatch is
port (D, C: in STD_LOGIC;
Q, QN: out STD_LOGIC );
end Vdlatch;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vdlatch_s2 of Vdlatch is
signal DN, SN, RN, IQ, IQN: STD_LOGIC;
component inv port (I: in STD_LOGIC; O: out STD_LOGIC ); end component;
component nand2 port (I0, I1: in STD_LOGIC; O: out STD_LOGIC ); end component;
begin
U1: inv port map (D,DN);DO NOT COPY
U2: nand2 port map (D,C,SN);
U3: nand2 port map (C,DN,RN);
U4: nand2 port map (SN,IQN,IQ);
U5: nand2 port map (IQ,RN,IQN);
Q <= IQ; QN <= IQN;
end Vdlatch_s2;DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 6  VHDL behavioral model of an edge-triggered  D  flip-flop.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPY
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vdff is
port (D, CLK: in STD_LOGIC;
Q: out STD_LOGIC );
end Vdff;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vdff_b of Vdff is
begin
process(CLK)
begin
if (CLK'event and CLK='1') then Q <= D; end if;
end process;DO NOT COPY
end Vdff_b;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

582  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 7  VHDL model of a 74x74-like  D  flip-flop with preset and clear.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vdff74 is
port (D, CLK, PR_L, CLR_L: in STD_LOGIC;
Q, QN: out STD_LOGIC );
end Vdff74;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vdff74_b of Vdff74 is
signal PR, CLR: STD_LOGIC;
begin
process(CLR_L, CLR, PR_L, PR, CLK)
begin
DO NOT COPYPR <= not PR_L; CLR <= not CLR_L;
if (CLR and PR) = '1' then Q <= '0'; QN <= '0';
elsif CLR = '1' then Q <= '0'; QN <= '1';
elsif PR = '1' then Q <= '1'; QN <= '0';
elsif (CLK'event and CLK='1') then Q <= D; QN <= not D;
end if;
DO NOT COPYend process;
end Vdff74_b;
Ta b l e 8 - 8  VHDL model of a 16-bit register with many features.
DO NOT COPY
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vreg16 is
port (CLK, CLKEN, OE_L, CLR_L: in STD_LOGIC;
D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 to 16);  -- Input bus
DO NOT COPY
Q: out STD_ULOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 16) ); -- Output bus (three-state)
end Vreg16;
architecture Vreg16 of Vreg16 is
signal CLR, OE: STD_LOGIC;  -- active-high versions of signals
signal IQ: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(1 to 16); -- internal Q signals
DO NOT COPY
begin
process(CLK, CLR_L, CLR, OE_L, OE, IQ)
begin
CLR <= not CLR_L;  OE <= not OE_L;
if (CLR = '1') then IQ <= (others => '0');
DO NOT COPYelsif (CLK'event and CLK='1') then
if (CLKEN='1') then IQ <= D; end if;
end if;
if OE = '1' then Q <= To_StdULogicVector(IQ);
else Q <= (others => 'Z'); end if;
end process;
DO NOT COPYend Vreg16;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  583
The  D-flip-flop model can be augmented to include asynchronous inputs
and a complemented output as in the 74x74 discrete flip-flop, as shown in
Table 8-7. This more detailed functional model shows the non-complementary
DO NOT COPY
behavior of the  Q  and  QN  outputs when preset and clear are asserted simul-
taneously. However, it does not include timing behavior such as propagation
delay and setup and hold times, which are beyond the scope of the VHDL
coverage in this book.
Larger registers can of course be modeled by defining the data inputs and
DO NOT COPY
outputs to be vectors, and additional functions can also be included. For
example, Table 8-8 models a 16-bit register with three-state outputs and clock-
enable, output-enable, and clear inputs. An internal signal vector  IQ  is used to
hold the flip-flop outputs, and three-state outputs are defined and enabled as in
Section 5.6.4.DO NOT COPY
SYNTHESIS In Table 8-8, the first  elsif  statement theoretically could have included all of the
RESTRICTIONS conditions needed to assign D to  IQ. That is, it could have read “elsif (CLK'event)
DO NOT COPY
and (CLK='1')  and (CLKEN='1') then ...” instead of using a nested if statement
to check  CLKEN. However, it was written as shown for a very pragmatic reason.
Only a subset of the VHDL language can be synthesized by the VHDL
compiler that was used to prepare this chapter; this is true of any VHDL compiler
today. In particular, use of the “event” attribute is limited to the form shown in the
DO NOT COPY
example, and a few others, for detecting simple edge-triggered behavior. This gets
mapped into edge-triggered  D  flip-flops during synthesis. The nested  IF  statement
that checks  CLKEN  in the example leads to the synthesis of multiplexer logic on the
D  inputs of these flip-flops.
DO NOT COPY
8.3 Sequential PLDs
8.3.1 Bipolar Sequential PLDsDO NOT COPY
The  PAL16R8, shown in Figure 8-17, is representative of the first generation of PAL16R8
sequential PLDs, which used bipolar (TTL) technology. This device has eight
primary inputs, eight outputs, and common clock and output-enable inputs, and
fits in a 20-pin package.
DO NOT COPY
The PAL16R8’s  AND-OR  array is exactly the same as the one found in the
PAL16L8 combinational PLD. However, the PAL16R8 has edge-triggered  D
flip-flops between the  AND-OR  array and its eight outputs,  O1–O8. All of the
flip-flops are connected to a common clock input,  CLK, and change state on the
rising edge of the clock. Each flip-flop drives an output pin through a 3-state
DO NOT COPY
buffer; the buffers have a common output-enable signal,  OE_L. Notice that, like
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

584  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
the combinational output pins of a PAL16L8, the registered output pins of the
PAL16R8 contain the complement of the signal produced by the  AND-OR  array.
The possible inputs to the PAL16R8’s  AND-OR  array are eight primary
DO NOT COPY
inputs (I1–I8) and the eight  D  flip-flop outputs. The connection from the  D  flip-
flop outputs into the  AND-OR  array makes it easy to design shift registers,
counters, and general state machines. Unlike the PAL16L8’s combinational
outputs, the PAL16R8’s  D-flip-flop outputs are available to the  AND-OR  array
whether or not the  O1–O8 three-state drivers are enabled. Thus, the internal flip-
DO NOT COPY
flops can go to a next state that is a function of the current state even when the
O1–O8  outputs are disabled.
Many applications require combinational as well as sequential PLD
outputs. The manufacturers of bipolar PLDs addressed this need by providing a
DO NOT COPYfew variants of the PAL16R8 that omitted the  D  flip-flops on some output pins,
and instead provided input and output capability identical to that of the
PAL16L8’s bidirectional pins. For example, Figure 8-18 is the logic diagram of
PAL16R6 the  PAL16R6, which has only six registered outputs. Two pins,  IO1  and  IO8, are
bidirectional, serving both as inputs and as combinational outputs with separate
DO NOT COPY3-state enables, just like the PAL16L8’s bidirectional pins. Thus, the possible
inputs to the PAL16R6’s AND-OR array are the eight primary inputs (I1–I8), the
six D-flip-flop outputs, and the two bidirectional pins (IO1,  IO8).
PAL16L8PAL16R4 Table 8-9 shows eight standard bipolar PLDs with differing numbers and
PAL16R8 types of inputs and outputs. All of the PAL16xx parts in the table use the same
DO NOT COPY
PAL20L8 AND-OR  array, where each output has eight  AND  gates, each with 16 variables
PAL20R4 and their complements as possible inputs. The PAL20xx parts use a similar
Ta b l e 8 - 9  Characteristics of standard bipolar PLDs.
DO NOT COPY
Inputs to AND array
Bidirectional
Part Package AND-gate Primary combinational Registered Combinational
number pins inputs inputs outputs outputs outputs
DO NOT COPY
PAL16L8  20  16  10  6  0  2
PAL16R4  20  16  8  4  4  0
PAL16R6  20  16  8  2  6  0
DO NOT COPYPAL16R8  20  16  8  0  8  0
PAL20L8  24  20  14  6  0  2
PAL20R4  24  20  12  4  4  0
PAL20R6  24  20  12  2  6  0
DO NOT COPY
PAL20R8  24  20  12  0  8  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  585
(1)
CLK
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27  28 29 30 31
0
1
2
DO NOT COPY3 (19)
4 D  Q O1
5
6
7 Q
(2)
I1
8
9
DO NOT COPY10 (18)
11
12 D  Q O2
13
14
15 Q
(3)
I2
16
17
DO NOT COPY18
19 (17)
20 D  Q O3
21
22
23 Q
(4)
I3
24
25
DO NOT COPY26
27 (16)
28 D  Q O4
29
30
31 Q
(5)
I4
32
DO NOT COPY33
34
35 (15)
36 D  Q O5
37
38
39 Q
(6)
I5
40
DO NOT COPY41
42
43 (14)
44 D  Q O6
45
46
47 Q
(7)
I6
DO NOT COPY4849
50
51 (13)
52 D  Q O7
53
54
55 Q
(8)
I7
DO NOT COPY56
57
58
59 (13)
60 D  Q O8
61
62
63 Q
(9)  (11)
I8 OE_L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-17  PAL16R8 logic diagram.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

586  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
(1)
CLK
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27  28 29 30 31
0
1
2
DO NOT COPY3 (19)
4 IO1
5
6
7
(2)
I1
8
9
DO NOT COPY10 (18)
11
12 D  Q O2
13
14
15 Q
(3)
I2
16
17
DO NOT COPY18
19 (17)
20 D  Q O3
21
22
23 Q
(4)
I3
24
25
DO NOT COPY26
27 (16)
28 D  Q O4
29
30
31 Q
(5)
I4
32
DO NOT COPY33
34
35 (15)
36 D  Q O5
37
38
39 Q
(6)
I5
40
DO NOT COPY41
42
43 (14)
44 D  Q O6
45
46
47 Q
(7)
I6
DO NOT COPY4849
50
51 (13)
52 D  Q O7
53
54
55 Q
(8)
I7
DO NOT COPY56
57
58
59 (12)
60 IO8
61
62
63
(9)  (11)
I8 OE_L
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-18  PAL16R6 logic diagram.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  587
PAL16L8 PAL16R4 PAL16R6 PAL16R8
1 1  1  1 
I1 CLK CLK CLK
2 19 2 19 2 19 2 19
I2 O1 I1  IO1 I1  IO1 I1  O1
DO NOT COPY
3 18 3 18 3 18 3 18
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I2 O2 I2 O2
4 17 4 17 4 17 4 17
I4 IO3 I3 O3 I3 O3 I3 O3
5 16 5 16 5 16 5 16
I5 IO4 I4 O4 I4 O4 I4 O4
6 15 6 15 6 15 6 15
I6 IO5 I5 O5 I5 O5 I5 O5
7 14 7 14 7 14 7 14
I7 IO6 I6 O6 I6 O6 I6 O6
8DO NOT COPY13 8 13 8 13 8 13
I8 IO7 I7 IO7 I7 O7 I7 O7
9 12 9 12 9 12 9 12
I9 O8 I8 IO8 I8 IO8 I8 O8
11 11 11 11
I10 OE OE OE
DO NOT COPYPAL20L8 PAL20R4 PAL20R6 PAL20R8
1 1  1  1 
I1 CLK CLK CLK
2 2 2 2
I2 I1 I1 I1
3 3 3 3
I3 I2 I2 I2
4 22 4 22 4 22 4 22
I4 O1 I3 IO1 I3 IO1 I3 O1
5DO NOT COPY I5 IO2 21 5 I4 IO2 21 5 I4 O2 21 5 I4 O2 21
6 20 6 20 6 20 6 20
I6 IO3 I5 O3 I5 O3 I5 O3
7 19 7 19 7 19 7 19
I7 IO4 I6 O4 I6 O4 I6 O4
8 18 8 18 8 18 8 18
I8 IO5 I7 O5 I7 O5 I7 O5
9 17 9 17 9 17 9 17
I9 IO6 I8 O6 I8 O6 I8 O6
10 16 10 16 10 16 10 16
DO NOT COPYI10 IO7 I9 IO7 I9 O7 I9 O7
11 15 11 15 11 15 11 15
I11 O8 I10 IO8 I10 IO8 I10 O8
13 14 14 14
I12 I11 I11 I11
14 23 23 23
I13 I12 I12 I12
23 13 13  13
I14 OE OE OE
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-19  Logic symbols for bipolar combinational and sequential PLDs.
AND-OR  array with 20 variables and their complements as possible inputs. PAL20R6
Figure 8-19 shows logic symbols for all of the PLDs in the table.DO NOT COPYPAL20R8
8.3.2 Sequential GAL Devices
The GAL16V8 electrically erasable PLD was introduced in Section 5.3.3. Two
“architecture-control” fuses are used to select among three basic configurations
of this device. Section 5.3.3 described theDO NOT COPY  16V8C  (“complex”) configuration, 16V8C
shown in Figure 5-27 on page 307, a structure similar to that of a bipolar
combinational PAL device, the PAL16L8. The  16V8S  (“simple”) configuration 16V8S
provides  a  slightly  different  combinational  logic  capability  (see  box  on
page 589).
DO NOT COPYThe third configuration, called the  16V8R, allows a flip-flop to be provided 16V8R
on any or all of the outputs. Figure 8-20 shows the structure of the device when
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

588  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
(1)
CLK
0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27  28 29 30 31
0
1
2
DO NOT COPY3 (19)
4 D  Q O1
5
6
7 Q
(2)
I1
8
9
10
DO NOT COPY11 (18)
12 D  Q O2
13
14
15 Q
I2 (3)
16
17
DO NOT COPY18
19 (17)
20 D  Q O3
21
22
23 Q
I3
(4)
24
25
DO NOT COPY26
27 (16)
28 D  Q O4
29
30
31 Q
(5)
I4
32
DO NOT COPY33
34
35 (15)
3637 D  Q O5
38
39 Q
(6)
I5
40
DO NOT COPY41
42
43 (14)
44 D  Q O6
45
46
47 Q
(7)
I6
DO NOT COPY48
49
50
51 (13)
52 D  Q O7
53
54
55 Q
(8)
I7
DO NOT COPY56
57
58
59 (12)
60 D  Q O8
61
62
63 Q
I8 (9)
(11)
DO NOT COPYOE_L
Figure 8-20  Logic diagram for the 16V8 in the “registered” configuration.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  589
Registered Combinational
output logic macrocell output logic macrocell
OE CLK OE CLK
DO NOT COPY
D  Q
Q
(a)  (b)
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-21  Output logic macrocells for the 16V8R: (a) registered; (b) combinational.
flip-flops are provided on all outputs. Notice that all of the flip-flops are
controlled by a common clock signal on pin 1, as in the bipolar devices of the
DO NOT COPY
preceding subsection. Likewise, all of the output buffers are controlled by a
common output-enable signal on pin 11.
The circuitry inside each dotted box in Figure 8-20 is called an  output logic output logic macrocell
macrocell. The 16V8R is much more flexible than a PAL16R8 because each
macrocell may be individually configured to bypass the flip-flop, that is, to
DO NOT COPY
produce a combinational output. Figure 8-21 shows the two macrocell config-
urations  that  are  possible  in  the  16V8R;  (a)  is  registered  and  (b)  is
combinational. Thus, it is possible to program the device to have any set of
registered and combinational outputs, up to eight total.
DO NOT COPYThe  20V8  is similar to the 16V8, but comes in a 24-pin package with four 20V8
extra input-only pins. Each AND gate in the 20V8 has 20 inputs, hence the “20”
in “20V8.”
DO NOT COPY
THE “SIMPLE” The “simple” 16V8S configuration of the GAL16V8 is not often used, because its
16V8S capabilities are mostly a subset of the 16V8C’s. Instead of an  AND term, the 16V8S
uses one fuse per output to control whether the output buffers are enabled. That is,
each output pin may be programmed either to be always enabled or to be always dis-
abled (except pins 15 and 16, which are always enabled). All of the output pins
DO NOT COPY
(except 15 and 16) are available as inputs to the AND array regardless of whether the
output buffer is enabled.
The only advantage of a 16V8S compared to a 16V8C is that it has eight, not
seven,  AND  terms as inputs to the  OR  gate on each output. The 16V8S architecture
was designed mainly for emulation of certain now-obsolete bipolar PAL devices,
DO NOT COPY
some of which either had eight product terms per output or had inputs on pins 12 and
19, which are not inputs in the 16V8C configuration. With appropriate program-
ming, the 16V8S can be used as a pin-for-pin compatible replacement for these
devices,  which  included  the  PAL10H8,  PAL12H6,  PAL14H4,  PAL16H2,
PAL10L8, PAL12L6, PAL14L4, and PAL16L2.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

590  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
clock (to all macrocells)
(1)
I1/CLK asynchronous reset
(to all macrocells)
DO NOT COPY
8 (23)
Output
IO1
logic
macrocell
10 (22)
DO NOT COPYOutput IO2
logic
(2) macrocell
I2
12 (21)
Output
IO3
logic
DO NOT COPY(3) macrocell
I3
14 (20)
Output
IO4
logic
(4) macrocell
I4
DO NOT COPY
16 (19)
Output
IO5
logic
(5) macrocell
I5
Programmable
DO NOT COPYAND Array 16 (18)
Output
(132 x 44) IO6
logic
(6) macrocell
I6
14 (17)
Output
IO7
DO NOT COPYlogic
(7) macrocell
I7
12 (16)
Output
IO8
logic
(8) macrocell
DO NOT COPYI8
10 (15)
Output
IO9
logic
(9) macrocell
I9
DO NOT COPY
8 (14)
Output
IO10
logic
(10) macrocell
I10
synchronous preset
Figure 8-22
(to all macrocells)
(11) (13)
Logic diagram forDO NOT COPYI11 I12
the 22V10.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  591
The  22V10, whose basic structure is shown in Figure 8-22, also comes in a 22V10
24-pin package, but is somewhat more flexible than the 20V8. The 22V10 does
not have “architecture control” bits like the 16V8’s and 20V8’s, but it can realize
DO NOT COPY
any function that is realizable with a 20V8, and more. It has more product terms,
two more general-purpose inputs, and better output-enable control than the
20V8. Key differences are summarized below:
•  Each output logic macrocell is configurable to have a register or not, as in
DO NOT COPYthe 20V8R architecture. However, the macrocells are different from the
16V8’s and 20V8’s, as shown in Figure 8-23.
•  A single product term controls the output buffer, regardless of whether the
registered or the combinational configuration is selected for a macrocell.
•DO NOT COPY  Every output has at least eight product terms available, regardless of
whether the registered or the combinational configuration is selected. Even
more product terms are available on the inner pins, with 16 available on
each of the two innermost pins. (“Innermost” is with respect to the right-
hand side of the Figure 8-22, which also matches the arrangement of these
DO NOT COPYpins on a 24-pin dual-inline package.)
•  The clock signal on pin 1 is also available as a combinational input to any
product term.
•  A single product term is available to generate a global, asynchronous reset
signal that resets all internal flip-flops to 0.
DO NOT COPY
•  A single product term is available to generate a global, synchronous preset
signal that sets all internal flip-flops to 1 on the rising edge of the clock.
•  Like the 16V8 and 20V8, the 22V10 has programmable output polarity.
However, in the registered configuration, the polarity change is made at the
DO NOT COPY
output, rather than the input, of the  D  flip-flop. This affects the details of
programming when the polarity is changed but does not affect the overall
capability of the 22V10 (i.e., whether a given function can be realized). In
fact, the difference in polarity-change location is transparent when you use
a PLD programming language such as ABEL.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-23  Output logic macrocells for the 22V10: (a) registered; (b) combinational.
(a) CLK  Registered (b) CLK  Combinational
SP AR output logic macrocell SP AR output logic macrocell
DO NOT COPY
8–16 D  Q 8–16
Q
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

592  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
GAL16V8C GAL16V8R GAL20V8C GAL20V8R GAL22V10
1 1  1 1  1
I1 CLK I1 CLK CLK/I1
2 19 2 19 2 2 2 23
I2 O1 I1  IO1 I2 I1 I2 IO1
3DO NOT COPY18 3 18 3 3 3 22
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I3 I2 I3 IO2
4 17 4 17 4 22 4 22 4 21
I4 IO3 I3 IO3 I4 O1 I3 IO1 I4 IO3
5 16 5 16 5 21 5 21 5 20
I5 IO4 I4 IO4 I5 IO2 I4 IO2 I5 IO4
6 15 6 15 6 20 6 20 6 19
I6 IO5 I5 IO5 I6 IO3 I5 IO3 I6 IO5
7 14 7 14 7 19 7 19 7 18
I7 IO6 I6 IO6 I7 IO4 I6 IO4 I7 IO6
8DO NOT COPY13 8 13 8 18 8 18 8 17
I8 IO7 I7 IO7 I8 IO5 I7 IO5 I8 IO7
9 12 9 12 9 17 9 17 9 16
I9 O8 I8 IO8 I9 IO6 I8 IO6 I9 IO8
11 11 10 16 10 16 10 15
I10 OE I10 IO7 I9 IO7 I10 IO9
11 15 11 15 11  14
I11 O8 I10 IO8 I11 IO10 
13 14 13
I12 I11 I12
14 23
DO NOT COPYI13 I12
23 13 
I14 OE
Figure 8-24  Logic symbols for popular GAL devices.
DO NOT COPY
For most of the 1990s, the 16V8, 20V8, and 22V10 were the most popular
and cost-effective PLDs (but see the box on page 595). Figure 8-24 shows
generic logic symbols for these three devices. Most of the examples in the rest of
this chapter can fit into the smallest of the three devices, the 16V8.
DO NOT COPY
PALS? GALS?  Lattice Semiconductor introduced GAL devices including the GAL16V8 and
GAL20V8 in the mid-1980s. Advanced Micro Devices later followed up with a pin-
compatible device which they call the PALCE16V8 (“C” is for CMOS, “E” is for
DO NOT COPYerasable). Several other manufacturers make differently numbered but compatible
devices as well. Rather than get caught up in the details of different manufacturers’
names, in this chapter we usually refer to commonly used GAL devices with their
generic names, 16V8, 20V8, and 22V10.
DO NOT COPY
8.3.3 PLD Timing Specifications
Several timing parameters are specified for combinational and sequential PLDs.
The most important ones are illustrated in Figure 8-25 and are explained below:
DO NOT COPY
t tPD  This parameter applies to combinational outputs. It is the propagation
PD
delay from a primary input pin, bidirectional pin, or “feedback” input to
feedback input the combinational output. A  feedback input  is an internal input of the
AND-OR  array that is driven by the registered output of an internal
macrocell.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.3  Sequential PLDs  593
tCO  This parameter applies to registered outputs. It is the propagation delay t
CO
from the rising edge of  CLK  to a primary output.
t This parameter also applies to registered outputs. It is the propagation t
DO NOT COPYCF  CF
delay from the rising edge of  CLK  to a macrocell’s registered output that
connects back to a feedback input. If specified,  tCF  is normally less than
tCO . However, some manufacturers do not specify tCF , in which case you
must assume that  tCF  =  tCO .
DO NOT COPYt This parameter applies to primary, bidirectional, and feedback inputs t
SU  SU
that propagate to the  D  inputs of flip-flops. It is the setup time that the
input signal must be stable before the rising edge of  CLK.
tH  This parameter also applies to signals that propagate to the  D  inputs of t
H
flip-flops. It is the hold time that the input signal must be stable after the
DO NOT COPY
rising edge of  CLK.
fmax  This parameter applies to clocked operation. It is the highest frequency f
max
at which the PLD can operate reliably, and is the reciprocal of the
minimum clock period. Two versions of this parameter can be derived
DO NOT COPYfrom the previous specifications, depending on whether the device is
operating with external feedback or internal feedback.
External feedback  refers to a circuit in which a registered PLD output is external feedback
connected to the input of another registered PLD with similar timing; for
proper operation, the sum of  tCO  for the first PLD and  tSU  for the second
DO NOT COPY
must not exceed the clock period.
Internal feedback  refers to a circuit in which a registered PLD output is fed internal feedback
back to a register in the same PLD; in this case, the sum of  tCF  and tSU  must
not exceed the clock period.
DO NOT COPY
Each of the PLDs that we described in previous sections is available in
several different speed grades. The speed grade is usually indicated by a suffix
on the part number, such as “16V8-10”; the suffix usually refers to the  tPD
input or
DO NOT COPY
feedback
tSU  t H
input or
CLK  CLK
feedback
tPD tCO tCF  tSU
DO NOT COPY
combinational registered registered
output output feedback
1/ f max 1/f max
(a)  (b)  (c)
(external feedback) (internal feedback)
Figure 8-25  PLD timing parameters.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

594  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 1 0  Timing specifications, in nanoseconds, of popular bipolar and CMOS PLDs.
Part numbers Suffix  t  t  t  t  t
DO NOT COPYPD CO CF SU H
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -5  5  4  –  4.5  0
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -7  7.5  6.5  –  7  0
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -10  10  8  –  10  0
DO NOT COPY
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  B  15  12  –  15  0
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  B-2  25  15  –  25  0
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  A  25  15  –  25  0
DO NOT COPY
PALCE16V8, PALCE20V8  -5  5  4  –  3  0
GAL16V8, GAL20V8  -7  7.5  5  3  5  0
GAL16V8, GAL20V8  -10  10  7.5  6  7.5  0
DO NOT COPY
GAL16V8, GAL20V8  -15  15  10  8  12  0
GAL16V8, GAL20V8  -25  25  12  10  15  0
PALCE22V10  -5  5  4  –  3  0
DO NOT COPY
PALCE22V10  -7  7.5  4.5  –  4.5  0
GAL22V10  -10  10  7  2.5  7  0
GAL22V10  -15  15  8  2.5  10  0
DO NOT COPY
GAL22V10  -25  25  15  13  15  0
specification, in nanoseconds. Table 8-10 shows the timing of several popular
DO NOT COPYbipolar and CMOS PLDs. Note that only the  tPD  column applies to the combina-
tional outputs of a device, while the last four columns apply to registered
outputs. All of the timing specifications are worst-case numbers over the
commercial operating range.
When sequential PLDs are used in applications with critical timing, it’s
DO NOT COPYimportant to remember that they normally have longer setup times than discrete
edge-triggered registers in the same technology, owing to the delay of the  AND-
OR  array on each  D  input. Conversely, under typical conditions, a PLD actually
has a negative hold-time requirement because of the delay through  AND-OR
array. However, you can’t count on it having a negative hold time—the worst-
DO NOT COPY
case specification is normally zero.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  595
HOW MUCH Once you understand the capabilities of different PLDs, you might ask, “Why not
DOES IT COST? just always use the most capable PLD available?” For example, even if a circuit fits
DO NOT COPY
in a 20-pin 16V8, why not specify the slightly larger, 24-pin 20V8 so that spare
inputs are available in case of trouble? And, once you’ve specified a 20V8, why not
use the somewhat more capable 22V10 which comes in the same 24-pin package?
In the real world of product design and engineering, the constraint is cost.
Otherwise, the argument of the previous paragraph could be extended  ad nauseum,
DO NOT COPY
using CPLDs and FPGAs with even more capability (see \chapref{CPLDsFPGAs}).
Like automobiles and fine wines, digital devices such as PLDs, CPLDs, and
FPGAs are not always priced proportionally to their capabilities and benefits. In
particular, the closer a device’s capability is to the “bleeding edge,” the higher the
premium you can expect to pay. Thus, when selecting a devices to realize a design,
DO NOT COPY
you must evaluate many trade-offs. For example, a high-density, high-cost CPLD or
FPGA may allow a design to be realized in a single device whose internal functions
are easily changed if need be. On the other hand, using two or more lower density
PLDs, CPLDs, or FPGAs may save component cost but increase board area and
power consumption, while making it harder to change the design later (since the
DO NOT COPY
device interconnections must be fixed when the board is fabricated).
What this goes to show is that overall cost must always be considered along
with design elegance and convenience to create a successful (i.e., profitable)
product. And minimizing the cost of a product usually involves a plethora of com-
mon-sense economic and engineering considerations that are far removed from the
DO NOT COPYturn-the-crank, algorithmic gate minimization methods of Chapter 4.
8.4 Counters
DO NOT COPY
The name  counter  is generally used for any clocked sequential circuit whose counter
state diagram contains a single cycle, as in Figure 8-26. The  modulus  of a modulus
counter is the number of states in the cycle. A counter with  m  states is called a
modulo-m  counter  or, sometimes, a  divide-by-m counter.  A counter with a non- modulo-m counter
power-of-2 modulus has extra states that are not used in normal operation. divide-by-m counter
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-26
S2 
S1 General structure
S3 of a counter’s state
DO NOT COPYdiagram—a single
cycle.
Sm
S4
DO NOT COPYS5
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

596  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Q Q0
CLK T
Q
DO NOT COPY
Q Q1
T
Q
DO NOT COPY
Q Q2
T
Q
Figure 8-27
A 4-bit binary Q Q3
DO NOT COPYripple counter. T
Q
n-bit binary counter Probably the most commonly used counter type is an  n-bit binary counter.
n 
Such a counter has  n  flip-flops and has 2 states, which are visited in the
DO NOT COPYsequence 0, 1, 2,  … , 2n−1, 0, 1,  … . Each of these states is encoded as the
corresponding  n-bit binary integer.
8.4.1 Ripple Counters
An  n-bit binary counter can be constructed with just  n  flip-flops and no other
DO NOT COPY
components, for any value of  n. Figure 8-27 shows such a counter for  n  =  4.
Recall that a  T  flip-flop changes state (toggles) on every rising edge of its clock
input. Thus, each bit of the counter toggles if and only if the immediately
preceding bit changes from 1 to 0. This corresponds to a normal binary counting
sequence—when a particular bit changes from 1 to 0, it generates a carry to the
DO NOT COPY
ripple counter next most significant bit. The counter is called a ripple counter  because the carry
information ripples from the less significant bits to the more significant bits, one
bit at a time.
8.4.2 Synchronous Counters
DO NOT COPY
Although a ripple counter requires fewer components than any other type of
binary counter, it does so at a price—it is slower than any other type of binary
counter. In the worst case, when the most significant bit must change, the output
is not valid until time  n  ⋅  tTQ  after the rising edge of  CLK, where  tTQ  is the
DO NOT COPYpropagation delay from input to output of a  T  flip-flop.
synchronous counter A  synchronous counter  connects all of its flip-flop clock inputs to the same
common  CLK  signal, so that all of the flip-flop outputs change at the same time,
after only  tTQ  ns of delay. As shown in Figure 8-28, this requires the use of
T  flip-flops with enable inputs; the output toggles on the rising edge of  T  if and
DO NOT COPYonly if  EN  is asserted. Combinational logic on the  EN  inputs determines which,
if any, flip-flops toggle on each rising edge of  T.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  597
CNTEN EN Q Q0
CLK T
DO NOT COPY
EN Q Q1
T
DO NOT COPY
EN Q Q2
T
Figure 8-28
EN Q Q3 A synchronous 4-bit
DO NOT COPYbinary counter with
T
serial enable logic.
As shown in Figure 8-28, it is also possible to provide a master count-
enable signal  CNTEN. Each  T  flip-flop toggles if and only if  CNTEN  is asserted
DO NOT COPY
and all of the lower-order counter bits are 1. Like the binary ripple counter, a
synchronous  n-bit binary counter can be built with a fixed amount of logic per
bit—in this case, a  T  flip-flop with enable and a 2-input  AND  gate.
The counter structure in Figure 8-28 is sometimes called a  synchronous synchronous serial
serial counter  because the combinational enable signals propagate serially from counter
DO NOT COPY
the least significant to the most significant bits. If the clock period is too short,
there may not be enough time for a change in the counter’s LSB to propagate to
the MSB. This problem is eliminated in Figure 8-29 by driving each  EN  input
with a dedicated  AND  gate, just a single level of logic. Called a  synchronous synchronous parallel
parallel counter,DO NOT COPY  this is the fastest binary counter structure. counter
CNTEN EN Q Q0 Figure 8-29
A synchronous 4-bit
CLK T
binary counter with
DO NOT COPY
parallel enable logic
EN Q Q1
T
DO NOT COPY
EN Q Q2
T
EN Q Q3
DO NOT COPY
T
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

598  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.4.3 MSI Counters and Applications
74x163 The most popular MSI counter is the  74x163, a synchronous 4-bit binary counter
with active-low load and clear inputs, with the traditional logic symbol shown in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-30. Its function is summarized by the state table in Table 8-11, and its
internal logic diagram is shown in Figure 8-31.
74x163
The ’163 uses  D  flip-flops rather than  T  flip-flops internally to facilitate the
2
CLK load and clear functions. Each  D  input is driven by a 2-input multiplexer consist-
1
CLR ing of an  OR  gate and two  AND  gates. The multiplexer output is 0 if the  CLR_L
9DO NOT COPY
LD input is asserted. Otherwise, the top  AND  gate passes the data input (A,  B,  C,
7
ENP
or  D) to the output if LD_L is asserted. If neither CLR_L nor LD_L  is asserted, the
10
ENT
3 14 bottom  AND  gate passes the output of an  XNOR  gate to the multiplexer output.
A QA
4 13
B QB
DO NOT COPY5 12 Ta b l e 8 - 1 1  State table for a 74x163 4-bit binary counter.
C QC
6  11
D QD 
15 Inputs Current State Next State
RCO
CLR_L LD_L  ENT  ENP  QD  QC  QB  QA  QD∗  QC∗  QB∗  QA∗
Figure 8-30
DO NOT COPY
Traditional logic 0  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  0  0  0  0
symbol for
1  0  x  x  x  x  x  x  D  C  B  A
the 74x163.
1  1  0  x  x  x  x  x  QD  QC  QB  QA
1  1  x  0  x  x  x  x  QD  QC  QB  QA
DO NOT COPY
1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1
1  1  1  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  1  0
1  1  1  1  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  1
1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  1  0  0
DO NOT COPY
1  1  1  1  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  1
1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  1  0
1  1  1  1  0  1  1  0  0  1  1  1
1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  0  0  0
DO NOT COPY
1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  1
1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  1  0
1  1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  1
DO NOT COPY1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  1
1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  0
1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1
DO NOT COPY1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  599
(2)
CLK
(9)
LD_L
DO NOT COPY
(1)
CLR_L
(3)
DO NOT COPYA
(14)
D  Q QA
CK Q
DO NOT COPY
(4)
B
(13)
D  Q QB
CK Q
DO NOT COPY
(5)
C
(12)
D  Q QC
DO NOT COPY
CK Q
DO NOT COPY(6)
D
(11)
D  Q QD
CK Q
DO NOT COPY
(15)
RCO
(7)
ENP 
(10)
ENTDO NOT COPY
Figure 8-31  Logic diagram for the 74x163 synchronous 4-bit binary counter,
including pin numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line package.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

600  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
74x163
2
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
DO NOT COPY
9
LD
+5 V  7
R ENP
RPU 10
ENT
3 14
A  QA QA
4 13
B QB QB
DO NOT COPY5 12
Figure 8-32
C QC QC
6  11 Connections for the
D QD  QD
15 74x163 to operate in
RCO RCO
a free-running mode.
U1
DO NOT COPY
The  XNOR  gates perform the counting function in the ’163. One input of
each  XNOR  is the corresponding count bit (QA,  QB,  QC, or QD); the other input
is 1, which complements the count bit, if and only if both enables  ENP  and  ENT
are asserted and all of the lower-order count bits are 1. The  RCO  (“ripple carry
DO NOT COPYout”) signal indicates a carry from the most significant bit position, and is 1
when all of the count bits are 1 and  ENT  is asserted.
Even though most MSI counters have enable inputs, they are often used in
free-running counter a  free-running  mode in which they are enabled continuously. Figure 8-32 shows
the connections to make a ’163 operate in this way, and Figure 8-33 shows the
DO NOT COPYresulting output waveforms. Notice that starting with  QA, each signal has half
the frequency of the preceding one. Thus, a free-running ’163 can be used as a
divide-by-2, -4, -8, or -16 counter, by ignoring any unnecessary high-order
output bits.
Note that the ’163 is fully synchronous; that is, its outputs change only on
DO NOT COPY
the rising edge of  CLK. Some applications need an asynchronous clear function,
Figure 8-33  Clock and output waveforms for a free-running divide-by-16 counter.
CLK
DO NOT COPY
QA
QB
DO NOT COPY
QC
QD
RCO
DO NOT COPY
COUNT  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 8  9  10  11  12  13  14  15  0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  601
CLOCK
QA
DO NOT COPY
QB
QC
DO NOT COPY
QD
RCO
COUNT  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 8  9  0
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-34  Clock and output waveforms for a free-running divide-by-10 counter.
as provided by the  74x161.  The ’161 has the same pinout as the ’163, but its 74x161
CLR_L  input is connected to the asynchronous clear inputs of its flip-flops.
The  74x160  and  74x162  are more variations with the same pinouts and 74x160
DO NOT COPY
general functions as the ’161 and ’163, except that the counting sequence is 74x162
modified to go to state 0 after state 9. In other words, these are modulo-10
counters, sometimes called  decade counters. Figure 8-34 shows the output decade counter
waveforms for a free-running ’160 or ’162. Notice that although the  QD  and  QC
outputs have one-tenth of theDO NOT COPY  CLK  frequency, they do not have a 50% duty cycle,
and the  QC  output, with one-fifth of the input frequency, does not have a
constant duty cycle. We’ll show the design of a divide-by-10 counter with a 50%
duty-cycle output later in this subsection.
Although the ’163 is a modulo-16 counter, it can be made to count in a
modulus less than 16 by using theDO NOT COPY  CLR_L  or  LD_L  input to shorten the normal
counting sequence. For example, Figure 8-35 shows one way of using the ’163
as a modulo-11 counter. The  RCO  output, which detects state 15, is used to force
74x163
Figure 8-35
DO NOT COPY2
CLOCK CLK Using the 74x163 as
RPU 1
CLR a modulo-11 counter
9
LD with the counting
7
ENP sequence 5, 6, …, 15,
10
ENT 5, 6,  ….
DO NOT COPY3 A  QA 14 Q0
+5 V
4 13
B QB Q1
5 12
C QC Q2
6  11
R D QD  Q3
15 74x04
RCO
CNT15 1 2
DO NOT COPY
U1 
CNT15_L U2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

602  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
74x163
2
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
DO NOT COPY
RPU 9
LD
+5 V 7
R ENP
10
ENT
3 14
A  QA Q0
4 13
B QB Q1
DO NOT COPY5 12
C QC Q2
Figure 8-36
6  11
Using the 74x163 as D QD  Q3
15
a modulo-11 counter RCO 74x00
1
with the counting 3
U1 2
sequence 0, 1, 2,  …,
DO NOT COPYU2
10, 0, 1,  …. CNT10_L
the next state to 5, so that the circuit will count from 5 to 15 and then start at 5
again, for a total of 11 states per counting cycle.
A different approach for modulo-11 counting with the ’163 is shown in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-36. This circuit uses a  NAND  gate to detect state 10 and force the next
state to 0. Notice that only a 2-input gate is used to detect state 10 (binary 1010).
Although a 4-input gate would normally be used to detect the condition  CNT10
=  Q3  ⋅  Q2′  ⋅  Q1  ⋅  Q0′, the 2-input gate takes advantage of the fact that no other
DO NOT COPYstate in the normal counting sequence of 0–10 has  Q3 = 1 and  Q1 = 1. In general,
to detect state  N  in a binary counter that counts from 0 to  N, we need to AND
only the state bits that are 1 in the binary encoding of  N.
There are many other ways to make a modulo-11 counter using a ’163. The
choice of approach—one of the preceding or a combination of them (as in
DO NOT COPYExercise 8.25)—depends  on  the  application.  As  another  example,  in
Section 2.10 we promised to show you how to build a circuit that counts in the
74x163
Figure 8-37 2
CLOCK CLK
A 74x163 used as anDO NOT COPY1
CLR
excess-3 decimal 9
LD
counter. 7
ENP
10
ENT
+5 V 3 14
R  A  QA Q0
RPU
DO NOT COPY4 B QB 13 Q1
5 12
C QC Q2
6 11
D QD  Q3
15
RCO 74x00
1
3
U1 2
DO NOT COPY
U2
S11XX_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  603
CLOCK
Q0
DO NOT COPY
Q1
Q2
DO NOT COPY
Q3
COUNT 3  4  5  6  7 8  9  10 11  12  3
Figure 8-38  Timing waveforms for the ’163 used as an excess-3 decimal counter.
DO NOT COPY
excess-3 decimal code, shown in Table 2-9 on page 45. Figure 8-37 shows the
connections for a ’163 to count in the excess-3 sequence. A  NAND  gate detects
state 1100 and forces 0011 to be loaded as the next state. Figure 8-38 shows the
resulting timing waveforms. Notice that the  Q3  output has a 50% duty cycle,
which may be desirable for some applications.DO NOT COPY
A binary counter with a modulus greater than 16 can be built by cascading
74x163s. Figure 8-39 shows the general connections for such a counter. The
CLK,  CLR_L, and  LD_L  inputs of all the ’163s are connected in parallel, so that
all of them count or are cleared or loaded at the same time. A master count-
DO NOT COPY
enable (CNTEN) signal is connected to the low-order ’163. The  RCO4  output is
asserted if and only if the low-order ’163 is in state 15  and  CNTEN  is asserted;
RCO4  is connected to the enable inputs of the high-order ’163. Thus, both the
carry information and the master count-enable ripple from the output of one
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-39  General cascading connections for 74x163-based counters.
74x163 74x163
DO NOT COPY2 CLK 2
CLOCK CLK
1 1
RESET_L CLR CLR
9 9
LOAD_L LD LD
7 7
CNTEN ENP ENP
10 10
ENT ENT
3 14 3 14
DO NOT COPYD0 A  QA Q0 D4 A QA Q4
4 13 4 13
D1 B QB Q1 D5 B QB Q5
5 12 5 12
D2 C QC Q2 D6 C QC Q6
6 11 6 11
D3 D QD  Q3 D7 D QD  Q7
15 RCO4 15
RCO RCO RCO8
DO NOT COPY
U1 U2
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

604  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
4-bit  counter  stage  to  the  next.  Like  the  synchronous  serial  counter  of
Figure 8-28, this scheme can be extended to build a counter with any desired
number of bits; the maximum counting speed is limited by the propagation delay
DO NOT COPY
of the ripple carry signal through all of the stages (but see Exercise 8.27).
Even experienced digital designers are sometimes confused about the
difference between the  ENP  and  ENT  enable inputs of the ’163 and similar
counters, since both must be asserted for the counter to count. However, a
glance at the 163’s internal logic diagram, Figure 8-31 on page 599, shows the
DO NOT COPY
difference quite clearly—ENT  goes to the ripple carry output as well. In many
applications, this distinction is important.
For example, Figure 8-40 shows an application that uses two ’163s as a
modulo-193 counter that counts from 63 to 255. The  MAXCNT  output detects
DO NOT COPYstate 255 and stops the counter until  GO_L  is asserted. When  GO_L  is asserted,
the counter is reloaded with 63 and counts up to 255 again. (Note that the value
of  GO_L  is relevant only when the counter is in state 255.) To keep the counter
74x163
Figure 8-40DO NOT COPY+5 V
2
Using 74x163s as a CLK
1
modulo-193 counter CLR
R 9
with the counting LD
7
sequence 63, 64,  …, ENP
RPU 10
255, 63, 64,DO NOT COPY  …. ENT
3 14
A  QA Q0
4 13
B QB Q1
5 12
C QC Q2
6 11
D QD  Q3
15
DO NOT COPYRCO
CLOCK
U2
RESET_L RCO4
74x00
1
GO_L 3 CNTEN 74x163
2
DO NOT COPY2
CLK
U1 74x00 1
4 CLR
6 RELOAD_L 9
5 LD
7
ENP
U1 10
ENT
DO NOT COPY3 14
A QA Q4
4 13
B QB Q5
5 12
C QC Q6
6  11
D QD  Q7
15
RCO MAXCNT
DO NOT COPY
U3
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  605
stopped,  MAXCNT  must be asserted in state 255 even while the counter is
stopped. Therefore, the low-order counter’s  ENT  input is always asserted, its
RCO  output is connected to the high-order  ENT  input, and  MAXCNT  detects
DO NOT COPY
state 255 even if  CNTEN  is not asserted (compare with the behavior of  RCO8  in
Figure 8-39). To enable counting,  CNTEN  is connected to the  ENP  inputs in
parallel. A  NAND  gate asserts  RELOAD_L  to go back to state 63 only if  GO_L  is
asserted and the counter is in state 255.
Another counter with functions similar to 74x163’s is the  74x169,  whose 74x169
DO NOT COPY
logic symbol is shown in Figure 8-41. One difference in the ’169 is that its carry
output and enable inputs are active low. More importantly, the ’169 is an  up/ up/down counter
down counter;  it counts in ascending or descending binary order depending on
the value of an input signal,  UP/DN. The ’169 counts up when  UP/DN  is 1 and 74x169
2
down whenDO NOT COPY  UP/DN  is 0. CLK
1
UP/DN
9
LD
8.4.4 Decoding Binary-Counter States 7
ENP
A binary counter may be combined with a decoder to obtain a set of 1-out-of-m- 10
ENT
coded signals, where one signal is asserted in each counter state. This is useful 3 14
DO NOT COPYA QA
4 13
when counters are used to control a set of devices where a different device is B QB
5 12
enabled in each counter state. In this approach, each output of the decoder C QC
6 11
enables a different device. D QD 
15
Figure 8-42 shows how a 74x163 wired as a modulo-8 counter can be com- RCO
binedDO NOT COPY  with a  74x138  3-to-8  decoder  to  provide  eight  signals, each  one
representing a counter state. Figure 8-43 shows typical timing for this circuit. Figure 8-41
Logic symbol for the
Each decoder output is asserted during a corresponding clock period.
74x169 up/down
Notice that the decoder outputs may contain “glitches” on state transitions
counter.
where two or more counter bits change, even though the ’163 outputs are glitch
DO NOT COPY
free and the ’138 does not have any static hazards. In a synchronous counter like
the ’163, the outputs don’t change at exactly the same time. More important, decoding glitches
+5 V
RPU 
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-42
74x163
R 74x138 A modulo-8 binary
2
CLOCK CLK 15 counter and decoder.
1 6  Y0 S0_L
CLR G1 14
9 4 Y1 S1_L
LD G2A 13
7 5 Y2 S2_L
DO NOT COPYENP G2B 12
10 Y3 S3_L
ENT 11
3 14 Q1 1 Y4 S4_L
A  QA A 10
4 13 Q2 2 Y5 S5_L
B QB B 9
5 12 Q3 3 Y6 S6_L
C QC C 7
6  11 Y7 S7_L
D QD 
DO NOT COPY15 U2
RCO
U1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

606  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
CLOCK_L
S0_L
DO NOT COPY
S1_L
S2_L
DO NOT COPY
S3_L
S4_L
S5_L
DO NOT COPY
S6_L
S7_L
DO NOT COPYCOUNT  0  1  2 3  4  5  6  7 0  1  2
Figure 8-43  Timing diagram for a modulo-8 binary counter and decoder,
showing decoding glitches.
multiple signal paths in a decoder like the ’138 have different delays; for exam-
DO NOT COPYple, the path from  B  to  Y1_L  is faster than the path from  A  to  Y1_L. Thus, even if
the input changes simultaneously from 011 to 100, the decoder may behave as if
the input were temporarily 001, and the  Y1_L  output may have a glitch. In the
present example, it can be shown that the glitches can occur in  any realization of
function hazard the binary decoder function; this problem is an example of a  function hazard.
DO NOT COPY
In most applications, the decoder output signals portrayed in Figure 8-43
would be used as control inputs to registers, counters, and other edge-triggered
devices (e.g.,  EN_L  in a 74x377,  LD_L  in a 74x163, or  ENP_L  in a 74x169). In
such a case, the decoding glitches in the figure are not a problem, since they
occur  after  the clock tick. They are long gone before the next tick comes along,
DO NOT COPY
when  the  decoder  outputs  are  sampled  by  other  edge-triggered  devices.
However, the glitches  would  be a problem if they were applied to something like
the  S_L  or  R_L  inputs of an  S-R  latch. Likewise, using such potentially glitchy
signals as clocks for edge-triggered devices is a definite no-no.
DO NOT COPYIf necessary, one way to “clean up” the glitches in Figure 8-43 is to connect
the ’138 outputs to another register that samples the stable decoded outputs on
the next clock tick, as shown in Figure 8-44. Notice that the decoded outputs
have been renamed to account for the 1-tick delay through the register. However,
once you decide to pay for an 8-bit register, a less costly solution is to use an
DO NOT COPY8-bit “ring counter,” which provides glitch-free decoded outputs directly, as
we’ll show in Section 8.5.6.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  607
+5 V 74x374
RPU 
11
CLK
74x163 1
R
DO NOT COPY74x138 OE
2
CLOCK CLK 15 S0_L 3 2
1 6  Y0 1D  1Q RS1_L
CLR G1 14 S1_L 4 5
9 4 Y1 2D 2Q  RS2_L
LD G2A 13 S2_L 7 6
7 5 Y2 3D 3Q  RS3_L
ENP G2B 12 S3_L 8 9
10 Y3 4D 4Q RS4_L
ENT 11 S4_L 13 12
DO NOT COPY3 14 Q1 1 Y4 5D 5Q  RS5_L
A  QA A 10 S5_L 14 15
4 13 Q2 2 Y5 6D 6Q RS6_L
B QB B 9 S6_L 17  16
5 12 Q3 3 Y6 7D 7Q RS7_L
C QC C 7 S7_L 18  19
6  11 Y7 8D 8Q RS0_L
D QD 
15 U2  U3
RCO
DO NOT COPYU1
Figure 8-44  A modulo-8 binary counter and decoder with glitch-free outputs.
8.4.5 Counters in ABEL and PLDs
DO NOT COPY
Binary counters are good candidates for ABEL- and PLD-based design, for
several reasons:
•  A large state machine can often be decomposed into two or more smaller
state machines where one of the smaller machines is a binary counter that
DO NOT COPY
keeps track of how long the other machine should stay in a particular state.
This may simplify both the conceptual design and the circuit design of the
machine.
•  Many applications require almost-binary-modulus counters with special
DO NOT COPYrequirements for initialization, state detection, or state skipping. For exam-
ple, a counter in an elevator controller may skip state 13. Instead of using
an off-the-shelf binary counter and extra logic for the special requirements,
a designer can specify exactly the required functions in an ABEL program.
•  Most standard MSI counters have only 4 bits, while a single 24-pin PLD
DO NOT COPY
can be used to create a binary counter with up to 10 bits.
The most popular MSI counter is the 74x163 4-bit binary counter, shown in
Figure 8-31 on page 599. A glance at this figure shows that the excitation logic
for this counter isn’t exactly simple, especially considering its use of  XNOR
gates. Nevertheless, ABEL provides a very simple way of defining counterDO NOT COPY
behavior, which we describe next.
Recall that ABEL uses the “+” symbol to specify integer addition. When
two sets are “added” with this operator, each is interpreted as a binary number;
the rightmost set element corresponds to the least significant bit of the number.
DO NOT COPY
Thus, the function of a 74x163 can be specified by the ABEL program in
Table 8-12.  When the counter is enabled, 1 is added to the current state.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

608  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 1 2  ABEL program for a 74x163-like 4-bit binary counter.
module Z74X163
DO NOT COPYtitle '4-bit Binary Counter'
" Input pins
CLK, !LD, !CLR, ENP, ENT  pin;
A, B, C, D  pin;
DO NOT COPY
" Output pins
QA, QB, QC, QD  pin istype 'reg';
RCO  pin istype 'com';
" Set definitions
DO NOT COPYINPUT = [D, C, B, A];
COUNT = [QD, QC, QB, QA];
equations
COUNT.CLK = CLK;
DO NOT COPY
COUNT := !CLR & ( LD & INPUT
# !LD & (ENT & ENP) & (COUNT + 1)
# !LD & !(ENT & ENP) & COUNT);
RCO = (COUNT == [1,1,1,1]) & ENT;
DO NOT COPY
end Z74X163
Ta b l e 8 - 1 3  MInimized equations for the 4-bit binary counter in Table 8-12.
DO NOT COPY
QA := (CLR & LD & ENT & ENP & !QA QD := (CLR & LD & ENT & ENP & !QD & QC & QB & QA
# CLR & LD & !ENP & QA # CLR & !LD & D
# CLR & LD & !ENT & QA # CLR & LD & QD & !QB
# CLR & !LD & A); # CLR & LD & QD & !QC
DO NOT COPY# CLR & LD & !ENP & QD
QB := (CLR & LD & ENT & ENP & !QB & QA # CLR & LD & !ENT & QD
# CLR & LD & QB & !QA # CLR & LD & QD & !QA);
# CLR & LD & !ENP & QB
# CLR & LD & !ENT & QB RCO = (ENT & QD & QC & QB & QA);
# CLR & !LD & B);
DO NOT COPY
QC := (CLR & LD & ENT & ENP & !QC & QB & QA
# CLR & LD & QC & !QA
# CLR & LD & QC & !QB
# CLR & LD & !ENP & QC
# CLR & LD & !ENT & QC
DO NOT COPY
# CLR & !LD & C);
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  609
Table 8-13 shows the minimized logic equations that ABEL generates for
the 4-bit counter. Notice that each more significant output bit requires one more
product term. As a result, the size of counters that can be realized in a 16V8 or
DO NOT COPY
even a 20V8 is generally limited to five or six bits. Other devices, including the
X-series PLDs and some CPLDs, contain an  XOR  structure that can realize
larger counters without increasing product-term requirements.
Designing a specialized counting sequence in ABEL is much simpler than
adapting a standard binary counter. For example, the ABEL program in
DO NOT COPY
Table 8-12 can be adapted to count in excess-3 sequence (Figure 8-38 on
page 603) by changing the equations as follows:
COUNT := !CLR & ( LD & INPUT
# !LD & (ENT & ENP) &
DO NOT COPY((COUNT==12) & 3) # ((COUNT!=12) & (COUNT + 1))
# !LD & !(ENT & ENP) & COUNT);
RCO = (COUNT == 12) & ENT;
PLDs can be cascaded to obtain wider counters, by providing each counter
DO NOT COPY
stage with a carry output that indicates when it is about to roll over. There are
two basic approaches to generating the carry output:
•  Combinational. The carry equation indicates that the counter is enabled combinational carry
and is currently in its last state before rollover. For a 5-bit binary up output
DO NOT COPY
counter, we have
COUT = CNTEN & Q4 & Q3 & Q2 & Q1 & Q0;
Since  CNTEN  is included, this approach allows carries to be rippled through
cascaded counters by connecting each  COUT  to the next  CNTEN.
DO NOT COPY
•  Registered. The carry equation indicates that the counter is about to enter registered carry output
its last state before rollover. Thus, at the next clock tick, the counter enters
this last state and the carry output is asserted. For a 5-bit binary up counter
with load and clear inputs, we have
DO NOT COPYCOUT := !CLR & !LD & CNTEN
& Q4 & Q3 & Q2 & Q1 & !Q0
# !CLR * !LD * !CNTEN
& Q4 & Q3 & Q2 & Q1 & Q0
# !CLR & LD
& D4 & D3 & D2 & D1 & D0;
DO NOT COPY
The second approach has the advantage of producing  COUT  with less delay than
the combinational approach. However, external gates are now required between
stages, since the  CNTEN  signal for each stage should be the logical  AND  of the
master count-enable signal and the  COUT  outputs of all lower-order counters.
These external gates can be avoided if the higher-order counters have multipleDO NOT COPY
enable inputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

610  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.4.6 Counters in VHDL
Like ABEL, VHDL allows counters to be specified fairly easily. The biggest
challenge in VHDL, with its strong type checking, is to get all of the signal types
DO NOT COPY
defined correctly and consistently.
Table 8-14 is a VHDL program for a 74x163-like binary counter. Notice
that the program uses the  IEEE.std_logic_arith.all  library, which includes
the  UNSIGNED  type, as we described in Section 5.9.6 on page 389. This library
includes definitions of “+” and “-” operators that perform unsigned addition and
DO NOT COPY
subtraction on  UNSIGNED  operands. The counter program declares the counter
input and output as  UNSIGNED  vectors and uses “+” to increment the counter
value as required.
In the program, we defined an internal signal  IQ  to hold the counter value.
DO NOT COPYWe could have used  Q  directly, but then we’d have to declare its port type as
buffer  rather than  out. Also, we could have defined the type of ports  D  and  Q  to
be  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, but then we would have to perform type conversions
inside the body of the process (see Exercise 8.33).
DO NOT COPYTa b l e 8 - 1 4  VHDL program for a 74x163-like 4-bit binary counter.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
DO NOT COPY
entity V74x163 is
port ( CLK, CLR_L, LD_L, ENP, ENT: in STD_LOGIC;
D: in UNSIGNED (3 downto 0);
Q: out UNSIGNED (3 downto 0);
RCO: out STD_LOGIC );
DO NOT COPYend V74x163;
architecture V74x163_arch of V74x163 is
signal IQ: UNSIGNED (3 downto 0);
begin
process (CLK, ENT, IQ)
DO NOT COPY
begin
if (CLK'event and CLK='1') then
if CLR_L='0' then IQ <= (others => '0');
elsif LD_L='0' then IQ <= D;
elsif (ENT and ENP)='1' then IQ <= IQ + 1;
end if;
DO NOT COPY
end if;
if (IQ=15) and (ENT='1') then RCO <= '1';
else RCO <= '0';
end if;
Q <= IQ;
DO NOT COPYend process;
end V74x163_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  611
Ta b l e 8 - 1 5  VHDL architecture for counting in excess-3 order.
architecture V74xs3_arch of V74x163 is
signal IQ: UNSIGNED (3 downto 0);DO NOT COPY
begin
process (CLK, ENT, IQ)
begin
if CLK'event and CLK='1' then
if CLR_L='0' then IQ <= (others => '0');
DO NOT COPY
elsif LD_L='0' then IQ <= D;
elsif (ENT and ENP)='1' and (IQ=12) then IQ <= ('0','0','1','1');
elsif (ENT and ENP)='1' then IQ <= IQ + 1;
end if;
end if;
DO NOT COPYif (IQ=12) and (ENT='1') then RCO <= '1';
else RCO <= '0';
end if;
Q <= IQ;
end process;
end V74xs3_arch;
DO NOT COPY
As in ABEL, specialized counting sequences can be specified very easily
using behavioral VHDL code. For example, Table 8-15 modifies the 74x163-
like counter to count in excess-3 sequence (3,  … ,  12, 3,  … ).
DO NOT COPYUnfortunately, some VHDL synthesis engines do not synthesize counters
particularly well. In particular, they tend to synthesize the counting step using a
binary adder with the counter value and a constant 1 as operands. This approach
requires much more combinational logic than what we’ve shown for discrete
counters, and is particularly wasteful in CPLDs and FPGAs containing  T  flip-
flops,DO NOT COPY  XOR  gates, or other structures optimized for counters. In this case, a
useful alternative is to write structural VHDL that is targeted to the cells
available in a particular CPLD, FPGA, or ASIC technology.
For example, we can construct one bit-cell for a 74x163-like counter using
the circuit in Figure 8-45. This circuit is designed to use serial propagation for
DO NOT COPY
the carry bits, so the same circuit can be used at any stage of an arbitrarily large
counter, subject to fanout constraints on the common signals that drive all of the
stages. The signals in the bit-cell have the following definitions:
CLK  (common) The clock input for all stages.
DO NOT COPY
LDNOCLR  (common) Asserted if the counter’s  LD  input is asserted and
CLR  is negated.
NOCLRORLD  (common) Asserted if the counter’s CLR  and  LD inputs are both
negated.
DO NOT COPYCNTENP  (common) Asserted if the counter’s  ENP  input is asserted.
Di  (per cell) Load data input for cell  i.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

612  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
CLK
LDNOCLR LDATi
Di
DINi
NOCLRORLDDO NOT COPYD Q Qi
CNTENP CEi CDATi
CK Q
CDi
CNTENi
Q_Li
DO NOT COPY
CNTEN_Li CNTENi+1
Figure 8-45  One bit-cell of a synchronous serial, 74x163-like counter.
DO NOT COPY
CNTENi  (per cell) Serial count enable input for cell  i.
CNTENi+1  (per cell) Serial count enable output for cell  i.
Qi  (per cell) Counter output for cell  i.
DO NOT COPY
Table 8-16 is a VHDL program corresponding to the bit-cell in the figure.
In the program, the  D  flip-flop component  Vdffqqn  is assumed to be already
defined; it is similar to the  D  flip-flop in Table 8-6 with the addition of a  QN
(complemented) output. In an FPGA or ASIC design, a flip-flop component type
DO NOT COPYwould be chosen from the manufacturer’s standard cell library.
Ta b l e 8 - 1 6  VHDL program for counter cell of Figure 8-45.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity syncsercell is
port( CLK, LDNOCLR, NOCLRORLD, CNTENP, D, CNTEN: in STD_LOGIC;
CNTENO, Q: out STD_LOGIC );
end syncsercell;
DO NOT COPYarchitecture syncsercell_arch of syncsercell is
component Vdffqqn
port( CLK, D: in STD_LOGIC;
Q, QN: out STD_LOGIC );
end component;
signal LDAT, CDAT, DIN, Q_L: STD_LOGIC;
DO NOT COPY
begin
LDAT <= LDNOCLR and D;
CDAT <= NOCLRORLD and ((CNTENP and CNTEN) xor not Q_L);
DIN  <= LDAT or CDAT;
CNTENO <= (not Q_L) and CNTEN;
DO NOT COPYU1: Vdffqqn port map (CLK, DIN, Q, Q_L);
end syncsercell_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.4  Counters  613
A MATTER Note that Table 8-16 uses a combination of dataflow and structural VHDL styles. It
OF STYLE could have been written completely structurally, for example using an ASIC manu-
DO NOT COPY
facturer’s gate component definitions, to guarantee that the synthesized circuit
conforms exactly to Figure 8-45. However, most synthesis engines can do a good job
of picking the best gate realization for the simple signal assignments used here.
DO NOT COPY
Table 8-17 shows how to create an 8-bit synchronous serial counter using
the cell defined previously. The first two assignments in the architecture body
synthesize the common  LDNOCLR  and  NOCLRORLD  signals. The next two state-
ments handle boundary condition for the serial count-enable chain. Finally, the
generate  statement (introduced on page 415) instantiates eight 1-bit counter
DO NOT COPY
cells and hooks up the count-enable chain as required.
It should be clear that a larger or smaller counter can be created simply by
changing a few definitions in the program. You can put VHDL’s  generic
statement to good use here to allow you to change the counter’s size with a
one-line change (see Exercise 8.35).DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 1 7  VHDL program for an 8-bit 74x163-like synchronous serial counter.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
DO NOT COPY
entity V74x163s is
port( CLK, CLR_L, LD_L, ENP, ENT: in STD_LOGIC;
D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
Q: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
RCO: out STD_LOGIC );
DO NOT COPY
end V74x163s;
architecture V74x163s_arch of V74x163s is
component syncsercell
port( CLK, LDNOCLR, NOCLRORLD, CNTENP, D, CNTEN: in STD_LOGIC;
CNTENO, Q: out STD_LOGIC );
DO NOT COPY
end component;
signal LDNOCLR, NOCLRORLD: STD_LOGIC; -- common signals
signal SCNTEN: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (8 downto 0); -- serial count-enable inputs
begin
LDNOCLR <= (not LD_L) and CLR_L; -- create common load and clear controls
NOCLRORLD <= LD_L and CLR_L;
DO NOT COPY
SCNTEN(0) <= ENT; -- serial count-enable into the first stage
RCO <= SCNTEN(8);  -- RCO is equivalent to final count-enable output
g1: for i in 0 to 7 generate  -- generate the eight syncsercell stages
U1: syncsercell port map ( CLK, LDNOCLR, NOCLRORLD, ENP, D(i), SCNTEN(i),
SCNTEN(i+1), Q(i));
end generate;DO NOT COPY
end V74x163s_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

614  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.5 Shift Registers
8.5.1 Shift-Register Structure
shift registerDO NOT COPYA  shift register  is an  n-bit register with a provision for shifting its stored data by
one bit position at each tick of the clock. Figure 8-46 shows the structure of a
serial input serial-in, serial-out shift register. The  serial input,  SERIN, specifies a new bit to
serial output be shifted into one end at each clock tick. This bit appears at the  serial output,
SEROUT, after  n  clock ticks, and is lost one tick later. Thus, an  n-bit serial-in,
DO NOT COPY
serial-out shift register can be used to delay a signal by  n  clock ticks.
serial-in, parallel-out A  serial-in, parallel-out shift register,  shown in Figure 8-47, has outputs
shift register for all of its stored bits, making them available to other circuits. Such a shift
serial-to-parallel register can be used to perform  serial-to-parallel conversion,  as explained later
conversion in this section.
DO NOT COPY
parallel-in, serial-out Conversely, it is possible to build a  parallel-in, serial-out shift register.
shift register Figure 8-48 shows the general structure of such a device. At each clock tick, the
register either loads new data from inputs  1D–ND, or it shifts its current contents,
depending on the value of the  LOAD/SHIFT  control input (which could be
DO NOT COPYnamed  LOAD  or  SHIFT_L). Internally, the device uses a 2-input multiplexer on
each flip-flop’s  D  input to select between the two cases. A parallel-in, serial-out
parallel-to-serial shift register can be used to perform  parallel-to-serial conversion, as explained
conversion later in this section.
By providing outputs for all of the stored bits in a parallel-in shift register,
parallel-in, parallel-outDO NOT COPYwe obtain the parallel-in, parallel-out shift register  shown in Figure 8-49. Such
shift register a device is general enough to be used in any of the applications of the previous
shift registers.
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-46  Structure of a serial-in, Figure 8-47  Structure of a serial-in,
serial-out shift register. parallel-out shift register.
SERIN D Q SERIN D Q 1Q
CLOCK CK CLOCK CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q D  Q 2Q
CK CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q SEROUT D Q NQ
DO NOT COPY
CK CK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  615
CLOCK
LOAD/SHIFT
DO NOT COPYSERIN
D Q
1D CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q
2D CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q SEROUT
ND CK
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-48  Structure of a parallel-in, serial-out shift register.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-49  Structure of a parallel-in, parallel-out shift register.
CLOCK
LOAD/SHIFT
DO NOT COPY
SERIN
D Q 1Q
1D CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q 2Q
2D CK
DO NOT COPY
D Q NQ
DO NOT COPYND CK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

616  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.5.2 MSI Shift Registers
Figure 8-50 shows logic symbols for three popular MSI 8-bit shift registers. The
74x164 74x164  is a serial-in, parallel-out device with an asynchronous clear input
DO NOT COPY
(CLR_L). It has two serial inputs that are  ANDed internally. That is, both  SERA
and  SERB  must be 1 for a 1 to be shifted into the first bit of the register.
74x166 The  74x166  is a parallel-in, serial-out shift register, also with an asynchro-
nous clear input. This device shifts when  SH/LD  is 1, and loads new data
otherwise. The ’166 has an unusual clocking arrangement called a “gated clock”
DO NOT COPY
(see also Section 8.8.2); it has two clock inputs that are connected to the internal
flip-flops as shown in Figure 8-50(c). The designers of the ’166 intended for
CLK  to be connected to a free-running system clock, and for  CLKINH  to be
asserted to inhibit  CLK, so that neither shifting nor loading occurs on the next
DO NOT COPYclock tick, and the current register contents are held. However, for this to work,
CLKINH must be changed only when  CLK  is 1; otherwise, undesired clock edges
occur on the internal flip-flops. A much safer way of obtaining a “hold” function
is employed in the next devices that we discuss.
74x194 The  74x194  is an MSI 4-bit bidirectional, parallel-in, parallel-out shift
DO NOT COPYregister. Its logic diagram is shown in Figure 8-51. The shift registers that we’ve
unidirectional shift
register studied previously are called  unidirectional shift registers  because they shift in
bidirectional shift only one direction. The ’194 is a  bidirectional shift register  because its contents
register may be shifted in either of two directions, depending on a control input. The two
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-50
(c)
Traditional logic symbols for MSI shift registers: D  Q
(7)
(a) 74x164 8-bit serial-in, parallel-out shift register; CLK
(6) CLK Q
(b) 74x166 8-bit parallel-in, serial-out shift register; CLKINH
(c) equivalent circuit for 74x166 clock inputs;
DO NOT COPY
(d) 74x194 universal shift register.
to other
flip-flops
(b) 74x166
(a) 74x164 7
CLK
8 6
CLK CLKINH (d) 74x194
DO NOT COPY9 15
CLR SH/LD 11
1 9 CLK
SERA CLR 1
2 1 CLR
SERB SER 10
3 2  S1
QA A 9
4 3 S0
QB  B
DO NOT COPY5 4 7
QC  C LIN
6 5 6  12
QD D D QD
10 10 5  13
QE  E C QC
11 11 4  14
QF  F B QB 
12 12 3  15
QG  G A QA
DO NOT COPY13 14  13 2 RIN
QH H QH
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  617
(11)
CLK
(1)
CLR_L
DO NOT COPY
(7) S1 S0
LIN
10
00
DO NOT COPYD  Q (12) QD
(6)
D
11 CLK
CLR
01
RIGHT
DO NOT COPY
10
00
DO NOT COPYD  Q (13) QC
(5)
C
11 CLK
CLR
01
DO NOT COPY
10
00
DO NOT COPYQ (14) QB
D 
(4)
B
11 CLK
CLR
(10) 01
S1 LEFT
DO NOT COPY
(9)
S0
10
00
DO NOT COPYQ (15) QA
D 
(3)
A
11 CLK
CLR
(2)
RIN
01
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-51  Logic diagram for the 74x194 4-bit universal shift register,
including pin numbers for a standard 16-pin dual in-line package.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

618  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 1 8
Inputs Next state
Function table for the
74x194 4-bit universal Function  S1  S0 QA∗ QB∗ QC∗ QD∗
shift register.DO NOT COPY
Hold  0  0  QA  QB  QC  QD
Shift right  0  1  RIN  QA  QB  QC
Shift left  1  0  QB  QC  QD  LIN
Load  1  1  A  B  C  D
DO NOT COPY
directions are called “left” and “right,” even though the logic diagram and the
left logic symbol aren’t necessarily drawn that way. In the ’194,  left  means “in the
right direction from  QD  to  QA,” and  right  means “in the direction from  QA  to  QD.”
Our logic diagram and symbol for the ’194 are consistent with these names if
DO NOT COPYyou rotate them 90°  clockwise.
Table 8-18 is a function table for the 74x194. This function table is highly
74x299 compressed, since it does not contain columns for most of the inputs (A–D,  RIN,
18 17 LIN) or the current state  QA–QD. Still, by expressing each next-state value as a
LIN QH
16 function of these implicit variables, it completely defines the operation of the
HQH
DO NOT COPY9 4 ’194 for all 2 12 possible combinations of current state and input, and it sure beats
CLR GQG
12 CLK FQF  15 a 4,096-row table!
19 5
S1 EQE Note that the ’194’s  LIN  (left-in) input is conceptually located on the
1 14
S0 DQD “right-hand” side of the chip, but it is the serial input for  left  shifts. Likewise,
2 6
G1 CQC RIN  is the serial input for right shifts.
DO NOT COPY3 13
G2 BQB  The ’194 is sometimes called a  universal  shift register because it can be
7
AQA 
made to function like any of the less general shift register types that we’ve dis-
11 8
RIN QA
cussed (e.g., unidirectional; serial-in, parallel-out; parallel-in, serial-out). In
fact, many of our design examples in the next few subsections contain ’194s
Figure 8-52
configured to use just a subset of their available functions.
DO NOT COPY
Traditional logic
The  74x299  is an 8-bit universal shift register in a 20-pin package; its
symbol for
symbol and logic diagram are given in Figures 8-52 and 8-53. The ’299’s
the 74x299.
functions and function table are similar to the ’194’s, as shown in Table 8-19. To
save pins, the ’299 uses bidirectional three-state lines for input and output, as
DO NOT COPYshown in the logic diagram. During load operations (S1  S0  =  11), the three-state
Ta b l e 8 - 1 9  Function table for a 74x299 8-bit universal shift register.
Inputs Next state
DO NOT COPY
Function  S1  S0 QA∗ QB∗ QC∗ QD∗ QE∗ QF∗ QG∗ QH∗
Hold  0  0  QA  QB  QC  QD  QE  QF  QG  QH
Shift right  0  1  RIN  QA  QB  QC  QD  QE  QF  QG
Shift left  1  0  QB  QC  QD  QE  QF  QG  QH  LIN
DO NOT COPY
Load  1  1  AQA  BQB  CQC  DQD  EQE  FQF  GQG  HQH
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  619
(12)
CLK
(9)
CLR_L
S1 S0
DO NOT COPY(18)
LIN
10 (17)
QH
00
QH (16)
D  Q HQH
DO NOT COPY11
CLK
CLR
01 RIGHT
DO NOT COPY
10
00
DO NOT COPYQG (4)
D  Q GQG
11 CLK
CLR
01
(15)
DO NOT COPYFQF
(5)
EQE
(14)
DQD
(6)
CQC
(13)
BQB
DO NOT COPY
(19)
S1
10
LEFT
(1)
S0
00
DO NOT COPY
QA (7)
D  Q AQA
11 CLK
CLR
(11) (8)
RIN QA
01
DO NOT COPY
(2)
G1_L 
(3)
G2_L
Figure 8-53  Logic diagram for the 74x299 8-bit universal shift register,
DO NOT COPYincluding pin numbers for a standard 20-pin dual in-line package.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

620  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
drivers are disabled and data is loaded through the  AQA–HQH  pins. At other
times, the stored bits are driven onto these same pins if  G1_L  and  G2_L  are
asserted. The leftmost and rightmost stored bits are available at all times on
DO NOT COPY
separate output-only pins,  QA  and  QH.
8.5.3 The World’s Biggest Shift-Register Application
The most common application of shift registers is to convert parallel data into
serial format for transmission or storage, and to convert serial data back to par-
DO NOT COPY
allel format for processing or display (see Section 2.16.1). The most common
example of serial data transmission, one that you almost certainly take part in
digital telephony every day, is in  digital telephony.
For years, TPCs (The Phone Companies) have been installing digital
CODO NOT COPYswitching equipment in their central offices (COs). Most home phones have a
two-wire analog connection to the central office. However, an analog-to-digital
converter samples the analog voice signal 8,000 times per second (once every
125 μs) when it enters the CO, and produces a corresponding sequence of 8,000
8-bit bytes representing the sign and amplitude of the analog signal at each
DO NOT COPYsampling point. Subsequently, your voice is transmitted digitally on 64-Kbps
serial channel serial channels  throughout the phone network, until it is converted back to an
analog signal by a digital-to-analog converter at the far-end CO.
The 64 Kbps bandwidth required by a single digital voice signal is far  less
than can be obtained on a single digital signal line or switched by digital ICs.
DO NOT COPY
multiplex Therefore most digital telephone equipment  multiplexes  many 64-Kbps chan-
nels onto a single wire, saving both wires and digital ICs for switching. In the
next subsection, we show how 32 channels can be processed by a handful of MSI
chips; and these chips could be easily integrated into a single CPLD. This is a
space/time trade-off classic example of a  space/time trade-off  in digital design—by running the chips
DO NOT COPY
faster, you can accomplish a larger task with fewer chips. Indeed, this is the main
reason that the telephone network has “gone digital.”
I STILL ISDN (Integrated Services Digital Network) technology was developed in the late
DO NOT COPY
DON’T KNOW 1980s to extend full-duplex 144-kbps serial digital channels to home phones. The
idea was to carry two 64-Kbps voice conversations plus a 16-Kbps control channel
on a single pair of wires, thus increasing the capacity of installed wiring.
In the first edition of this book, we noted that delays in ISDN deployment had
led some people in the industry to rename it “Imaginary Services Delivered
DO NOT COPY
Nowhere.” In the mid-1990s, ISDN finally took off in the U.S., but it was deployed
not so much to carry voice as to provide “high-speed” connections to the Internet.
Unfortunately for TPCs, the growth in ISDN was cut short first by the deploy-
ment of inexpensive 56-Kbps analog modems and later by the growing availability
of very high-speed connections (160 Kbps to 2 Mbps or higher) using newer DSL
DO NOT COPY
(Digital Subscriber Line) and cable-modem technologies.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  621
8.5.4 Serial/Parallel Conversion
A typical application of serial data transfer between two modules (possibly in a
piece of CO switching equipment) is shown in Figure 8-54. Three signals are
DO NOT COPY
normally connected between a source module and a destination module to
accomplish the transfer:
•  Clock.  The clock signal provides the timing reference for transfers, defin-
ing the time to transfer one bit. In systems with just two modules, the clock
DO NOT COPYmay be part of control circuits located on the source module as shown. In
larger systems, the clock may be generated at a common point and distrib-
uted to all of the modules.
•  Serial data.  The data itself is transmitted on a single line.
•DO NOT COPY  Synchronization.  A  synchronization pulse  (or  sync pulse) provides a refer- synchronization pulse
ence point for defining the data format, such as the beginning of a byte or sync pulse
word in the serial data stream. Some systems omit this signal and instead
use a unique pattern on the serial data line for synchronization.
The general timing characteristics of these signals in a typical digital tele-
DO NOT COPY
phony application are shown in Figure 8-55(a). The  CLOCK  signal has a
frequency of 2.048 MHz to allow the transmission of 32 × 8,000 8-bit bytes per
Source module Destination module
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-54
CLOCK A system that
Control Control transmits data serially
circuits circuits between modules.
SYNC
DO NOT COPY
Parallel-to- Serial-to-
Parallel serial SDATA parallel Parallel
data converter converter data
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
THE NATION’S Believe it or not, in the phone network, a very precise 8-KHz clock is generated in
CLOCK St. Louis and distributed throughout the U.S.! The clock signal that is distributed in
a particular piece of local CO equipment is normally derived from the national clock.
For example, the 2.048-MHz clock in this section’s example could be derived by a
DO NOT COPYphase-locked loop circuit that multiplies the national clock frequency by 256.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

622  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
(a)
256 clock ticks per 125 μsec frame
CLOCK
(2.048 MHz)
DO NOT COPY
488 nsec
SYNC
SDATA timeslot 31 timeslot 0  timeslot 1  timeslot 31  timeslot 0
DO NOT COPY
32 timeslots per frame
(b)
bit  7 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 0  1  2
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
SYNC
BIT7_L
DO NOT COPY
D0–D7
SDATA 7 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 0  1  2
timeslot 31  timeslot 0 timeslot 1
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-55  Timing diagram for parallel-to-serial conversion: (a) a complete
frame; (b) one byte at the beginning of the frame.
second. The 1-bit-wide pulse on the  SYNC  signal identifies the beginning of a
DO NOT COPY
frame 125-μs interval called a frame.  A total of 256 bits are transmitted on  SDATA  dur-
timeslot ing this interval, which is divided into 32  timeslots  containing eight bits each.
Each timeslot carries one digitally encoded voice signal. Both timeslot numbers
and bit positions within a timeslot are located relative to the  SYNC  pulse.
Figure 8-56 shows a circuit that converts parallel data to the serial format
DO NOT COPY
of Figure 8-55(a), with detailed timing shown in (b). Two 74x163 counters are
wired as a free-running modulo-256 counter to define the frame. The five high-
order and three low-order counter bits are the timeslot number and bit number,
respectively.
DO NOT COPY
WHICH BIT FIRST?  Most real serial links for digitized voice actually transmit bit 7 first, because this is
the first bit generated by the analog-to-digital converter that digitizes the voice sig-
nal. However, to simplify our examples, we transmit bit 0 first so that counter state
DO NOT COPY
equals bit number.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  623
+5 V 74x163
2
CLK
1
R CLR
DO NOT COPY
9
LD
7
ENP
10
ENT
3 14 BC0
A QA
4 13 BC1
CLOCK B QB bit number
DO NOT COPY5 12 BC2
C QC
6 11 BC3
RESET_L D QD 
15
RCO
1 74x10
U1 2 12
RCO4
DO NOT COPY13
74x163 U4
2 BIT7_L
CLK
1
CLR timeslot number
9
LD
7
DO NOT COPYENP
10
ENT
3 14 BC4
A QA
4 13 BC5
B QB
5 12 BC6
C QC
6  11 BC7
DO NOT COPYD QD 
15 SYNC
RCO SYNC_L
U2
CLOCK
74x166
DO NOT COPY
7
CLK
6
CLKINH
15
SH/LD
1
SERIN
9 to
CLR
DO NOT COPYdestination
2
D7 A
3
D6 B
4 
D5 C
5
parallel D4 D
10
data D3 E
DO NOT COPY11
D2 F
12
D1 G
14  13
D0 H QH SDATA
U3
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-56  Parallel-to-serial conversion using a parallel-in shift register.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

624  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
74x163
+5 V 2
CLK
1
CLR
DO NOT COPY
9
R LD
7
ENP
10
ENT
3 14 BC0
A QA
4 13 BC1 bit
B QB
DO NOT COPY5 12 BC2 number
C QC
6 11 BC3
D QD 
SYNC_L 15
RCO
1 74x27
U1
2  12 BIT0
CLOCK RCO4
DO NOT COPY13
74x163 U5
2
CLK
74x04 1 74x04 timeslot
CLR number
1  2 9 3  4 BIT0_L
SYNC LD
DO NOT COPYU6 7 ENP U6
10
ENT
3 14 BC4
A QA
4 13 BC5
from B QB
source 5 12 BC6
C QC
6 11 BC7
DO NOT COPYD QD 
15
RCO
U2
74x164
DO NOT COPY8
CLK 74x377
9
CLR 11
1 CLK
SDATA SERA 1
2 G
SERB
3 RD7 3 2
QA 1D  1Q PD7
RD6
DO NOT COPYQB  4 4 2D 2Q  5 PD6
5 RD5 7 6
QC  3D 3Q  PD5
6 RD4 8 9
QD 4D 4Q PD4 parallel
10 RD3 13 12 data
QE  5D 5Q  PD3
11 RD2 14 15
QF  6D 6Q PD2
12 RD1 17  16
DO NOT COPYQG  7D 7Q PD1
13 RD0 18  19
QH 8D 8Q PD0
U3 U4
Figure 8-57  Serial-to-parallel conversion using a parallel-out shift register.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  625
A 74x166 parallel-in shift register performs the parallel-to-serial conver-
sion. Bit 0 of the parallel data (D0–D7) is connected to the ’166 input closest to
the  SDATA  output, so bits are transmitted serially in the order 0 through 7.
DO NOT COPY
During bit 7 of each timeslot, the  BIT7_L  signal is asserted, which causes
the ’166 to be loaded with  D0–D7. The value of  D0–D7  is irrelevant except dur-
ing the setup- and hold-time window around the clock edge on which the ’166 is
loaded, as shown by shading in the timing diagram. This leaves open the possi-
bility that the parallel data bus could be used for other things at other times (see
DO NOT COPY
Exercise 8.36).
A destination module can convert the serial data back into parallel format
using the circuit of Figure 8-57. A modulo-256 counter built from a pair of ’163s
is used to reconstruct the timeslot and bit numbers. Although  SYNC  is asserted
during state 255 of the counter on the source module,DO NOT COPY  SYNC  loads the destina-
tion module’s counter with 0 so that both counters go to 0 on the same clock
edge. The counter’s high-order bits (timeslot number) are not used in the figure,
but they may be used by other circuits in the destination module to identify the
byte from a particular timeslot on the parallel data bus (PD0–PD7).
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-58 shows detailed timing for the serial-to-parallel conversion
circuit. A complete received byte is available at parallel output of the 74x164
shift register during the clock period following the reception of the last bit (7) of
the byte. The parallel data in this example is  double-buffered  —once it is fully double-buffered data
received, it is transferred into a 74x377 register, where it is available on  PD0–
DO NOT COPY
PD7  for eight full clock periods until the next byte is fully received. The  BIT0_L
signal enables the ’377 to be loaded at the proper time. Additional registers and
decoding could be provided to load the byte from each timeslot into a different
register, making each byte available for 125 μs (see Section 8.38).
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-58  Timing diagram for serial-to-parallel conversion.
bit  7 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 0  1  2
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
BIT0_L
SDATA 7 0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 0  1  2
DO NOT COPY
byte 31  byte 0 byte 1
RD0–RD7 partial byte 31 byte 31 partial byte 0 byte 0 partial byte 1
PD0–PD7DO NOT COPY byte 30 byte 31 byte 0
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

626  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
LITTLE ENDIANS At one point in the evolution of digital systems, the choice of which bit or byte to
AND BIG ENDIANS transmit first was a religious issue. In a famous article on the subject, “On Holy Wars
DO NOT COPY
and a Plea for Peace” (Computer, October 1981, pp. 48–54), Danny Cohen described
the differences in bit- and byte-ordering conventions and the havoc that could be
(and now has been) wrought as a result.
A firm standard was never established, so that today there are some popular
computer systems (such as IBM-compatible PCs) that transmit or number the low-
DO NOT COPY
order byte of a 32-bit word first, and others (such as Apple Macintosh computers)
that transmit or number the high-order byte first. Following Cohen’s nomenclature,
people refer to these conventions as “Little Endian” and “Big Endian,” respectively,
and talk about “endianness” as if it were actually a word.
DO NOT COPY
Once the received data is in parallel format, it can easily be stored or mod-
ified by other digital circuits; we’ll give examples in Section 11.1.6. In digital
telephony, the received parallel data is converted back into an analog voltage that
DO NOT COPYis filtered and transmitted to an earpiece or speaker for 125 μs, until the next
voice sample arrives.
8.5.5 Shift-Register Counters
Serial/parallel conversion is a “data” application, but shift registers have “non-
DO NOT COPYdata” applications as well. A shift register can be combined with combinational
logic to form a state machine whose state diagram is cyclic. Such a circuit is
shift-register counter called a  shift-register counter.  Unlike a binary counter, a shift-register counter
does not count in an ascending or descending binary sequence, but it is useful in
many “control” applications nonetheless.
DO NOT COPY
+5 V
Figure 8-59 R
74x194
Simplest design for
DO NOT COPYa four-bit, four-state CLOCK 11 CLK
1
ring counters with a CLR
wired as a
10
single circulating 1. S1 shift-left
9 shift register
RESET S0
(load) 7
LIN
DO NOT COPY6  12
D QD Q0
5  13
C QC Q1
4  14
B QB  Q2
3  15
A QA Q3
2
RIN
DO NOT COPY
U1
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  627
CLOCK
Figure 8-60
Timing diagram for a
RESET
DO NOT COPY4-bit ring counter.
Q0
Q1
DO NOT COPYQ2
Q3
STATE  S1  S2  S3  S4  S1  S2
8.5.6 Ring CountersDO NOT COPY
The simplest shift-register counter uses an  n-bit shift register to obtain a counter
with  n  states, and is called a  ring counter.  Figure 8-59 is the logic diagram for a ring counter
4-bit ring counter. The 74x194 universal shift register is wired so that it normally
performs a left shift. However, when  RESET  is asserted, it loads 0001 (refer to
DO NOT COPY
the ’194’s function table, Table 8-18 on page 618). Once  RESET  is negated, the
’194 shifts left on each clock tick. The  LIN  serial input is connected to the
“leftmost” output, so the next states are 0010, 0100, 1000, 0001, 0010,  …. Thus,
the counter visits four unique states before repeating. A timing diagram is shown
in Figure 8-60. In general, an  n-bit ring counter visits  n  states in a cycle.
DO NOT COPY
The ring counter in Figure 8-59 has one major problem—it is not robust. If
its single 1 output is lost due to a temporary hardware problem (e.g., noise), the
counter goes to state 0000 and stays there forever. Likewise, if an extra 1 output
is set (i.e., state 0101 is created), the counter will go through an incorrect cycle
of states and stay in that cycle forever. These problems are quite evident if weDO NOT COPY
draw the  complete  state diagram for the counter circuit, which has 16 states. As
shown in Figure 8-61, there are 12 states that are not part of the normal counting
cycle. If the counter somehow gets off the normal cycle, it stays off it.
DO NOT COPY0001 Figure 8-61
State diagram for a
simple ring counter.
0000
0010 1000
0101 0011 0111
DO NOT COPY
0100
0110 1001 1110 1011
DO NOT COPY
1111
1010 1100 1101
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

628  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
+5 V
R
DO NOT COPY74x194
11
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
wired as a
10
S1 shift-left
9 shift register
S0
DO NOT COPY
7
LIN
6  12
D QD Q0
5  13
C QC Q1
4  14
B QB  Q2
3  15
A QA Q3
Figure 8-62DO NOT COPY
2
Self-correcting RIN 1 74x27
four-bit, four-state 2  12
U1
ring counter with a 13
U2
single circulating 1. ABC0
DO NOT COPY
self-correcting counter A  self-correcting counter  is designed so that all abnormal states have tran-
sitions leading to normal states. Self-correcting counters are desirable for the
same reason that we use a minimal-risk approach to state assignment in
DO NOT COPYSection 7.4.3: If something unexpected happens, a counter or state machine
should go to a “safe” state.
self-correcting ring A  self-correcting ring counter  circuit is shown in Figure 8-62. The circuit
counter uses a NOR  gate to shift a 1 into  LIN  only when the three least significant bits are
0. This results in the state diagram in Figure 8-63; all abnormal states lead back
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-63 0001 0000
State diagram for a
self-correcting ring
counter.
DO NOT COPY0010 1000
1001  0100 1100
DO NOT COPY
1010 0110 1110
0101 1101 0011 1011 0111 1111
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  629
+5 V
R
DO NOT COPY74x194
11
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
wired as a
10
S1 shift-left
9 shift register
S0
DO NOT COPY
7
LIN
6  12
D QD Q0
5  13
C QC Q1
4  14
B QB  Q2
3  15
A QA
DO NOT COPYQ3 Figure 8-64
2
RIN 1 74x10 Self-correcting
2  12 four-bit, four-state
U1
13 ring counter with a
U2
ABC1_L single circulating 0.
DO NOT COPY
into the normal cycle. Notice that, in this circuit, an explicit  RESET  signal is not
necessarily required. Regardless of the initial state of the shift register on power-
up, it reaches state 0001 within four clock ticks. Therefore, an explicit reset sig-
nal is required only if it is necessary to ensure that the counter starts upDO NOT COPY
synchronously with other devices in the system or to provide a known starting
point in simulation.
For the general case, an  n-bit self-correcting ring counter uses an  n−1-input
NOR  gate, and corrects an abnormal state within  n  −  1 clock ticks.
DO NOT COPYIn CMOS and TTL logic families, wide  NAND  gates are generally easier to
come by than  NORs, so it may be more convenient to design a self-correcting
ring counter as shown in Figure 8-64. States in this counter’s normal cycle have
a single circulating 0.
The major appeal of a ring counter for control applications is that its states
appear in 1-out-of-DO NOT COPYn  decoded form directly on the flip-flop outputs. That is,
exactly one flip-flop output is asserted in each state. Furthermore, these outputs
are “glitch free”; compare with the binary counter and decoder approach of
Figure 8-42 on page 605.
DO NOT COPY
*8.5.7 Johnson Counters
An  n-bit shift register with the complement of the serial output fed back into the twisted-ring counter
serial input is a counter with  2n  states and is called a  twisted-ring,  Moebius, or Moebius counter
Johnson counter.  Figure 8-65 is the basic circuit for a Johnson counter and Johnson counter
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-66 is its timing diagram. The normal states of this counter are listed in
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

630  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
+5 V
R 74x194
DO NOT COPY
11
CLOCK CLK
1
RESET_L CLR
wired as a
10
S1 shift-left
9 shift register
S0
DO NOT COPY7 LIN
Figure 8-65 6  12
D QD Q0
Basic four-bit, 5  13
C QC Q1
eight-state 4  14
B QB  Q2
Johnson counter. 3  15
A QA Q3
2
DO NOT COPYRIN
74x04
1  2
U1
U2
Q3_L
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
RESET_L
DO NOT COPYQ0
Q1
Q2
DO NOT COPY
Q3
STATE  S1  S2  S3 S4  S5  S6  S7  S8 S1  S2  S3
Figure 8-66  Timing diagram for a 4-bit Johnson counter.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 2 0
State Name  Q3  Q2  Q1  Q0  Decoding
States of a 4-bit
Johnson counter. S1  0  0  0  0  Q3′  ⋅  Q0′
S2  0  0  0  1  Q1′  ⋅  Q0
DO NOT COPY
S3  0  0  1  1  Q2′  ⋅  Q1
S4  0  1  1  1  Q3′  ⋅  Q2
S5  1  1  1  1  Q3  ⋅  Q0
S6  1  1  1  0  Q1  ⋅  Q0′
S7  1  1  0  0  Q2  ⋅  Q1′
DO NOT COPY
S8  1  0  0  0  Q3  ⋅  Q2′
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  631
+5 V
R 74x194
DO NOT COPY
11
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
wired as a
10
S1 shift-left
9 shift register
S0
DO NOT COPY7 LIN
6  12
D QD Q0
5  13
C QC Q1
4  14
B QB  Q2
3  15
A QA Q3
2
DO NOT COPYRIN
74x02
2
1
U1 3 
U2
74x04
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-67
1 2
Self-correcting
four-bit, eight-state
U3
Johnson counter.
Q3_L
LOAD
DO NOT COPY
Table 8-20. If both the true and complemented outputs of each flip-flop are
available, each normal state of the counter can be decoded with a 2-input  AND
or  NAND  gate, as shown in the table. The decoded outputs are glitch free.
n 
An  n-bit Johnson counter has 2 − 2n  abnormal states, and is therefore
DO NOT COPY
subject to the same robustness problems as a ring counter. A 4-bit  self-correcting self-correcting Johnson
Johnson counter  can be designed as shown in Figure 8-67. This circuit loads counter
0001 as the next state whenever the current state is 0xx0. A similar circuit using
a single 2-input  NOR  gate can perform correction for a Johnson counter with any
number of bits. The correction circuit must load 00DO NOT COPY…01 as the next state
whenever the current state is 0x…x0.
THE SELF- We can prove that the Johnson-counter self-correction circuit corrects any abnormal
DO NOT COPY
CORRECTION state as follows. An abnormal state can always be written in the form x…x10x…x,
CIRCUIT IS ITSELF since the only states that can’t be written in this form are normal states (00…00,
CORRECT! 11…11, 01…1, 0…01…1, and 0…01). Therefore, within  n − 2 clock ticks, the shift
register will contain 10x…x. One tick later it will contain 0x…x0, and one tick after
that the normal state 00…01 will be loaded.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

632  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
*8.5.8 Linear Feedback Shift Register Counters
The  n-bit shift register counters that we’ve shown so far have far less than the
n 
maximum-length maximum of 2 normal states. An  n-bit  linear feedback shift-register (LFSR)
DO NOT COPYn 
sequence generator counter  can have 2 − 1 states, almost the maximum. Such a counter is often
called a  maximum-length sequence generator.
finite fields The design of LFSR counters is based on the theory of  finite fields,  which
was developed by French mathematician Évariste Galois (1811–1832) shortly
before he was killed in a duel with a political opponent. The operation of an
DO NOT COPY
n 
LFSR counter corresponds to operations in a finite field with 2 elements.
Figure 8-68 shows the structure of an  n-bit LFSR counter. The shift regis-
ter’s serial input is connected to the sum modulo 2 of a certain set of output bits.
These feedback connections determine the state sequence of the counter. By
DO NOT COPYconvention, outputs are always numbered and shifted in the direction shown.
Using finite field theory, it can be shown that for any value of  n, there exists
n 
at least one feedback equation such that the counter cycles through all 2 − 1
maximum-length nonzero states before repeating. This is called a  maximum-length sequence.
sequence Table 8-21  lists  feedback  equations  that  result  in  maximum-length
DO NOT COPYsequences for selected values of  n. For each value of  n  greater than 3, there are
many other feedback equations that result in maximum-length sequences, all
different.
An LFSR counter designed according to Figure 8-68 can never cycle
n 
through all 2 possible  states. Regardless of the connection pattern, the next state
DO NOT COPY
for the all-0s state is the same—all 0s.
Figure 8-68  General structure of a linear feedback shift-register counter.
N-bit
DO NOT COPYparallel-out
shift register
connect to
selected outputs
CLOCK CLK (see table)
RESET_L PR
odd-parity circuit
SERIN
DO NOT COPYXN–1
QA
XN–2
QB
XN–3
QC
XN
DO NOT COPYX2
QX
X1
QY
X0
QZ
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  633
Ta b l e 8 - 2 1
n  Feedback Equation 
Feedback equations
2  X2  =  X1  ⊕  X0 for linear feedback
DO NOT COPYshift-register counters.
3  X3  =  X1  ⊕  X0
4  X4  =  X1  ⊕  X0
5  X5  =  X2  ⊕  X0
6  X6  =  X1  ⊕  X0
DO NOT COPY7  X7  =  X3  ⊕  X0
8  X8  =  X4  ⊕  X3  ⊕  X2  ⊕  X0
12  X12  =  X6  ⊕  X4  ⊕  X1  ⊕  X0
16  X16  =  X5  ⊕  X4  ⊕  X3  ⊕  X0
DO NOT COPY20  X20  =  X3  ⊕  X0
24  X24  =  X7  ⊕  X2  ⊕  X1  ⊕  X0
28  X28  =  X3  ⊕  X0
32  X32  =  X22  ⊕  X2  ⊕  X1  ⊕  X0
DO NOT COPY
WORKING IN A finite field has a finite number of elements and two operators, addition and multi-
THE FIELD plication, that satisfy certain properties. An example of a finite field with P elements,
where  P  is any prime, is the set of integers modulo  P. The operators in this field are
DO NOT COPY
addition and multiplication modulo  P.
According to finite-field theory, if you start with a nonzero element  E  and
repeatedly multiply by a “primitive” element  α, after  P − 2 steps you will generate
the rest of the field’s nonzero elements in the field before getting back to  E. It turns
out that in a field with  P  elements, any integer in the range 2,  … ,  P − 1 is primitive.
DO NOT COPY
You can try this yourself using  P  = 7 and  α  = 2, for example. The elements of the
field are 0, 1,  … , 6, and the operations are addition and subtraction modulo 7.
The paragraph above gives the basic idea behind maximum-length sequence
n
generators. However, to apply them to a digital circuit, you need a field with 2
elements, where  n  is the number of bits required by the application. On one hand,
DO NOT COPYn 
we’re in luck, because Galois proved that there exist finite fields with  P  elements
for any integer n, as long as P  is prime, including P = 2. On the other hand, we’re out
n  n
of luck, because when  n > 1, the operators in fields with  P (including 2 ) elements
are quite different from ordinary integer addition and multiplication. Also, primitive
elements are harder to find.
DO NOT COPY
If you enjoy math, as I do, you’d probably be fascinated by the finite-field
theory that leads to the LFSR circuits for maximum-length sequence generators and
other applications; see the References. Otherwise, you can confidently follow the
“cookbook” approach in this section.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

634  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
+5 V
R
DO NOT COPY74x194
11
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
wired as a
10
S1 shift-left
9
RESET S0 shift register
DO NOT COPY
(load)
7
LIN
6  12
D QD X2
5  13
C QC X1
4  14
B QB  X0
3  15
DO NOT COPYA QA 74x02
2 2
RIN 1 74x86
74x86 3  4
1 6
3 U3 5 
U1
2
U2
X3 U2
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-69  A 3-bit LFSR counter; modifications to include the all-0s state are shown in color.
The logic diagram for a 3-bit LFSR counter is shown in Figure 8-69. The
state sequence for this counter is shown in the first three columns of Table 8-22.
DO NOT COPY
Starting in any nonzero state, 100 in the table, the counter visits seven states
before returning to the starting state.
n 
An LFSR counter can be modified to have 2 states, including the all-0s
state, as shown in color for the 3-bit counter in Figure 8-69. The resulting state
DO NOT COPYsequence is given in the last three columns of Table 8-22. In an  n-bit LFSR
Ta b l e 8 - 2 2
Original Sequence Modified Sequence
State sequences for the
3-bit LFSR counter in X2  X1  X0  X2  X1  X0
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-69.
1  0  0  1  0  0
0  1  0  0  1  0
1  0  1  1  0  1
1  1  0  1  1  0
DO NOT COPY1  1  1  1  1  1
0  1  1  0  1  1
0  0  1  0  0  1
1  0  0  0  0  0
.  .  .  1  0  0
DO NOT COPY.  .  .  .  .  .
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  635
counter, an extra  XOR  gate and an  n  −  1 input  NOR  gate connected to all shift-
register outputs except  X0  accomplishes the same thing.
The states of an LFSR counter are not visited in binary counting order.
DO NOT COPY
However, LFSR counters are typically used in applications where this character-
istic is an advantage. A major application of LFSR counters is in generating test
inputs for logic circuits. In most cases, the “pseudo-random” counting sequence
of an LFSR counter is more likely than a binary counting sequence to detect
errors. LFSRs are also used in the encoding and decoding circuits for certain
DO NOT COPY
error-detecting and error-correcting codes, including CRC codes, which we
introduced in Section 2.15.4.
In data communications, LFSR counters are often used to “scramble” and
“descramble” the data patterns transmitted by high-speed modems and network
interfaces, including 100 Mbps Ethernet. This is done byDO NOT COPY  XORing the LFSR’s
output with the user data stream. Even when the user data stream contains a long
run of 0s or 1s, combining it with the LFSR’s pseudo-random output improves
the DC balance of the transmitted signal and creates a rich set of transitions that
allows clocking information to be recovered more easily at the receiver.
DO NOT COPY
8.5.9 Shift Registers in ABEL and PLDs
General-purpose shift registers can be specified quite easily in ABEL and fit
nicely into typical sequential PLDs. For example, Figure 8-70 and Table 8-23
show how to realize a function similar to that of a 74x194 universal shift register
DO NOT COPY
using a 16V8. Notice that one of the I/O pins of the 16V8, pin 12, is used as an
input.
The 16V8 realization of the ‘194 differs from the real ’194 in just one
way—in the function of the  CLR_L  input. In the real ’194,  CLR_L  is an asyn-
chronous input, while in the 16V8 it is sampled along with other inputs at the
DO NOT COPY
rising edge of  CLK.
GAL16V8R
1 
CLK CLK
DO NOT COPY2 I1  IO1  19 QA Figure 8-70
RIN
3 18 PLD realizations of a
A I2 IO2 QB
4 17 74x194-like universal
B I3 IO3 QC
5 16 shift register with
C I4 IO4 QD
6 15 synchronous clear.
D I5 IO5
7 14
DO NOT COPYLIN I6 IO6
8 13
S1 I7 IO7
9 12
S0 I8 IO8
11
OE
Z74X194
DO NOT COPY
CLR_L
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

636  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 2 3  ABEL program for a 4-bit universal shift register.
module Z74x194
DO NOT COPYtitle '4-bit Universal Shift Register'
Z74X194 device ’P16V8R’;
" Input and output pins
CLK, RIN, A, B, C, D, LIN  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7;
S1, S0, CLR_L  pin 8, 9, 12;
DO NOT COPYQA, QB, QC, QD  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'reg';
" Active-level translation
CLR = !CLR_L;
" Set definitions
DO NOT COPYINPUT  = [  A,  B,  C, D  ];
LEFTIN  = [ QB, QC, QD, LIN];
RIGHTIN = [RIN, QA, QB, QC ];
OUT  = [ QA, QB, QC, QD ];
CTRL  = [S1,S0];
DO NOT COPYHOLD  = (CTRL == [0,0]);
RIGHT = (CTRL == [0,1]);
LEFT  = (CTRL == [1,0]);
LOAD  = (CTRL == [1,1]);
equations
DO NOT COPY
OUT.CLK = CLK;
OUT := !CLR & (
HOLD & OUT
# RIGHT & RIGHTIN
# LEFT & LEFTIN
DO NOT COPY
# LOAD & INPUT);
end Z74x194
DO NOT COPYIf you really need to provide an asynchronous clear input, you can use the
22V10, which provides a single product line to control the reset inputs of all of
its flip-flops. This requires only a few changes in the original program (see
Exercise 8.51).
The flexibility of ABEL can be used to create shift registers circuits with
DO NOT COPYmore or different functionality. For example, Table 8-24 defines an 8-bit shift
register that can be cleared, loaded with a single 1 in any bit position, shifted left,
shifted right, or held. The operation to be performed at each clock tick is speci-
fied by a 4-bit operation code,  OP[3:0]. Despite the large number of “WHEN”
cases, the circuit can be synthesized with only five product terms per output.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  637
Ta b l e 8 - 2 4  ABEL program for a multi-function shift register.
module shifty
title '8-bit shift register with decoded load'DO NOT COPY
" Inputs and Outputs
CLK, OP3..OP0  pin;
Q7..Q0  pin istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY
" Definitions
Q = [Q7..Q0];
OP = [OP3..OP0];
HOLD = (OP == 0);DO NOT COPY
CLEAR = (OP == 1);
LEFT = (OP == 2);
RIGHT = (OP == 3);
NOP = (OP >= 4) & (OP < 8);
LOADQ0 = (OP == 8);
LOADQ1 = (OP == 9);DO NOT COPY
LOADQ2 = (OP == 10);
LOADQ3 = (OP == 11);
LOADQ4 = (OP == 12);
LOADQ5 = (OP == 13);
LOADQ6 = (OP == 14);
DO NOT COPY
LOADQ7 = (OP == 15);
Equations
Q.CLK = CLK;
DO NOT COPY
WHEN HOLD THEN Q := Q;
ELSE WHEN CLEAR THEN Q := 0;
ELSE WHEN LEFT THEN Q := [Q6..Q0, Q7];
ELSE WHEN RIGHT THEN Q := [Q0, Q7..Q1];
ELSE WHEN LOADQ0 THEN Q := 1;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN LOADQ1 THEN Q := 2;
ELSE WHEN LOADQ2 THEN Q := 4;
ELSE WHEN LOADQ3 THEN Q := 8;
ELSE WHEN LOADQ4 THEN Q := 16;
ELSE WHEN LOADQ5 THEN Q := 32;
ELSE WHEN LOADQ6 THEN Q := 64;
DO NOT COPY
ELSE WHEN LOADQ7 THEN Q := 128;
ELSE Q := Q;
end shifty
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

638  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 2 5  Program for an 8-bit ring counter.
module Ring8
DO NOT COPYtitle '8-bit Ring Counter'
" Inputs and Outputs
MCLK, CNTEN, RESTART  pin;
S0..S7  pin istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY
equations
[S0..S7].CLK = MCLK;
S0 := CNTEN & !S0 & !S1 & !S2 & !S3 & !S4 & !S5 & !S6  " Self-sync
DO NOT COPY# !CNTEN & S0  " Hold
# RESTART;  " Start with one 1
[S1..S7] := !RESTART & ( !CNTEN & [S1..S7]  " Shift
# CNTEN & [S0..S6] );  " Hold
end Ring8
DO NOT COPY
ABEL can be used readily to specify shift register counters of the various
types that we introduced in previous subsections. For example, Table 8-25 is the
program for an 8-bit ring counter. We’ve used the extra capability of the PLD to
add two functions not present in our previous MSI designs: counting occurs only
DO NOT COPY
if  CNTEN  is asserted, and the next state is forced to  S0  if  RESTART  is asserted.
Ring counters are often used to generate multiphase clocks or enable
signals in digital systems, and the requirements in different systems are many
and varied. The ability to reprogram the counter’s behavior easily is a distinct
advantage of an HDL-based design.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-71 shows a set of clock or enable signals that might be required in
a digital system with six distinct phases of operation. Each phase lasts for two
ticks of a master clock signal, MCLK, during which the corresponding active-low
phase-enable signal  Pi_L  is asserted. We can obtain this sort of timing from a
DO NOT COPYring counter if we provide an extra flip-flop to count the two ticks of each phase,
so that a shift occurs on the  second  tick of each phase.
The timing generator can be built with a few inputs and outputs of a PLD.
Three control inputs are provided, with the following behavior:
RESET  When this input is asserted, no outputs are asserted. The counter
DO NOT COPY
always goes to the first tick of phase 1 after  RESET  is negated.
RUN  When asserted, this input allows the counter to advance to the
second tick of the current phase, or to the first tick of the next phase;
otherwise, the current tick of the current phase is extended.
DO NOT COPY
RESTART  Asserting this input causes the counter to go back to the first tick of
phase 1, even if  RUN  is not asserted.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  639
MCLK
DO NOT COPYT1
P1_L
P2_L
DO NOT COPY
P3_L
P4_L
P5_LDO NOT COPY
P6_L
Figure 8-71  Six-phase timing waveforms required in a certain digital system.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 2 6  Program for a six-phase waveform generator.
module TIMEGEN6
title 'Six-phase Master Timing Generator'
DO NOT COPY
" Input and Output pins
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART  pin;
T1, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L  pin istype 'reg';
" State definitions
PHASES = [P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L];DO NOT COPY
NEXTPH = [P6_L, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L];
SRESET = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P1 =  [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
equations
T1.CLK = MCLK; PHASES.CLK = MCLK;DO NOT COPY
WHEN RESET THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := SRESET;}
ELSE WHEN (PHASES==SRESET) # RESTART THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := P1;}
ELSE WHEN RUN & T1 THEN {T1 := 0; PHASES := PHASES;}
ELSE WHEN RUN & !T1 THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := NEXTPH;}
ELSE {T1 := T1; PHASES := PHASES;}DO NOT COPY
end TIMEGEN6
Table 8-26 is a program that creates the required behavior. Notice the use
DO NOT COPY
of sets to specify the ring counter’s behavior very concisely, with the  RESET,
RESTART, and  RUN  having the specified behavior in any counter phase.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

640  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 2 7  Alternate program for the waveform generator.
module TIMEGN6A
DO NOT COPYtitle 'Six-phase Master Timing Generator'
" Input and Output pins
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART  pin;
T1, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L  pin istype 'reg';
" State definitions
DO NOT COPY
TSTATE = [T1, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L];
SRESET = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P1F =  [1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P1S =  [0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P2F =  [1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1];
DO NOT COPYP2S =  [0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P3F =  [1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1];
P3S =  [0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 1];
P4F =  [1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1];
P4S =  [0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1];
P5F =  [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1];
DO NOT COPYP5S =  [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1];
P6F =  [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0];
P6S =  [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0];
equations
TSTATE.CLK = MCLK;
DO NOT COPYWHEN RESET THEN TSTATE := SRESET;
state_diagram TSTATE
state SRESET: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE P1F;
state P1F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
DO NOT COPYELSE IF RUN THEN P1S ELSE P1F;
state P1S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P2F ELSE P1S;
state P2F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P2S ELSE P2F;
DO NOT COPY
state P2S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P3F ELSE P2S;
state P3F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P3S ELSE P3F;
DO NOT COPY
state P3S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P4F ELSE P3S;
state P4F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P4S ELSE P4F;
DO NOT COPYstate P4S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P5F ELSE P4S;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  641
Ta b l e 8 - 2 7  (continued) Alternate program for the waveform generator.
state P5F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
DO NOT COPYELSE IF RUN THEN P5S ELSE P5F;
state P5S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P6F ELSE P5S;
state P6F: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
DO NOT COPY
ELSE IF RUN THEN P6S ELSE P6F;
state P6S: IF RESET THEN SRESET ELSE IF RESTART THEN P1F
ELSE IF RUN THEN P1F ELSE P6S;
end TIMEGN6ADO NOT COPY
The same timing-generator behavior in Figure 8-71 can be specified using
a state-machine design approach, as shown in Table 8-27. This ABEL program,
though longer, generates the same external behavior during normal operation as
DO NOT COPY
the previous one, and from a certain point of view it may be easier to understand.
However, its realization requires 8 to 20  AND  terms per output, compared to only
3 to 5 per output for the original ring-counter version. This is a good example of
how you can improve circuit efficiency and performance by adapting a standard,
simple structure to a “custom” design problem, rather than grinding out a brute-DO NOT COPY
force state machine.
RELIABLE RESET  Notice in Table 8-27 that TSTATE is assigned a value in the equations  section of the
DO NOT COPY
program, as well as being used in the  state_diagram  section. This was done very
a very specific purpose, to ensure that the program goes to the  SRESET state from any
undefined state, as explained below.
ABEL augments the on-set for an output each time the output appears on the
left-hand side of an equation, as we explained for combinational outputs on
DO NOT COPY
page 252. In the case of registered outputs, ABEL also augments the on-set of each
state variable in the state vector for each “state” definition in a  state_diagram.
For each state-variable output, all of the input combinations that cause that output to
be 1 in each  state  are added to the output’s on-set.
7 
The state machine in Table 8-27 has 2 or 128 states in total, of which only 13
DO NOT COPY
are explicitly defined and have a transition into  SRESET. Nevertheless, the  WHEN
equation ensures that anytime that RESET is asserted, the machine goes to the SRESET
state. This is true regardless of the  state  definitions in the  state_diagram. When
RESET  is asserted, the all-1s state encoding of  SRESET  is, in effect,  ORed with the
next state, if any, specified by the  state_diagram. This approach to reliable reset
DO NOT COPYwould not be possible if 
SRESET  were encoded as all 0s, for example.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

642  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
MCLK
R1_L
DO NOT COPY
R2_L
R3_L
DO NOT COPY
R4_L
R5_L
R6_L
DO NOT COPY
STATE  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11  0  1  2  3  4
Figure 8-72  Modified timing waveforms for a digital system.
DO NOT COPY
Now let’s look at a variation of the previous timing waveforms that might
be required in a different system. Figure 8-72 is similar to the previous wave-
forms, except that each phase output  Ri  is asserted for only one clock tick per
phase. This change has a subtle but important effect on the design approach.
In the original design, we used a six-bit ring counter and one auxiliary state
DO NOT COPY
bit  T1  to keep track of the two states within each phase. With the new wave-
forms, this is not possible. In the states between active-low pulses (STATE  = 0,
2, 4, etc. in Figure 8-72), the phase outputs are all negated, so they can no longer
be used to figure out which state should be visited next. Something else is need-
DO NOT COPYed to keep track of the state.
There are many different ways to solve this problem. One idea is to start
with the original design in Table 8-26, but use the phase outputs  P1_L,  P2_L,
Ta b l e 8 - 2 8  Additions to Table 8-26 for a modified six-phase waveform generator.
DO NOT COPY
module TIMEG12K
...
R1_L, R2_L, R3_L, R4_L, R5_L, R6_L  pin istype 'com';
...
DO NOT COPYOUTPUTS = [R1_L, R2_L, R3_L, R4_L, R5_L, R6_L];
equations
...
!OUTPUTS = !PHASES & !T1;
DO NOT COPYend TIMEG12K
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  643
and so on as internal states only. Then, each phase output  Ri_L can be defined as
a Moore-type combinational output that is asserted when the corresponding  Pi_L
is asserted  and  we are in the second tick of a phase. The additional ABEL code
DO NOT COPY
to support this first approach is shown in Table 8-28.
This first approach is easy, and it works just fine if the  Pi_L  signals are
going to be used only as enables or other control inputs. However, it’s a bad idea
if these signals are going to be used as clocks, because they may have glitches, as
we’ll now explain. The  Pi_L  and  T1  signals are all outputs from flip-flops
DO NOT COPY
clocked by the same master clock  MCLK. Although these signals change at
approximately the same time, their timing is never quite exact. One output may
change sooner than another; this is called  output  timing skew. For example, output timing skew
suppose that on the transition from state 1 to 2 in Figure 8-71,  P2_L  goes  LOW
beforeDO NOT COPY  T1  goes  HIGH. In this case, a short glitch could appear on the  R2_L
output.
To get glitch-free outputs, we should design the circuit so that each phase
output is the a registered output. One way to do this is to build a 12-bit ring
counter, and only use alternate outputs to yield the desired waveforms; an ABEL
program using this approach is shown in Table 8-29.DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 2 9  ABEL program for a modified six-phase waveform generator.
module TIMEG12
DO NOT COPY
title 'Modified six-phase Master Timing Generator'
" Input and Output pins
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART  pin;
P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L  pin istype 'reg';
P1A, P2A, P3A, P4A, P5A, P6A  pin istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY
" State definitions
PHASES = [P1A, P1_L, P2A, P2_L, P3A, P3_L, P4A, P4_L, P5A, P5_L, P6A, P6_L];
NEXTPH = [P6_L, P1A, P1_L, P2A, P2_L, P3A, P3_L, P4A, P4_L, P5A, P5_L, P6A];
SRESET = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P1 =DO NOT COPY  [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
equations
PHASES.CLK = MCLK;
DO NOT COPY
WHEN RESET THEN PHASES := SRESET;
ELSE WHEN RESTART # (PHASES == SRESET) THEN PHASES := P1;
ELSE WHEN RUN THEN PHASES := NEXTPH;
ELSE PHASES := PHASES;
end TIMEG12DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

644  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 3 0  Counter-based program for six-phase waveform generator.
module TIMEG12A
DO NOT COPYtitle 'Counter-based six-phase master timing generator'
" Input and Output pins
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART  pin;
P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L  pin istype 'reg';
CNT3..CNT0  pin istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY
" Definitions
CNT = [CNT3..CNT0];
P_L = [P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L];
equations
DO NOT COPY
CNT.CLK = MCLK;  P_L.CLK = MCLK;
WHEN RESET THEN CNT := 15
ELSE WHEN RESTART THEN CNT := 0
ELSE WHEN (RUN & (CNT < 11)) THEN CNT := CNT + 1
ELSE WHEN RUN THEN CNT := 0
DO NOT COPY
ELSE CNT := CNT;
P1_L := !(CNT == 0);
P2_L := !(CNT == 2);
P3_L := !(CNT == 4);
P4_L := !(CNT == 6);
DO NOT COPY
P5_L := !(CNT == 8);
P6_L := !(CNT == 10);
end TIMEG12A
DO NOT COPY
Still another approach is to recognize that since the waveforms cycle
through 12 states, we can build a modulo-12 binary counter and decode the
states of that counter. An ABEL program using this approach is shown in
Table 8-30. The states of the counter correspond to the “STATE” values shown
DO NOT COPYin Figure 8-72. Since the phase outputs are registered, they are glitch-free. Note
that they are decoded one cycle early, to account for the one-tick decoding delay.
Also, during reset, the counter is forced to state 15 rather than 0, so that the  P1_L
output is not asserted during reset.
DO NOT COPY8.5.10 Shift Registers in VHDL
Shift registers can be specified structurally or behaviorally in VHDL; we’ll look
at a few behavioral descriptions and applications. Table 8-31 is the function
table for an 8-bit shift register with an extended set of functions. In addition to
the hold, load, and shift functions of the 74x194 and 74x299, it performs circular
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  645
Ta b l e 8 - 3 1  Function table for an extended-function 8-bit shift register.
Inputs Next state
DO NOT COPY
Function S2  S1  S0  Q7∗ Q6∗ Q5∗ Q4∗ Q3∗ Q2∗ Q1∗ Q0∗
Hold  0  0  0  Q7  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1  Q0
Load  0  0  1  D7  D6  D5  D4  D3  D2  D1  D0
Shift rightDO NOT COPY  0  1  0  RIN  Q7  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1
Shift left  0  1  1  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1  Q0  LIN
Shift circular right  1  0  0  Q0  Q7  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1
Shift circular left  1  0  1  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1  Q0  Q7
Shift arithmetic rightDO NOT COPY  1  1  0  Q7  Q7  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1
Shift arithmetic left  1  1  1  Q6  Q5  Q4  Q3  Q2  Q1  Q0  0
and arithmetic shift operations. In the  circular  shift  operations, the bit that “falls circular shift
DO NOT COPY
off” one end during a shift is fed back into the other end.  In the  arithmetic  shift arithmetic shift
operations, the edge input is set up for multiplication or division by 2; for a left
shift, the right input is 0, and for a right shift, the leftmost (sign) bit is replicated.
A behavioral VHDL program for the extended-function shift register is
shown in Table 8-32. As in previous examples, we define a process and use the
DO NOT COPY
event  attribute on the  CLK  signal to obtain the desired edge-triggered behavior.
Several other features of this program are worth noting:
•  An internal signal,  IQ, is used for what eventually becomes the  Q  output,
so it can be both read and written by process statements. Alternatively, we
DO NOT COPY
could have defined the  Q  output as type “buffer”.
•  The  CLR  input is asynchronous; because it’s in the process sensitivity list,
it is tested whenever it changes. And the  IF  statement is structured so that
CLR  takes precedence over any other condition.
•DO NOT COPY  A  CASE  statement is used to define the operation of the shift register for the
eight possible values of the select inputs  S(2  downto  0).
•  In the  CASE  statement, the “when others” case is required to prevent the
32 
compiler from complaining about approximately 2  uncovered cases!
•  The “null” statement indicates that no action is taken in certain cases. In
DO NOT COPY
case 1, note that no action is required; the default is for a signal to hold its
value unless otherwise stated.
•  In most of the cases, the concatenation operator “&” is used to construct an
8-bit array from a 7-bit subset of  IQ  and one other bit.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

646  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Ta b l e 8 - 3 2  VHDL program for an extended-function 8-bit shift register.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity Vshftreg is
port (
CLK, CLR, RIN, LIN: in STD_LOGIC;
DO NOT COPYS: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (2 downto 0); -- function select
D: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0); -- data in
Q: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0) -- data out
);
end Vshftreg;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vshftreg_arch of Vshftreg is
signal IQ: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
begin
process (CLK, CLR, IQ)
begin
if (CLR='1') then IQ <= (others=>'0'); -- Asynchronous clear
DO NOT COPY
elsif (CLK'event and CLK='1') then
case CONV_INTEGER(S) is
when 0 => null;  -- Hold
when 1 => IQ <= D;  -- Load
when 2 => IQ <= RIN & IQ(7 downto 1);  -- Shift right
DO NOT COPYwhen 3 => IQ <= IQ(6 downto 0) & LIN;  -- Shift left
when 4 => IQ <= IQ(0) & IQ(7 downto 1); -- Shift circular right
when 5 => IQ <= IQ(6 downto 0) & IQ(7); -- Shift circular left
when 6 => IQ <= IQ(7) & IQ(7 downto 1); -- Shift arithmetic right
when 7 => IQ <= IQ(6 downto 0) & '0';  -- Shift arithmetic left
when others => null;
DO NOT COPY
end case;
end if;
Q <= IQ;
end process;
end Vshftreg_arch;
DO NOT COPY
•  Because of VHDL’s strong requirements for type matching, we used the
CONV_INTEGER  function in the  IEEE.std_logic_unsigned  library to
convert the  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  select input  S  to an integer in the  CASE
DO NOT COPYstatement. Alternatively, we could have written each case label as a
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR  (e.g.,  ('0','1','1')  instead of integer 3).
One application of shift registers is in ring counters, as in the six-phase
waveform generator that we described on page 638 with the waveforms in
Figure 8-71. A VHDL program that provides the corresponding behavior is
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.5  Shift Registers  647
Ta b l e 8 - 3 3  VHDL program for a six-phase waveform generator.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity Vtimegn6 is
port (
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART: in STD_LOGIC; -- clock, control inputs
P_L: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6)  -- active-low phase outputs
DO NOT COPY
);
end Vtimegn6;
architecture Vtimegn6_arch of Vtimegn6 is
signal IP: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6); -- internal active-high phase signals
signal T1: STD_LOGIC;DO NOT COPY  -- first tick within phase
begin
process (MCLK, IP)
begin
if (MCLK'event and MCLK='1') then
if (RESET='1') then
DO NOT COPYT1 <= '1'; IP <= ('0','0','0','0','0','0');
elsif ((IP=('0','0','0','0','0','0')) or (RESTART='1')) then
T1 <= '1'; IP <= ('1','0','0','0','0','0');
elsif (RUN='1') then
T1 <= not T1;
if (T1='0') then IP <= IP(6) & IP(1 to 5); end if;
DO NOT COPY
end if;
end if;
P_L <= not IP;
end process;
end Vtimegn6_arch;
DO NOT COPY
shown in Table 8-33. As in the previous VHDL example, an internal active-high
signal vector,  IP, is used for reading and writing what eventually becomes the
circuit’s output; this internal signal is conveniently inverted in the last statement
to obtain the required active-low output signal vector. The rest of the program isDO NOT COPY
straightforward, but notice that it has three levels of nested  IF  statements.
A possible modification to the preceding application is to produce output
waveforms that are asserted only during the second tick of each two-tick phase;
such waveforms were shown in Figure 8-72 on page 642. One way to do this is
DO NOT COPY
to create a 12-bit ring counter, and use only alternate outputs. In the VHDL
realization, only the six phase outputs,  P_L(1  to  6), would appear in the entity
definition. The additional six signals, which we name  NEXTP(1  to  6), are local
to the architecture definition. Figure 8-73 shows the relationship of these signals
for shift-register operation, and Table 8-34 is the VHDL program.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

648  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
4 5 6
NEXTP(1 to 6) 1 2 3
4 5 6
DO NOT COPYIP(1 to 6) 1 2 3
(P_L <= not IP)
Figure 8-73  Shifting sequence for waveform generator 12-bit ring counter.
DO NOT COPYAs in the previous program, a 6-bit active-high signal,  IP, is declared in the
architecture body and used for reading and writing what eventually becomes the
circuit’s active-low output,  P_L. The additional 6-bit signal,  NEXTP, holds the
remaining six bits of state. Constants  IDLE  and  FIRSTP  are used to improve the
program’s readability.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 3 4  VHDL program for a modified six-phase waveform generator.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
DO NOT COPY
entity Vtimeg12 is
port (
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART: in STD_LOGIC; -- clock, control inputs
P_L: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6)  -- active-low phase outputs
);
DO NOT COPY
end Vtimeg12;
architecture Vtimeg12_arch of Vtimeg12 is
signal IP, NEXTP: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6); -- internal active-high phase signals
begin
process (MCLK, IP, NEXTP)
DO NOT COPY
variable TEMP: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6);  -- temporary for signal shift
constant IDLE: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := ('0','0','0','0','0','0');
constant FIRSTP: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := ('1','0','0','0','0','0');
begin
if (MCLK'event and MCLK='1') then
DO NOT COPYif (RESET='1') then IP <= IDLE;  NEXTP <= IDLE;
elsif (RESTART='1') or (IP=IDLE and NEXTP=IDLE) then IP <= IDLE;  NEXTP <= FIRSTP;
elsif (RUN='1') then
if (IP=IDLE) and (NEXTP=IDLE) then NEXTP <= FIRSTP;
else TEMP := IP;  IP <= NEXTP;  NEXTP <= TEMP(6) & TEMP(1 to 5);
end if;
DO NOT COPY
end if;
end if;
P_L <= not IP;
end process;
end Vtimeg12_arch;
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *8.6  Iterative versus Sequential Circuits  649
Notice that a six-bit variable, TEMP, is used just as a temporary place to hold
the old value of IP when shifting occurs—IP is loaded with  NEXTP, and  NEXTP  is
loaded with the shifted, old value of  IP. Because the assignment statements in a
DO NOT COPY
process are executed  sequentially, we couldn’t get away with just writing
“IP <= NEXTP;  NEXTP <=  IP(6)  &  IP(1  to  5);”. If we did that, then  NEXTP  would
pick up the  new  value of IP, not the old. Notice also that since  TEMP  is a variable,
not a signal, its value is not preserved between process invocations. Thus, the
VHDL compiler does not synthesize any flip-flops to hold  TEMP’s value.
DO NOT COPY
*8.6 Iterative versus Sequential Circuits
We introduced iterative circuits in Section 5.9.2. The function of an  n-module
iterative circuit can be performed by a sequential circuit that uses just one copyDO NOT COPY
of the module but requires  n  steps (clock ticks) to obtain the result. This is an
excellent example of a space/time trade-off in digital design.
As shown in Figure 8-74, flip-flops are used in the sequential-circuit ver-
sion to store the cascading outputs at the end of each step; the flip-flop outputs
DO NOT COPY
are used as the cascading inputs at the beginning of the next step. The flip-flops
must be initialized to the boundary-input values before the first clock tick, and
they contain the boundary-output values after the  nth tick.
Since an iterative circuit is a combinational circuit, all of its primary and
boundary inputs may be applied simultaneously, and its primary and boundary
DO NOT COPY
outputs are all available after a combinational delay. In the sequential-circuit
version, the primary inputs must be delivered sequentially, one per clock tick,
and the primary outputs are produced with similar timing. Therefore, serial-out
shift registers are often used to provide the inputs, and serial-in shift registers are
used to collect the outputs. For this reason, the sequential-circuit version of anDO NOT COPY
“iterative widget” is often called a “serial widget.”
CLOCK
Figure 8-74
DO NOT COPYPIi General structure of
the sequential-circuit
version of an iterative
PI CLK
Ci  Ci +1 circuit.
CI  module CO register
DO NOT COPYPO
Ci
PO
DO NOT COPYi
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

650  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Y
X
CMP
DO NOT COPY
EQO 
D  Q EQI
CLK
Figure 8-75
Simplified serialDO NOT COPY
CLOCK
comparator circuit.
serial comparator For example, Figure 8-75 shows the basic design for a  serial comparator
DO NOT COPYcircuit. The shaded block is identical to the module used in the iterative compar-
ator of Figure 5-80 on page 385. The circuit is drawn in more detail using SSI
chips in Figure 8-76. In addition, we have provided a synchronous reset input
that, when asserted, forces the initial value of the cascading flip-flop to 1 at the
next clock tick. The initial value of the cascading flip-flop corresponds to the
DO NOT COPYboundary input in the iterative comparator.
With the serial comparator, an  n-bit comparison requires  n  +  1 clock ticks.
RESET_L  is asserted at the first clock tick. RESET_L is negated and data bits are
applied at the next  n  ticks. The EQI  output gives the comparison result during the
clock period following the last tick. A timing diagram for two successive 4-bit
DO NOT COPY
comparisons is shown in Figure 8-77. The spikes in the  EQO  waveform indicate
the time when the combinational outputs are settling in response to new  X  and  Y
input values.
DO NOT COPY
+5 V
Figure 8-76
Detailed serial
comparator circuit. R
74x86
1  74x08 4
DO NOT COPYX 3 1 74x00 74x74
2  3 1
Y 2  3 EQO 2 PR 5
2 D  Q EQI
U1
U2 3
U3 CK 6
Q
RESET_L CLR
DO NOT COPY+5V 
R 1 U4
CLOCK
EQI_L
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section *8.6  Iterative versus Sequential Circuits  651
bit  0  1 2  3  R  0  1  2  3  R
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
RESET_L
1  0  0  1  0  0  1 0
X
DO NOT COPY
1  0  1  0  0  0  1 0
Y
EQO
DO NOT COPY
EQI
not equal  equal
Figure 8-77DO NOT COPY  Timing diagram for serial comparator circuit.
A  serial binary adder  circuit for addends of any length can be constructed serial binary adder
from a full adder and a  D  flip-flop, as shown in Figure 8-78. The flip-flop, which
stores the carry between successive bits of the addition, is cleared to 0 at reset.
Addend bits are presented serially on theDO NOT COPY  A  and  B  inputs, starting with the LSB,
and sum bits appear on  S  in the same order.
Because of the large size and high cost of digital logic circuits in the early
days, many computers and calculators used serial adders and other serial
versions of iterative circuits to perform arithmetic operations. Even though these
arithmetic circuits aren’t used much today, they are an instructive reminder ofDO NOT COPY
the space/time trade-offs that are possible in digital design.
full adder 
Figure 8-78
DO NOT COPY
A A Serial binary adder
S  S
B B circuit.
COUT
CIN COUT RCOUT 
D  Q
DO NOT COPY
RESET_L CLK
CLOCK
CIN
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

652  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.7 Synchronous Design Methodology
synchronous system In a  synchronous system, all flip-flops are clocked by the same, common clock
DO NOT COPYsignal, and preset and clear inputs are not used, except for system initialization.
Although it’s true that all the world does not march to the tick of a common
clock, within the confines of a digital system or subsystem we can make it so.
When we interconnect digital systems or subsystems that use different clocks,
we can usually identify a limited number of asynchronous signals that need
DO NOT COPY
special treatment, as we’ll show later, in Section 8.8.3.
Races and hazards are not a problem in synchronous systems, for two
reasons. First, the only fundamental-mode circuits that might be subject to races
or essential hazards are predesigned elements, such as discrete flip-flops or
ASIC cells, that are guaranteed by the manufacturer to work properly. Second,
DO NOT COPY
even though the combinational circuits that drive flip-flop control inputs may
contain static or dynamic or function hazards, these hazards have no effect, since
the control inputs are sampled only  after  the hazard-induced glitches have had a
chance to settle out.
Aside from designing the functional behavior of each state machine, the
DO NOT COPY
designer of a practical synchronous system or subsystem must perform just three
well-defined tasks to ensure reliable system operation:
1.  Minimize and determine the amount of clock skew in the system, as
discussed in Section 8.8.1.
DO NOT COPY
2.  Ensure that flip-flops have positive setup- and hold-time margins, includ-
ing an allowance for clock skew, as described in Section 8.1.4.
3.  Identify asynchronous inputs, synchronize them with the clock, and ensure
that the synchronizers have an adequately low probability of failure, as
DO NOT COPYdescribed in Sections 8.8.3 and 8.9.
Before we get into these issues, in this section we’ll look at a general model for
synchronous system structure and an example.
8.7.1 Synchronous System Structure
DO NOT COPY
The sequential-circuit design examples that we gave in Chapter 7 were mostly
individual state machines with a small number of states. If a sequential circuit
has more than a few flip-flops, then it’s not desirable (and often not possible) to
treat the circuit as a single, monolithic state machine, because the number of
DO NOT COPYstates would be too large to handle.
Fortunately, most digital systems or subsystems can be partitioned into two
or more parts. Whether the system processes numbers, digitized voice signals, or
a stream of spark-plug pulses, a certain part of the system, which we’ll call the
data unit data unit,  can be viewed as storing, routing, combining, and generally process-
DO NOT COPY
control unit ing “data.” Another part, which we’ll call the  control unit,  can be viewed as
starting and stopping actions in the data unit, testing conditions, and deciding
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.7  Synchronous Design Methodology  653
what to do next according to circumstances. In general, only the control unit
must be designed as a state machine. The data unit and its components are
typically handled at a higher level of abstraction, such as:
DO NOT COPY
•  Registers. A collection of flip-flops is loaded in parallel with many bits of
“data,” which can then be used or retrieved together.
•  Specialized functions. These include multibit counters and shift registers,
which increment or shift their contents on command.
DO NOT COPY
•  Read/write memory. Individual latches or flip-flops in a collection of the
same can be written or read out.
The first two topics above were discussed earlier in this chapter, and the last is
discussed in Chapter 11.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-79 is a general block diagram of a system with a control unit and
a data unit. We have also included explicit blocks for input and output, but we
could have just as easily absorbed these functions into the data unit itself. The
control unit is a state machine whose inputs include  command inputs  that command input
indicate how the machine is to function, and  condition inputs  provided by the condition input
DO NOT COPY
data unit. The command inputs may be supplied by another subsystem or by a
user to set the general operating mode of the control state machine (RUN/HALT,
NORMAL/TURBO, etc.), while the condition inputs allow the control state
machine unit to change its behavior as required by circumstances in the data unit
(ZERO_DETECT,  MEMORY_FULL, etc.).
DO NOT COPY
A key characteristic of the structure in Figure 8-79 is that the control, data,
input, and output units all use the same common clock. Figure 8-80 illustrates
the operations of the control and data units during a typical clock cycle:
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
Figure 8-79
COMMAND DATA IN
Synchronous system
structure.
CONTROL INPUT
DO NOT COPY
CONTROL
UNIT
(state machine)
CONTROL DATA UNIT
DO NOT COPY
CONTROL OUTPUT
DO NOT COPYDATA OUT
CONDITIONS
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

654  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
CLOCK
Control-unit state and
valid
DO NOT COPYdata-unit register outputs
Data-unit valid
control inputs
Data-unit
valid
conditions
DO NOT COPYData-unit result inputs and
valid
control-unit excitation inputs
Figure 8-80  Operations during one clock cycle in a synchronous system.
1.  Shortly after the beginning of the clock period, the control-unit state and
DO NOT COPY
the data-unit register outputs are valid.
2.  Next, after a combinational logic delay, Moore-type outputs of the control-
unit state machine become valid. These signals are control  inputs  to the
data unit. They determine what data-unit functions are performed in the
DO NOT COPYrest of the  clock  period, for  example,  selecting  memory addresses,
multiplexer paths, and arithmetic operations.
3.  Near the end of the clock period, data-unit condition outputs such as zero-
or overflow-detect are valid, and are made available to the control unit.
DO NOT COPY4.  At the end of the clock period, just before the setup-time window begins,
the next-state logic of the control-unit state machine has determined the
next state based on the current state and command and condition inputs. At
about the same time, computational results in the data unit are available to
be loaded into data-unit registers.
DO NOT COPY
5.  After the clock edge, the whole cycle may repeat.
Data-unit control inputs, which are control-unit state-machine outputs,
may be of the Moore, Mealy, or pipelined Mealy type; timing for the Moore type
was shown in Figure 8-80. Moore-type  and pipelined-Mealy-type  outputs
DO NOT COPYcontrol the data unit’s actions strictly according to the current state and past
inputs, which do not depend on  current  conditions in the data unit. In contrast,
Mealy-type outputs may select different actions in the data unit according to
current  conditions in the data unit. This increases flexibility, but typically also
DO NOT COPY
PIPELINED Some state machines have pipelined Mealy outputs, discussed in Section 7.3.2. In
MEALY OUTPUTS Figure 8-80, pipelined Mealy outputs would typically be valid early in the cycle, at
the same time as control-unit state outputs. Early validity of these outputs, compared
to Moore outputs that must go through a combinational logic delay, may allow the
DO NOT COPY
entire system to operate at a faster clock rate.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.7  Synchronous Design Methodology  655
increases the minimum clock period for correct system operation, since the
delay path may be much longer. Also, Mealy-type outputs must not create
feedback loops. For example, a signal that adds 1 to an adder’s input if the adder
DO NOT COPY
output is nonzero causes an oscillation if the adder output is  −1.
8.7.2 A Synchronous System Design Example
To give you an overview of several elements of synchronous system design, this
subsection presents a representative example of a synchronous system. The
DO NOT COPY
example is a  shift-and-add multiplier  for unsigned integers using the algorithm shift-and-add multiplier
of Section 2.8. Its data unit uses standard combinational and sequential building
blocks, and its control unit is described by a state diagram
Figure 8-81 illustrates data-unit registers and functions that are used to
perform an 8-bit multiplication:DO NOT COPY
MPY/LPROD  A shift register that initially stores the multiplier, and accumu-
lates the low-order bits of the product as the algorithm is
executed.
HPROD  A register that is initially cleared, and accumulates the high-
DO NOT COPY
order bits of the product as the algorithm is executed.
MCND  A register that stores the multiplicand throughout the algorithm.
F  A combinational function equal to the 9-bit sum of  HPROD  and
MCND  if the low-order bit of  MPY/LPROD  is 1, and equal to
DO NOT COPY
HPROD  (extended to 9 bits) otherwise.
The  MPY/LPROD  shift register serves a dual purpose, holding both yet-to-
be-tested multiplier bits (on the right) and unchanging product bits (on the left)
as the algorithm is executed. At each step it shifts right one bit, discarding the
multiplier bit that was just tested, moving the next multiplier bit to be tested toDO NOT COPY
the rightmost position, and loading into the leftmost position one more product
bit that will not change for the rest of the algorithm.
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-81
Registers and functions
HP7 HP0 MPY7 MPY0 used by the shift-and-add
multiplication algorithm.
HPROD MPY/LPROD
MC7 MC0
DO NOT COPYshift
+ MCND
F8 F0
F = HPROD + MPY[0] • MCND
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

656  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
CLEAR
SELSUM
74x377 74x283 74x157
11 15
CLOCK CLK 7 S[7:0] G
DO NOT COPY1 C0 1
LDMCND_L G HP0 5 4 S0 S
A0 S0 HP0 2 
MCND[7:0] MCND0 3 2 MC0 MC0 6 1A 4 F0
1D  1Q B0 S0 3 1Y
MCND1 4 5 MC1 HP1 3 1 S1 1B
2D 2Q A1 S1 HP1 5
MCND2 7 6 MC2 MC1 2 2A 7 F1
3D 3Q  B1 S1 6 2Y
MCND3 8 9 MC3 HP2 14 13 S2 2B
4D 4Q A2 S2 HP2 11
MCND413 12 MC4 MC2 15 3A 9 F2
5D 5Q  B2 S2 10 3Y
DO NOT COPYMCND514 6D 6Q 15 MC5 HP3 12 A3 S3 10 S3 HP3 14 3B
MCND617  16 MC6 MC3 11 4A 12 F3
7D 7Q B3 9 S3 13 4Y
MCND718  19 MC7 C4 4B
8D 8Q
+5 V  U4  U7
U1 
R 74x194 MC[7:0]
11
CLK
1
DO NOT COPYCLR 74x283 74x157
10
MPYS1 S1 15
9 7 G
MPYS0 S0 C0 1
HP4 5 4 S4 S
7 A0 S0 HP4 2 
LIN MC4 6 1A 4 F4
MPY[7:0]  MPY0 6  12 LP0 B0 S4 3 1Y
D QD HP5 3 1 S5 1B
MPY1 5  13 LP1 A1 S1 HP5 5
C QC MC5 2 2A 7 F5
MPY2 4  14 LP2 B1 S5 6 2Y
B QB  HP6 14 13 S6 2B
DO NOT COPYMPY3 3  15 LP3 A2 S2 HP6 11
A QA MC6 15 3A 9 F6
2 B2 S6 10 3Y
RIN HP7 12 10 S7 3B
A3 S3 HP7 14
U2 MC7 11 4A 12 F7
B3 9 S7 13 4Y
C4 4B
HP[7:0] U5 U8
HP[7:0]
74x194
LP[7:0]
DO NOT COPY11 CLK
1 CLR F[8:0] 74x377 F8
10
11
9 S1 CLK 74x08
S0 1 1
G 3
7 S8 2 
LIN F1 3 2 HP0
MPY4 6  12 LP4 1D  1Q 5 U9
D QD F2 4 HP1
MPY5 5  13 LP5 2D 2Q
DO NOT COPYC QC F3 7 3D 3Q  6 HP2
MPY6 4  14 LP6
B QB  F4 8 9 HP3
MPY7 3  15 LP7 4D 4Q
A QA F5 13 12 HP4 Figure 8-82
5D 5Q 
2 RIN F6 14 15 HP5 Data unit of an 8-bit
6D 6Q
U3 F7 17  16 HP6
7D 7Q shift-and-add binary
LDHP_L F8 18 8D 8Q 19 HP7
F0 multiplier.
U6
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-82 is an MSI design for the data unit. The multiplier,  MPY[7:0],
and the multiplicand, MCND[7:0], are loaded into two registers before a multipli-
cation begins. When the multiplication is completed, the product appears on
HP[7:0]  and  LP[7:0]. The data unit uses the following control signals:
DO NOT COPY
LDMCND_L  When asserted, enables the multiplicand register  U1  to be loaded.
LDHP_L  When asserted, enables the  HPROD  register  U6  to be loaded.
MPYS[1:0]  When 11, these signals enable the  MPY/LPROD  register  U2  and
U3 to be loaded at the next clock tick. They are set to 01 during the
DO NOT COPY
multiplication operation to enable the register to shift right, and
are 00 at other times to preserve the register’s contents.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.7  Synchronous Design Methodology  657
Data Unit
Control Unit State Machine
CLOCK
CLOCKDO NOT COPYCLK CLEAR CLEAR
74x04
RESET RESET LDHP
1  2
START START LDMCND LDMCND
MPY0 MPYS1 U11
MPYS1
MAXCNT MPYS0
MPYS0
DO NOT COPYSELSUM
SELSUM
RUNC LP0
74x04
LP[7:0] LP[7:0]
3  4
LDHP HP[7:0] HP[7:0]
U11
DO NOT COPY
74x163 MPY[7:0] MPY[7:0]
2 MCND[7:0] MCND[7:0]
CLK
74x04 1
CLR
5  6 9
LD
7
DO NOT COPYU11 ENP
10
ENT
+5 V 3 14
A QA
4 13
B QB Figure 8-83
R 5 12
C QC Control unit for an
RPU 6 11
8-bit shift-and-add
DO NOT COPYD QD 
15
RCO MAXCNT binary multiplier.
U10
SELSUM  When this is asserted, the multiplexers U7  and U8  select the output
of the adders  U4  and  U5, which is the sum of  HPROD  and the
DO NOT COPY
multiplicand  MC. Otherwise, they select  HPROD  directly.
CLEAR  When asserted, the output of multiplexers  U7  and  U8  is zero.
The multiplier uses a control unit, shown along with the data-unit block in
Figure 8-83, to initialize the data unit and step through a multiplication. The
control unit is decomposed into a counter (DO NOT COPYU10) and a state machine with the
state diagram shown in Figure 8-84.
The state machine has the following inputs and outputs:
RESET  A reset input that is asserted at power-up.
DO NOT COPYSTART  An external command input that starts a multiplication.
MPY0  A condition input from the data unit, the next multiplier bit to test.
CLEAR  A control output that zeroes the multiplexer output and initializes
the counter.
LDMCNDDO NOT COPY  A control output that enables the  MCND  register to be loaded.
LDHP  A control output that enables the  HPROD  register to be loaded.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

658  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
RESET
CLEAR = 1;
LDHP = 1; IDLE
DO NOT COPYLDMCND = 1;
MPYS = [1,1]; START
START′
START′ START
INIT WAIT
MAXCNT′
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-84
1 
State diagram for the
RUNC = 1; MAXCNT
control state machine
LDHP = 1; RUN
for a shift-and-add MPYS = [0,1];
binary multiplier. SELSUM = MPY0;
DO NOT COPY
RUNC  A control output that enables the counter to count.
MPYS[1:0]  Control outputs for  MPY/LPROD  shifting and loading.
SELSUM  A control output that selects between the shifted adder output or
DO NOT COPYshifted  HPROD  to be loaded back into  HPROD.
The state diagram can be converted into a corresponding state machine
using any of a variety of methods, from turn-the-crank (a.k.a. hand-crafted)
design to automatic synthesis using a corresponding ABEL or VHDL descrip-
DO NOT COPYtion. The state machine has mostly Moore-type outputs;  SELSUM  is a Mealy-
type output. Two boxes in the state diagram list outputs that are asserted in the
INIT  and  RUN  states; all outputs are negated at other times. The machine is
designed so that asserting  RESET in any state takes it to the  IDLE  state.
After the  START  signal is asserted, a multiplication begins in the  INIT
DO NOT COPYstate. In this state, the counter is initialized to 1000  , the multiplier and multipli-
2
cand are loaded into their respective registers, and  HPROD  is cleared. The  RUN
state is entered next, and the counter is enabled to count. The state machine stays
in the  RUN  state for eight clock ticks, to execute the eight steps of the 8-bit shift-
and-add algorithm. During the eighth tick, the counter is in state 1111 2, so
DO NOT COPY
MAXCNT  is asserted and the state machine goes to the  WAIT  state. The machine
waits there until  START  is negated, to prevent a multiplication from restarting
until  START  is asserted once again.
The design details of the data and control units are interesting, but the most
important thing to see in this example is that all of the sequential circuit elements
DO NOT COPY
for both data and control are edge-triggered flip-flops clocked by the same,
common  CLOCK  signal. Thus, its timing is consistent with the model in
Figure 8-80, and the designer need not be concerned about races, hazards, and
asynchronous operations. Unless the state machine realization is very slow, the
DO NOT COPYoverall circuit’s maximum clock speed will be limited mainly by the propagation
delays through the data unit.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.8  Impediments to Synchronous Design  659
8.8 Impediments to Synchronous Design
Although the synchronous approach is the most straightforward and reliable
method of digital system design, a few nasty realities can get in the way. We’llDO NOT COPY
discuss them in this section.
8.8.1 Clock Skew
Synchronous systems using edge-triggered flip-flops work properly only if all
DO NOT COPY
flip-flops see the triggering clock edge at the same time. Figure 8-85 shows what
can happen otherwise. Here, two flip-flops are theoretically clocked by the same
signal, but the clock signal seen by  FF2  is delayed by a significant amount rela-
tive to  FF1’s clock. This difference between arrival times of the clock at different
devices is called  clock skew. clock skew
DO NOT COPY
We’ve named the delayed clock in Figure 8-85(a) “CLOCKD.” If  FF1’s
propagation delay from  CLOCK  to  Q1 is short, and if the physical connection of
Q1 to  FF2  is short, then the change in  Q1  caused by a  CLOCK  edge may actually
reach  FF2  before  the corresponding  CLOCKD  edge. In this case,  FF2  may go to
an incorrect next state determined by the  next  state of  FF1  instead of the current
DO NOT COPY
state, as shown in (b). If the change in  Q1  arrives at  FF2  only slightly early
relative to  CLOCKD, then  FF2’s hold-time specification may be violated, in
which case  FF2  may become metastable and produce an unpredictable output.
If Figure 8-85 reminds you of the essential hazard shown in Figure 7-101,
you’re on to something. The clock-skew problem may be viewed simply as aDO NOT COPY
manifestation of the essential hazards that exist in all edge-triggered devices.
We can determine quantitatively whether clock skew is a problem in a
given system by defining  tskew  to be the amount of clock skew and using the
other timing parameters defined in Figure 8-1. For proper operation, we need
DO NOT COPY
tffpd(min)  +  tcomb(min)  −  thold −  tskew(max)  > 0
In other words, clock skew subtracts from the hold-time margin that we defined
in Section 8.1.4.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-85  Example of clock skew. (b) IN
CLOCK
(a)
Q1 Q2
IN D  Q D Q
DO NOT COPY
CLOCKD Q1
CLK CLK
FF1  FF2
CLOCK CLOCKD
incorrect
DO NOT COPYQ2
a long, slow path
correct
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

660  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
(a)  (b) all in same
IC package
CLOCK  CLOCK
DO NOT COPYCLOCK_L  CLOCK1
CLOCK1
CLOCK2
CLOCK2
DO NOT COPYCLOCK3
Figure 8-86  Buffering the clock: (a) excessive clock skew; (b) controllable clock skew.
DO NOT COPYViewed in isolation, the example in Figure 8-85 may seem a bit extreme.
After all, why would a designer provide a short connection path for data and a
long one for the clock, when they could just run side by side? There are several
ways this can happen; some are mistakes, while others are unavoidable.
In a large system, a single clock signal may not have adequate fanout to
DO NOT COPYdrive all of the devices with clock inputs, so it may be necessary to provide two
or more copies of the clock signal. The buffering method of Figure 8-86(a) obvi-
ously produces excessive clock skew, since  CLOCK1  and  CLOCK2  are delayed
through an extra buffer compared to  CLOCK.
A recommended buffering method is shown in Figure 8-86(b). All of the
DO NOT COPY
clock signals go through identical buffers, and thus have roughly equal delays.
Ideally, all the buffers should be part of the same IC package, so that they all
have similar delay characteristics and are operating at identical temperature and
power-supply voltage. Some manufacturers build special buffers for just this sort
of application and specify the worst-case delay variation between buffers in the
DO NOT COPY
same package, which can be as low as a few tenths of a nanosecond.
Even the method in Figure 8-86(b) may produce excessive clock skew if
one clock signal is loaded much more heavily than the other; transitions on the
more heavily loaded clock appear to occur later because of increases in output-
DO NOT COPYtransistor switching delay and signal rise and fall times. Therefore, a careful
designer tries to balance the loads on multiple clocks, looking at both DC load
(fanout) and AC load (wiring and input capacitance).
Another bad situation can occur when signals on a PCB or in an ASIC are
routed automatically by CAD software. Figure 8-87 shows a PCB or ASIC with
DO NOT COPYmany flip-flops and larger-scale elements, all clocked with a common  CLOCK
signal. The CAD software has laid out  CLOCK in a serpentine path that winds its
way past all the clocked devices. Other signals are routed point-to-point between
an output and a small number of inputs, so their paths are shorter. To make
matters worse, in an ASIC some types of “wire” may be slower than others
DO NOT COPY
(polysilicon vs. metal in CMOS technology). As a result, a  CLOCK  edge may
indeed arrive at  FF2  quite a bit later than the data change that it produces on  Q1.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.8  Impediments to Synchronous Design  661
CLOCK
Q1
D Q D Q
DO NOT COPYCLK FF1  CLK FF2
CLK
CLK CLK
DO NOT COPY
CLK
CLK 
D  Q D Q D Q
CLK CLK CLK
DO NOT COPY
CLK CLK
Figure 8-87  A clock-signal path leading to excessive skew in a complex PCB or ASIC.
DO NOT COPY
One way to minimize this sort of problem is to arrange for  CLOCK  to be
distributed in a tree-like structure using the fastest type of wire, as illustrated in
Figure 8-88. Usually, such a “clock tree” must be laid out by hand or using a
specialized CAD tool. Even then, in a complex design it may not be possible to
DO NOT COPY
guarantee that clock edges arrive everywhere before the earliest data change. A
CAD timing analysis program is typically used to detect these problems, which
Figure 8-88  Clock-signal routing to minimize skew.
CLOCKDO NOT COPY
Q1
D Q D Q
CLK CLK
FF1  FF2 CLK
DO NOT COPY
CLK CLK
CLK
DO NOT COPYCLK 
D  Q D Q D Q
CLK CLK CLK
DO NOT COPYCLK
CLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

662  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
HOW NOT TO Unbalanced wire lengths and loads are the most obvious sources of clock skew, but
GET SKEWERED there are many other subtle sources. For example,  crosstalk, the coupling of energy
DO NOT COPY
from one signal line into another, can cause clock skew. Crosstalk is inevitable when
parallel wires are packed together tightly on a printed circuit board or in a chip, and
energy is radiated during signal transitions. Depending on whether an adjacent signal
is changing in the same or opposite direction as a clock, the clock’s transition can be
accelerated or retarded, making its transition appear to occur earlier or later.
DO NOT COPY
In a large PCB or ASIC design, it’s usually not feasible to track down all the
possible sources of clock skew. As a result, most ASIC manufacturers require
designers to provide extra setup- and hold-time margin, equivalent to many gate
delays, over and above the known simulation timing results to accommodate such
unknown factors.
DO NOT COPY
generally can be remedied only by inserting extra delay (e.g., pairs of inverters)
in the too-fast data paths.
Although synchronous design methodology simplifies the conceptual
DO NOT COPY
operation of large systems, we see that clock skew can be a major problem when
edge-triggered flip-flops are used as the storage elements. To control this prob-
two-phase latch design lem, many high-performance systems and VLSI chips use a  two-phase  latch
design,  discussed in the References. Such designs effectively split each edge-
DO NOT COPYtriggered  D  flip-flop into its two component latches, and control them with two
nonoverlapping clock phases. The nonoverlap between the phases accommo-
dates clock skew.
8.8.2 Gating the Clock
DO NOT COPY
Most of the sequential MSI parts that we introduced in this chapter have
synchronous function-enable inputs. That is, their enable inputs are sampled on
the clock edge, along with the data. The first example that we showed was the
74x377 register with synchronous load-enable input; other parts included the
74x163 counter and 74x194 shift register with synchronous load-enable, count-
DO NOT COPY
enable, and shift-enable inputs. Nevertheless, many MSI parts, FPGA macros,
and ASIC cells do not have synchronous function-enable inputs; for example,
the 74x374 8-bit register has three-state outputs but no load-enable input.
So, what can a designer do if an application requires an 8-bit register with
DO NOT COPYboth a load-enable input  and  three-state outputs? One solution is to use a 74x377
to get the load-enable, and follow it with a 74x241 three-state buffer. However,
this increases both cost and delay. Another approach is to use a larger, more
expensive part, the 74x823, which provides both required functions as well as an
asynchronous  CLR_L  input. A riskier but sometimes-used alternative is to use a
DO NOT COPY’374, but to suppress its clock input when it’s not supposed to be loaded. This is
gating the clock called  gating the clock.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.8  Impediments to Synchronous Design  663
(a)  (b)
CLOCK
CLOCK
GCLK CLKEN
DO NOT COPYCLKEN
GCLK
Figure 8-89  How not to gate the clock: (a) simple-minded circuit; (b) timing diagram.
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-89 illustrates an obvious but wrong approach to gating the clock.
A signal  CLKEN  is asserted to enable the clock, and is simply  ANDed with the
clock to produce the gated clock  GCLK. This approach has two problems:
1.  If  CLKEN  is a state-machine output or other signal produced by a register
DO NOT COPY
clocked by  CLOCK, then  CLKEN  changes some time  after  CLOCK  has
already gone  HIGH. As shown in (b) this produces glitches on  GCLK, and
false clocking of the registers controlled by  GCLK.
2.  Even if  CLKEN  is somehow produced well in advance of  CLOCK’s rising
DO NOT COPYedge (e.g., using a register clocked with the  falling  edge of  CLOCK, an
especially nasty kludge), the  AND-gate delay gives  GCLK  excessive clock
skew, which causes more problems all around.
A method of gating the clock that generates only minimal clock skew is
shown in Figure 8-90. Here, both an ungated clock and several gated clocks are
DO NOT COPY
generated from the same active-low master clock signal. Gates in the same IC
package are used to minimize the possible differences in their delays. The
CLKEN  signal may change arbitrarily whenever  CLOCK_L  is  LOW, which is
when  CLOCK  is HIGH. That’s just fine; a  CLKEN  signal is typically produced by
a state machine whose outputs change right afterDO NOT COPY  CLOCK  goes  HIGH.
The approach of Figure 8-90 is acceptable in a particular application only
if the clock skew that it creates is acceptable. Furthermore, note that  CLKEN
Figure 8-90  An acceptable way to gate the clock: (a) circuit; (b) timing diagram.
DO NOT COPY
(a) all in same
IC package
(b)
CLOCK
CLOCK_L
CLOCK_L
DO NOT COPYGCLK1
CLKEN1
CLOCK
GCLK2
CLKEN2 CLKEN
GCLK
DO NOT COPYGCLK3
CLKEN3
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

664  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
must be stable during the entire time that  CLOCK_L  is  HIGH  (CLOCK  is  LOW).
Thus, the timing margins in this approach are sensitive to the clock’s duty cycle,
especially if  CLKEN  suffers significant combinational-logic delay (tcomb) from
DO NOT COPY
the triggering clock edge. A truly synchronous function-enable input, such as the
74x377’s load-enable input in Figure 8-13, can be changed at almost any time
during the entire clock period, up until a setup time before the triggering edge.
DO NOT COPY8.8.3 Asynchronous Inputs
Even though it is theoretically possible to build a computer system that is fully
synchronous, you couldn’t do much with it, unless you can synchronize your
keystrokes with a 500 MHz clock. Digital systems of all types inevitably must
asynchronous input deal with  asynchronous input signals  that are not synchronized with the system
signalDO NOT COPYclock.
Asynchronous inputs are often requests for service (e.g., interrupts in a
computer) or status flags (e.g., a resource has become available). Such inputs
normally change slowly compared to the system clock frequency, and need not
be recognized at a particular clock tick. If a transition is missed at one clock tick,
DO NOT COPY
it can always be detected at the next one. The transition rates of asynchronous
signals may range from less than one per second (the keystrokes of a slow typist)
to 100 MHz or more (access requests for a 500-MHz multiprocessor system’s
shared memory).
synchronizer Ignoring the problem of metastability, it is easy to build a  synchronizer,  a
DO NOT COPY
circuit that samples an asynchronous input and produces an output that meets the
setup  and  hold  times  required  in  a  synchronous  system.  As  shown  in
Figure 8-91, a  D  flip-flop samples the asynchronous input at each tick of the
system clock and produces a synchronous output that is valid during the next
DO NOT COPYclock period.
(a) synchronizer
Figure 8-91 SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q
A single, simple
DO NOT COPY(asynchronous input) CLK  Synchronous
synchronizer:
system
(a) logic diagram;
(b) timing. CLOCK
(system clock)
DO NOT COPY
(b)
CLOCK
ASYNCIN
DO NOT COPY
SYNCIN
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.8  Impediments to Synchronous Design  665
synchronizers
(a)
SYNC1
D  Q
DO NOT COPYCLK
ASYNCIN
(asynchronous input) Synchronous
SYNC2 system
D  Q
CLK
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
(system clock)
(b)
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-92
ASYNCIN
Two synchronizers
for the same
SYNC1
asynchronous input:
(a) logic diagram;
SYNC2
DO NOT COPY(b) possible timing.
It is essential for asynchronous inputs to be synchronized at only  one place
in a system; Figure 8-92 shows what can happen otherwise. Because of physical
delays in the circuit, the two flip-flops will not see the clock and input signals atDO NOT COPY
precisely the same time. Therefore, when asynchronous input transitions occur
near the clock edge, there is a small window of time during which one flip-flop
may sample the input as 1 and the other may sample it as 0. This inconsistent
result may cause improper system operation, as one part of the system responds
as if the input were 1, and another part responds as if it were 0.DO NOT COPY
Combinational logic may hide the fact that there are two synchronizers, as
shown in Figure 8-93. Since different paths through the combinational logic will
inevitably have different delays, the likelihood of an inconsistent result is even
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-93  An asynchronous input driving two synchronizers through combinational logic.
Combinational logic synchronizers
SYNC1
D  Q
DO NOT COPYCLK
ASYNCIN fanout
Synchronous
(asynchronous input) system
SYNC2
D  Q
CLK
DO NOT COPYCLOCK
(system clock)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

666  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
state memory
synchronizer
D1
SYNCIN D  Q Q1
ASYNCIN D  Q
DO NOT COPY(asynchronous input) Combinational CLK
CLK 
excitation logic
D2
D  Q Q2
CLK
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
(system clock)
Figure 8-94  An asynchronous state-machine input coupled through a single synchronizer.
DO NOT COPYgreater. This situation is especially common when asynchronous signals are
used as inputs to state machines, since the excitation logic for two or more state
variables may depend on the asynchronous input. The proper way to use an
asynchronous signal as a state-machine input is shown in Figure 8-94. All of the
excitation logic sees the same synchronized input signal,  SYNCIN.
DO NOT COPY
WHO CARES?  As you probably know, even the synchronizers in Figures 8-91 and 8-94 sometimes
fail. The reason they fail is that the setup and hold times of the synchronizing flip-
flop are sometimes violated because the asynchronous input can change at any time.
DO NOT COPY
“Well, who cares?” you may say. “If the  D  input changes near the clock edge, then
the flip-flop will either see the change this time or miss it and pick it up next time;
either way is good enough for me!” The problem is, there is a third possibility, dis-
cussed in the next section.
DO NOT COPY
8.9 Synchronizer Failure and Metastability
DO NOT COPY
We showed in Section 7.1 that when the setup and hold times of a flip-flop are
not met, the flip-flop may go into a third,  metastable  state halfway between 0
and 1. Worse, the length of time it may stay in this state before falling back into
a legitimate 0 or 1 state is theoretically unbounded. When other gates and flip-
flops are presented with a metastable input signal, some may interpret it as a 0
DO NOT COPY
and others as a 1, creating the sort of inconsistent behavior that we showed in
Figure 8-92. Or the other gates and flip-flops may produce metastable outputs
themselves (after all, they are now operating in the  linear  part of their operating
range). Luckily, the probability of a flip-flop output remaining in the metastable
state decreases exponentially with time, though never all the way to zero.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  667
8.9.1 Synchronizer Failure
Synchronizer failure  is said to occur if a system uses a synchronizer output while synchronizer failure
the output is still in the metastable state. The way to avoid synchronizer failure
DO NOT COPY
is to ensure that the system waits “long enough” before using a synchronizer’s
output, “long enough” so that the mean time between synchronizer failures is
several orders of magnitude longer than the designer’s expected length of
employment.
Metastability is more than an academic problem. More than a few experi-
DO NOT COPY
enced designers of high-speed digital systems have built (and released to
production) circuits that suffer from intermittent synchronizer failures. In fact,
the initial versions of several commercial ICs are said to have suffered from
metastability problems, for example, the AMD 9513 system timing controller,
the AMD 9519 interrupt controller, the Zilog Z-80 Serial I/O interface, the IntelDO NOT COPY
8048 single-chip microcomputer, and the AMD 29000 RISC microprocessor. It
makes you wonder, are the designers of these parts still employed?
There are two ways to get a flip-flop out of the metastable state:
1.  Force the flip-flop into a valid logic state using input signals that meet the
DO NOT COPY
published specifications for minimum pulse width, setup time, and so on.
2.  Wait “long enough,” so the flip-flop comes out of metastability on its own.
Inexperienced designers often attempt to get around metastability in other ways,
and they are usually unsuccessful. Figure 8-95 shows an attempt by a designer
DO NOT COPY
who thinks that since metastability is an “analog” problem, it must have an
“analog” solution. After all, Schmitt trigger inputs and capacitors can normally
be used to clean up noisy signals. However, rather than eliminate metastability,
this circuit enhances it—with the “right” components, the circuit will oscillate
forever once it is excited by negatingDO NOT COPY  S_L  and  R_L  simultaneously. (Confession:
It was the author who tried this over 20 years ago!) Exercises 8.74 and 8.75 give
examples of valiant but also failed attempts to eliminate metastability. These
examples should give you the sense that synchronizer problems can be very sub-
tle, so you must be careful. The only way to make synchronizers reliable is to
wait long enough for metastable outputs to resolve. We answer the questionDO NOT COPY
“How long is ‘long enough’?” later in this section.
74LS132 
Figure 8-95
S_L A failed attempt to
Q
DO NOT COPY
build a metastable-
100pf
proof  S-R  flip-flop.
QN
R_L
100pf
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

668  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.9.2 Metastability Resolution Time
If the setup and hold times of a  D  flip-flop are met, the flip-flop output settles to
a new value within time  tpd after the clock edge. If they are violated, the flip-flop
DO NOT COPY
output may be metastable for an arbitrary length of time. In a particular system
tr design, we use the parameter  tr, called the  metastability resolution time,  to
metastability resolution denote the maximum time that the output can remain metastable without causing
time synchronizer (and system) failure.
For example, consider the state machine in Figure 8-94 on page 666. The
DO NOT COPY
available metastability resolution time is
tr  =  tclk  −  tcomb  −  tsetup
tclk where  tclk is the clock period,  tcomb  is the propagation delay of the combinational
tcombDO NOT COPYexcitation logic, and  tsetup  is the setup time of the flip-flops used in the state
tsetup memory.
8.9.3 Reliable Synchronizer Design
The most reliable synchronizer is one that allows the maximum amount of time
DO NOT COPYfor metastability resolution. However, in the design of a digital system, we
seldom have the luxury of  slowing down  the clock to make the system work
more reliably. Instead, we are usually asked to  speed up  the clock to get higher
performance from the system. As a result, we often need synchronizers that
work reliably with very short clock periods. We’ll show several such designs,
DO NOT COPYand show how to predict their reliability.
We showed previously that a state machine with an asynchronous input,
built as shown in Figure 8-94, has  tr =  tclk − tcomb − tsetup . In order to maximize  tr
for a given clock period, we should minimize  tcomb  and  tsetup . The value of  tsetup
depends on the type of flip-flops used in the state memory; in general, faster flip-
DO NOT COPY
flops have shorter setup times. The minimum value of  tcomb  is zero, and is
achieved by the synchronizer design of Figure 8-96, whose operation we explain
next.
Inputs to flip-flop  FF1  are asynchronous with the clock, and may violate
the flip-flop’s setup and hold times. When this happens, the  META  output may
DO NOT COPY
become metastable and remain in that state for an arbitrary time. However, we
Figure 8-96  Recommended synchronizer design.
synchronizer
DO NOT COPY
META SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q
(asynchronous input)
CLK CLK  Synchronous
system
FF1  FF2
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
(system clock)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  669
assume that the maximum duration of metastability after the clock edge is  tr .
(We show how to calculate the probability that our assumption is correct in the
next subsection.) As long as the clock period is greater than  tr  plus the  FF2’s
DO NOT COPY
setup time,  SYNCIN  becomes a synchronized copy of the asynchronous input on
the next clock tick without ever becoming metastable itself. The  SYNCIN  signal
is distributed as required to the rest of the system.
8.9.4 Analysis of Metastable Timing
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-97 shows the flip-flop timing parameters that are relevant to our analy-
sis of metastability timing. The published setup and hold times of a flip-flop with
respect to its clock edge are denoted by  ts  and  th , and bracket an interval called
the  decision window, when the flip-flop samples its input and decides to change decision window
its output if necessary. As long as theDO NOT COPY  D  input changes outside the decision win-
dow, as in (a), the manufacturer guarantees that the output will change and settle
to a valid logic state before time  tpd. If  D  changes inside the decision window, as
in (b), metastability may occur and persist until time  tr .
Theoretical research suggests and experimental research has confirmed
that when asynchronous inputs change during the decision window, the durationDO NOT COPY
of metastable outputs is governed by an exponential formula:
exp ( t  /τ)
r
MTBF ( t  )  = ----------------------
r
T  ⋅  f ⋅ a
o 
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-97  Timing parameters for metastability analysis: (a) normal flip-flop
operation; (b) metastable behavior.
(a) (b)
CLOCK CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
tclk
D stable  stable D  unstable
ts th ts th
DO NOT COPY
decision decision
window window
metastable
Q  Q
tpd tr
DO NOT COPY
DETAILS, In our analysis of the synchronizer in Figure 8-96, we do not allow metastability,
DETAILS even briefly, on the output of  FF2, because we assume that the system has been
designed with zero timing margins. If the system can in fact tolerate some increase
DO NOT COPY
in  FF2’s propagation delay, the MTBF will be somewhat better than predicted.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

670  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Here MTBF(tr) is the mean time between synchronizer failures, where a failure
occurs if metastability persists beyond time  tr  after a clock edge, where  tr  ≥  t pd.
f This MTBF depends on  f,  the frequency of the flip-flop clock;  a, the number of
DO NOT COPY
a asynchronous input changes per second applied to the flip-flop; and  To  and  τ,
To constants that depend on the electrical characteristics of the flip-flop. For a
τ typical 74LS74,  To  ≈  0.4 s and  τ  ≈  1.5 ns.
Now suppose that we build a microprocessor system with a 10 MHz clock
and use the circuit of Figure 8-96 to synchronize an asynchronous input. If
DO NOT COPY
ASYNCIN  changes during the decision window of  FF1, the output  META  may
become metastable until time  tr . If  META  is still metastable at the beginning of
the decision window for  FF2, then the synchronizer fails because  FF2  may have
a metastable output; system operation is unpredictable in that case.
DO NOT COPYLet us assume that the  D  flip-flops in Figure 8-96 are 74LS74s. The setup
time  ts of a 74LS74 is 20 ns, and the clock period in our example microprocessor
system is 100 ns, so  tr  for synchronizer failure is 80 ns. If the asynchronous input
changes 100,000 times per second, then the synchronizer MTBF is
exp(80/1.5) 11 
DO NOT COPYMTBF(80 ns)  = --------------------------------7  5-  = 3.6 ⋅ 10  s
0.4 ⋅ 10  ⋅ 10 
That’s not bad, about 100 centuries between failures! Of course, if we’re lucky
enough to sell 10,000 copies of our system, one of them will fail in this way
every year. But, no matter, let us consider a more serious problem.
DO NOT COPY
Suppose we upgrade our system to use a faster microprocessor chip with a
clock speed of 16 MHz. We may have to replace some components in our system
to operate at the higher speed, but 74LS74s are still perfectly good at 16 MHz.
Or are they? With a clock period of 62.5 ns, the new synchronizer MTBF is
DO NOT COPYexp(42.5/1.5)
MTBF(42.5 ns)  = ---------------------------------------------  = 3.1 s!
7  5
0.4  ⋅ 1.6 ⋅ 10  ⋅ 10 
UNDERSTANDING Although a flip-flop output can go metastable  only  if  D  changes during the deci-
DO NOT COPY
A AND F sion window, the MTBF formula does not explicitly specify how many such input
changes occur. Instead, it specifies the total number of asynchronous input chang-
es per second,  a, and assumes that asynchronous input changes are uniformly
distributed over the clock period. Therefore, the fraction of input changes that
actually occur during the decision window is “built in” to the clock-frequency
DO NOT COPY
parameter  f—as  f  increases, the fraction goes up.
If the system design is such that input changes might be clustered in the deci-
sion window rather than being uniformly distributed (as when synchronizing a
slow input with a fixed but unknown phase difference from the system clock), then
a useful rule of thumb is to use a frequency equal to the reciprocal of the decision
DO NOT COPY
window (based on published setup and hold times), times a safety margin of 10.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  671
The only saving grace of this synchronizer at 16 MHz is that it’s so lousy, we’re
likely to discover the problem in the engineering lab before the product ships!
Thank goodness the MTBF wasn’t one year.
DO NOT COPY
8.9.5 Better Synchronizers
Given the poor performance of the 74LS74 as a synchronizer at moderate clock
speeds, we have a couple of alternatives for building more reliable synchroniz-
ers. The simplest solution, which works for most design requirements, is simply
DO NOT COPY
to use a flip-flop from a faster technology. Nowadays there are available much
faster technologies for flip-flops, whether discrete or embedded in PLDs,
FPGAs, or ASICs.
Based on published data discussed in the References, Table 8-35 lists the
metastability parameters for several common logic families and devices. TheseDO NOT COPY
numbers are very much circuit-design and IC-process dependent. Thus, unlike
guaranteed logic signal levels and timing parameters, published metastability
numbers can vary dramatically among different manufacturers of the same part
and must be used conservatively. For example, one manufacturer’s 74F74 may
give acceptable metastability performance in a design while another’s may not.DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 8 - 3 5  Metastability parameters for some common devices.
Reference Device τ  (ns)  To  (s)  tr (ns)
DO NOT COPY−1 
Chaney (1983)  74LS74  1.50  4.0  ⋅  10 77.71
−6 
Chaney (1983)  74S74  1.70  1.0  ⋅  10 66.14
−6 
Chaney (1983)  74S174  1.20  5.0  ⋅  10 48.62
−4 
Chaney (1983)  74S374  0.91  4.0  ⋅  10 40.86
DO NOT COPY
−4 
Chaney (1983)  74F74  0.40  2.0  ⋅  10 17.68
−3 
TI (1997)  74LSxx  1.35  4.8  ⋅  10 63.97
−9 
TI (1997)  74Sxx  2.80  1.3  ⋅  10 90.33
−6 
TI (1997)DO NOT COPY  74ALSxx  1.00  8.7  ⋅  10 41.07
3 
TI (1997)  74ASxx  0.25  1.4  ⋅  10  14.99
8 
TI (1997)  74Fxx  0.11  1.9  ⋅  10  7.90
−6 
TI (1997)  74HCxx  1.82  1.5  ⋅  10 71.55
DO NOT COPY−12 
Cypress (1997)  PALC16R8-25  0.52  9.5  ⋅ 10 14.22*
−11 
Cypress (1997)  PALC22V10B-20  0.26  5.6  ⋅ 10 7.57*
−13 
Cypress (1997)  PALCE22V10-7  0.19  1.3 ⋅ 10 4.38*
−15 
Xilinx (1997)  7300-series CPLD  0.29  1.0  ⋅ 10 5.27*
DO NOT COPY
−18 
Xilinx (1997)  9500-series CPLD  0.17  9.6  ⋅ 10 2.30*
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

672  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
Note that different authors and manufacturers may specify metastability
parameters differently. For example, author Chaney and manufacturer Texas
Instruments measure the metastability resolution time  tr  from the triggering
DO NOT COPY
clock edge, as in our previous subsection. On the other hand, manufacturers
Cypress and Xilinx define  tr  as the  additional  delay beyond a normal clock-to-
output delay time  tpd.
The last column in the table gives a somewhat arbitrarily chosen figure of
merit for each device. It is the metastability resolution time  t required to obtain
DO NOT COPYr 
an MTBF of 1000 years when operating a synchronizer with a clock frequency
of 25 MHz and with 100,000 asynchronous input changes per second. For the
Cypress and Xilinx devices, their parameter values yield a value of  tr, marked
with an asterisk, consistent with their own definition as introduced above.
DO NOT COPYAs you can see, the 74LS74 is one of the worst devices in the table. If we
replace  FF1  in the 16 MHz microprocessor system of the preceding subsection
with a 74ALS74, we get
exp(42.5/0.87) 10 
MTBF(42.5 ns) = ---------------------------------------------------------------  = 8.2 ⋅ 10 s
– 3 7  5
12.5  ⋅ 10  ⋅ 1.6  ⋅ 10  ⋅ 10 
DO NOT COPY
If you’re satisfied with a synchronizer MTBF of about 25 centuries per system
shipped, you can stop here. However, if  FF2  is also replaced with a 74ALS74,
the MTBF gets better, since the ’ALS74 has a shorter setup time than the ’LS74,
only 10 ns. With the ’ALS74, the MTBF is about 100,000 times better:
DO NOT COPY
exp(52.5/0.87) 15 
MTBF(52.5 ns)  = -----------------------------------------------------------  = 8.1  ⋅ 10 s
– 3 7  5
12.5  ⋅ 10  ⋅ 2 ⋅ 10  ⋅ 10 
Even if we ship a million systems containing this circuit, we (or our heirs) will
DO NOT COPYsee a synchronizer failure only once in 240 years. Now that’s job security!
Actually, the margins above aren’t as large as they might seem. (How large
does 240 years seem  to you?) Most of the numbers given in Table 8-35 are  aver-
ages, and are seldom specified, let alone guaranteed, by the device manufacturer.
Furthermore, calculated MTBFs are extremely sensitive to the value of  τ, which
DO NOT COPYin turn may depend on temperature, voltage, and the phase of the moon. So the
operation of a given flip-flop in an actual system may be much worse (or much
better) than predicted by our table.
For example, consider what happens if we increase the clock in our
16 MHz system by just 25%, to 20 MHz. Your natural inclination might be to
DO NOT COPY
think that metastability will get 25% worse, or maybe 250% worse, just to be
conservative. But, if you run the numbers, you’ll find that the MTBF using
15  9 
’ALS74s for both FF1 and  FF2 goes down from 8.1 ⋅ 10  s to just 3.7 ⋅ 10  s, over
a million times worse! The new MTBF of about 118 years is fine for one system,
but if you ship a million of them, one will fail every hour. You’ve just gone from
DO NOT COPY
generations of job security to corporate goat!
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  673
synchronizer
META SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q
DO NOT COPY
(asynchronous
CLK CLK Synchronous
input)
system
FF1  FF2
CLOCKN
DO NOT COPYdivide-by-N
CLOCK Figure 8-98
counter
Multiple-cycle
(system clock)
synchronizer.
8.9.6 Other Synchronizer Designs
DO NOT COPY
We promised to describe a couple of ways to build more reliable synchronizers.
The first way was to use faster flip-flops, that is, to reduce the value of  τ  in the
MTBF equation. Having said that, the second way is obvious—to  increase  the
value of  tr  in the MTBF equation.
For a given system clock, the best value we can obtain for  t using the multiple-cycle
DO NOT COPYr 
circuit of Figure 8-96 is  tclk , if  FF2  has a setup time of 0. However, we can get synchronizer
values of  tr on the order of  n ⋅ tclk by using the  multiple-cycle synchronizer  circuit
of Figure 8-98. Here we divide the system clock by  n  to obtain a slower synchro-
nizer clock and longer  tr =  (n ⋅ tclk )  −  tsetup . Usually a value of  n  =  2 or  n  =  3 gives
adequate synchronizer reliability.DO NOT COPY
In the figure, note that the edges of  CLOCKN  will lag the edges of  CLOCK
because  CLOCKN  comes from the  Q  output of a counter flip-flop that is clocked
by  CLOCK. This means that  SYNCIN, in turn, will be delayed or skewed relative
to other signals in the synchronous system that come directly from flip-flops
clocked byDO NOT COPY  CLOCK. If  SYNCIN  goes through additional combinational logic in
the synchronous system before reaching its flip-flop inputs, their setup time may
be inadequate. If this is the case, the solution in Figure 8-99 can be used. Here,
SYNCIN  is reclocked by  CLOCK  using  FF3  to produce  DSYNCIN, which will
Figure 8-99DO NOT COPY  Multiple-cycle synchronizer with deskewing.
synchronizer
META SYNCIN  DSYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q D  Q
(deskewed
(asynchronous
DO NOT COPYCLK CLK CLK SYNCIN)
input)  Synchronous
system
FF1  FF2  FF3
CLOCKN
divide-by-N
CLOCK
DO NOT COPYcounter
(system clock)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

674  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
have the same timing as other flip-flop outputs in the synchronous system. Of
course, the delay from  CLOCK  to  CLOCKN  must still be short enough that
SYNCIN  meets the setup time requirement of  FF3.
DO NOT COPY
In an  n-cycle synchronizer, the larger the value of  n, the longer it takes for
an asynchronous input change to be seen by the synchronous system. This is
simply a price that must be paid for reliable system operation. In typical micro-
processor  systems,  most  asynchronous  inputs  are  for  external  events—
interrupts, DMA requests, and so on—that need not be recognized very quickly,
DO NOT COPY
relative to synchronizer delays. In the time-critical area of main memory access,
experienced designers use the processor clock to run the memory subsystem too,
if possible. This eliminates the need for synchronizers and provides the fastest
possible system operation.
DO NOT COPYAt higher frequencies, the feasibility of the multiple-cycle synchronizer
design shown in Figure 8-98 tends to be limited by clock skew. For this reason,
cascaded synchronizers rather than use a divide-by-n  synchronizer clock, some designers use  cascaded
synchronizers.  This design approach simply uses a cascade (shift register) of  n
flip-flops, all clocked with the high-speed system clock. This approach is shown
DO NOT COPYin Figure 8-100.
With cascaded synchronizers, the idea is that metastability will be resolved
with some probability by the first flip-flop, and failing that, with an equal proba-
bility by each successive flip-flop in the cascade. So the overall probability of
failure is on the order of the  nth power of the failure probability of a single-flip-
DO NOT COPY
flop synchronizer at the system clock frequency. While this is partially true, the
MTBF of the cascade is poorer than that of a multiple-cycle synchronizer with
the same delay (n ⋅ tclk ). With the cascade, the flip-flop setup time  tsetup  must be
subtracted from  tr, the available metastability resolution time,  n  times, but in a
multiple-cycle design, it is subtracted only once.
DO NOT COPY
PLDs that contain internal flip-flops can be used in synchronizer designs,
where the two flip-flops in Figure 8-96 on page 668 are simply included in
the PLD. This is very convenient in most applications, because it eliminates
the need for external, discrete flip-flops. However, a PLD-based synchronizer
typically has a poorer MTBF than a discrete circuit built with the same or similar
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-100  Cascaded synchronizer.
synchronizer
DO NOT COPYMETA1 META2 METAn-1  SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q D  Q
(asynchronous
CLK CLK CLK Synchronous
input)
system
FF1  FF2 FFn
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
(system clock)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  675
technology. This happens because each flip-flop in a PLD has a combinational
logic array on its  D  input that increases its setup time and thereby reduce the
amount of time  tr  available for metastability resolution during a given system
DO NOT COPY
clock period  tclk . To maximize  tr  without using special components,  FF2  in
Figure 8-96 should be a short-setup-time discrete flip-flop.
8.9.7 Metastable-Hardened Flip-Flops
DO NOT COPY
In the late 1980s, Texas Instruments and other manufacturers developed SSI and
MSI flip-flops that are specifically designed for board-level synchronizer appli-
cations. For example, the  74AS4374  was similar to the 74AS374, except that 74AS4374
each individual flip-flop was replaced with a pair of flip-flops, as shown in
Figure 8-101. Each pair of flip-flops could be used as a synchronizer of the type
DO NOT COPY
shown in Figure 8-96, so eight asynchronous inputs could be synchronized with
one 74AS4374.
The internal design of the ’AS4374 was improved to reduce  τ  and  To
compared to other 74AS flip-flops, but the biggest improvement in the ’AS4374
was a greatly reduced  t . Because the entire synchronizer of Figure 8-96 is
DO NOT COPYsetup
built on a single chip, there are no input or output buffers between  FF1  and  FF2,
and  tsetup for  FF2 is only 0.5 ns. Compared to a conventional 74AS flip-flop with
a 5 ns  tsetup , and assuming that  τ  = 0.40 ns, this improves the MTBF by a factor
of exp(4.5/.40), or about 77,000.
DO NOT COPYIn recent years, the move towards faster CMOS technologies and higher
integration has largely obsoleted specialized parts like the ’AS4374. As you can
see from the last few rows in Table 8-35 on page 671, fast PLDs and CPLDs are
available with values of  τ  that rival the fastest discrete devices while offering the
convenience of integrating synchronization with many other functions. Still, the
approach used by ’AS4374 is worth emulating in FPGA and ASIC designs. ThatDO NOT COPY
is, whenever you have control over the layout of a synchronizer circuit, it pays to
locate  FF1  and  FF2  as close as possible to each other, and to connect them with
the fastest available wires, in order to maximize the setup time available for  FF2.
DO NOT COPY
(1)
OE_L Figure 8-101
Logic diagram for the
(11)
CLK 74AS4374 octal
(3) dual-rank  D  flip-flop.
1D D  Q D
DO NOT COPY(2)
CLK CLK Q 1Q
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

676  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.9.8 Synchronizing High-Speed Data Transfers
A very common problem in computer systems is synchronizing external data
transfers with the computer system clock. A simple example is the interface
DO NOT COPY
between personal computer’s network interface card and a 100 Mbps Ethernet
link. The interface card may be connected to a PCI bus, which has a 33.33 MHz
clock. Even though the Ethernet speed is an approximate multiple of the bus
speed, the signal received on the Ethernet link is generated by another computer
whose transmit clock is not synchronized with the receive clock in any way. Yet
DO NOT COPY
the interface must still deliver data reliably to the PCI bus.
Figure 8-102 shows the problem. NRZ serial data  RDATA  is received from
the Ethernet at 100 Mbps. The digital phase-locked loop (DPLL) recovers a 100-
MHz clock signal  RCLK  which is centered on the 100 Mbps data stream and
DO NOT COPY
33.33 MHz
SCLK
RCLK 100 MHz
DPLL 
shift register SREG
DO NOT COPYCLK
CLK
RDATA DIN SLOAD
CLKEN
100 Mbps Ethernet
RBYTE[7:0] SBYTE[7:0]
received data DOUT[7:0] DIN[7:0]
? DOUT[7:0] SD[7:0]
DO NOT COPY
byte
synchronizer
CLK
Figure 8-102
DIN[7:0]
Ethernet synchronization
DO NOT COPYSYNC
problem. SYNC
ONE NIBBLE The explanation of 100 Mbps Ethernet reception above is oversimplified, but suf-
DO NOT COPY
AT A TIME ficient for discussing the synchronization problem. In reality, the received data
rate is 125 Mbps, where each 4 bits of user data is encoded as a 5-bit symbol using
a so-called 4B5B code. By using only 16 out of 32 possible 5-bit codewords, the
4B5B code guarantees that regardless of the user data pattern, the bit stream on the
wire will have a sufficient number of transitions to allow clock recovery. Also, the
DO NOT COPY
4B5B code includes a special code that is transmitted periodically to allow nibble
(4-bit) and byte synchronization to be accomplished very easily.
As a result of nibble synchronization, a typical 100-Mbps Ethernet interface
does not see an unsynchronized 100 MHz stream of bits. Instead, it sees an
unsynchronized 25 MHz stream of nibbles. So, the details of a real 100-Mbps
DO NOT COPY
Ethernet synchronizer are different, but the same principles apply.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  677
10 ns 80 ns
RCLK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
Figure 8-103
SCLK Ethernet link and
system clock timing.
30 ns
DO NOT COPY
allows data to be clocked bit-by-bit into an 8-bit shift register. At the same time,
a byte synchronization circuit searches for special patterns in the received data
stream that indicate byte boundaries. When it detects one of these, it asserts the
SYNC  signal and does so on every eighth subsequent RCLK  tick, so that SYNC  is
DO NOT COPY
asserted whenever the shift register contains an aligned 8-bit byte. The rest of the
system is clocked by a 33.33 MHz clock  SCLK. We need to transfer each aligned
byte  RBYTE[7:0]  into a register  SREG  in  SCLK’s domain. How can we do it?
Figure 8-103 shows some of the timing. We immediately see is that the
byte-aligned signal,  SYNC, is asserted for only 10 ns per byte. We have no hope
DO NOT COPY
of consistently detecting this signal with the asynchronous  SCLK, whose period
is a much longer 30 ns.
The strategy that is almost universally followed in this kind of situation is
to transfer the aligned data first into a holding register HREG  in the receive clock
(RCLKDO NOT COPY) domain. This gives us a lot more time to sort things out, 80 ns in this
case. Thus, the “?” box in Figure 8-102 can be replaced by Figure 8-104, which
shows  HREG  and a box marked “SCTRL.” The job of  SCTRL  is to assert
SLOAD  during exactly one 30-ns  SCLK  period, so that the output of  HREG  is
valid and stable for the setup and hold times of register  SREG  in the  SCLK
DO NOT COPY
domain.  SLOAD  also serves as a “new-data available” signal for the rest of the
interface, indicating that a new data byte will appear on  SBYTE[7:0]  during the
SCTRL
Figure 8-104
DO NOT COPYSCLK Byte holding register
and control.
SLOAD
HREG
DO NOT COPY
RCLK CLK
SYNC CLKEN
RBYTE[7:0] DIN[7:0]
DO NOT COPYDOUT[7:0] SBYTE[7:0]
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

678  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
10 ns 80 ns
RCLK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
SCLK
30 ns
DO NOT COPY
SBYTE  valid
Figure 8-105
SLOAD
Timing for  SBYTE
and possible timing
SD  valid
for DO NOT COPYSLOAD.
next  SCLK  period. Figure 8-105 shows possible timing for  SLOAD  based on this
approach and the previous timing diagram.
Figure 8-106 is a circuit that can generate  SLOAD  with the desired timing.
DO NOT COPYThe idea is to use  SYNC to set an  S-R  latch as a new byte becomes available. The
output of this latch,  NEWBYTE, is sampled by  FF1  in the  SCLK  domain. Since
NEWBYTE  is not synchronized with  SCLK, FF1’s output SM may be metastable,
but it is not used by  FF2  until the next clock tick, 30 ns later. Assuming that the
AND  gate is reasonably fast, this gives plenty of metastability resolution time.
DO NOT COPY
FF2’s output is the  SLOAD  signal. The  AND  gate ensures that  SLOAD  is only
one SCLK  period wide; if SLOAD  is already 1, it can’t be set to 1 on the next tick.
This gives time for the S-R  latch to be reset by SLOAD  in preparation for the next
byte.
A timing diagram for the overall circuit with “typical” timing is shown in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-107. Since  SCLK  is asynchronous to  RCLK, it can have an arbitrary
relationship with  RCLK  and  SYNC. In the figure, we’ve shown a case where the
next  SCLK  rising edge occurs well after  NEWBYTE  is set. Although the figure
shows a window in which  SM  and  SM1  could be metastable in the general case,
metastability doesn’t actually happen when the timing is as drawn. Later, we’ll
DO NOT COPY
show what can happen if the  SCLK  edge occurs when  NEWBYTE  is changing.
We should make several notes about the circuit in Figure 8-106. First, the
SYNC  signal must be glitch-free, since it controls the  S  input of a latch, and it
must be wide enough to meet the minimum pulse width requirement of the latch.
DO NOT COPY
NEWBYTE SM SM1 
Figure 8-106 SYNC  S  Q D  Q D  Q SLOAD
SCTRL  circuit for R CLK CLK
generating  SLOAD.
FF1  FF2
DO NOT COPY
SCLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  679
10 ns 80 ns
RCLK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
SCLK
30 ns
DO NOT COPY
SBYTE  valid
NEWBYTE
t r  tpd tsu
SM
DO NOT COPY
SM1
SLOAD Figure 8-107
Timing for the  SCTRL
DO NOT COPYvalid
SD  circuit in Figure 8-106.
Since the latch is set on the leading edge of  SYNC, we actually cheated a little;
NEWBYTE  may be asserted a little  before  a new byte is actually available in
HREGDO NOT COPY. This is OK, because we know that it takes two  SCLK  periods from when
NEWBYTE  is sampled until  SREG  is loaded. In fact, we might have cheated
even more if an earlier version of  SYNC  was available (see Exercise 8.76).
Assuming that  tsu is the setup time of a D  flip-flop and  tpd is the propagation
delay of the  AND  gate in Figure 8-106, the available metastability resolution
timeDO NOT COPY  t is one  SCLK  period, 30 ns, minus  t +  t , as shown in Figure 8-107. The
r  su  pd
timing diagram also shows why we can’t use  SM  directly as the reset signal for
the  S-R  latch. Since SM  can be metastable, it could wreak havoc. For example, it
could be semi-HIGH  long enough to reset the latch but then fall back to  LOW; in
that case,  SLOAD  would not get set and we would miss a byte. By using instead
DO NOT COPY
the output of the synchronizer (SLOAD) both for the latch reset and for the load
signal in the  SCLK  domain, we ensure that the new byte is detected and handled
consistently in both clock domains.
The timing that we showed in Figure 8-107 is nominal, but we also have to
analyze what happens if  SCLK  has a different phase relationship with  RCLK  and
DO NOT COPY
SYNC  than what is shown. You should be able to convince yourself that if the
SCLK  edge occurs earlier, so that it sample  NEWBYTE  just as it’s going  HIGH,
everything still works as before, and the data transfer just finishes a little sooner.
The more interesting case is when  SCLK  occurs later, so that it just misses
NEWBYTEDO NOT COPY  as it’s going  HIGH, and catches it one SCLK  period later. This timing
is shown in Figure 8-108.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

680  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
t start tend
t RCLK 8tRCLK
RCLK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
SCLK
DO NOT COPYtSCLK
SBYTE  valid valid
goes LOW
NEWBYTE before detected
DO NOT COPY
SM1
next byte
SLOAD is missed
SD  invalid
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-108  Maximum-delay timing for  SCTRL  circuit.
In the timing diagram, we have shown  NEWBYTE  going high around the
same time as the  SCLK  edge—less than  FF1’s  tsu  before the edge. Thus,  FF1
DO NOT COPYmay not see  NEWBYTE  as  HIGH  or its output may become metastable, and it
does not solidly capture  NEWBYTE  until one  SCLK  period later. Two  SCLK
periods after that, we get the  SCLK  edge that loads  SBYTE  into  SREG.
This timing scenario is bad news, because by the time the load occurs,
SBYTE  is already changing to the  next  received byte. In addition,  SLOAD
DO NOT COPYhappens to be asserted during and a little bit after the  SYNC  pulse for this next
received byte. Thus, the latch has both  S  and  R  asserted simultaneously. If they
are removed simultaneously, the latch output may become metastable. Or, as
we’ve shown in the timing diagram, if  NEWBYTE  (R) is negated last, then the
latch is left in the reset state, and this next received byte is never detected and
DO NOT COPY
loaded into the  SCLK  domain.
Thus, we need to analyze the maximum-delay timing case carefully to
determine if a synchronizer will work properly. Figure 8-108 shows a starting
reference point  tstart  for the  SCTRL  circuit, namely the  RCLK  edge on which a
byte is loaded into  HREG, at end of  SYNC  pulse). The ending reference point
DO NOT COPY
tend  is the  SCLK  edge on which  SBYTE  is loaded into  SREG. The maximum
delay between these two reference points, which we’ll call  tmaxd , is the sum of
the following components:
–tRCLK  Minus one  RCLK  period, the delay from  tstart  back to the edge on which
DO NOT COPYSYNC  was asserted. This number is negative because  SYNC  is asserted
one clock tick before the tick that actually loads  HREG.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  681
tCQ  One flip-flop  CLK-to-Q  maximum delay. Assuming that  SYNC  is a
direct flip-flop output in the  RCLK  domain, this is delay from the  RCLK
edge until  SYNC  is asserted.
DO NOT COPY
tSQ  Maximum delay from S to  Q in the  S-R latch in Figure 8-106. This is the
delay for  NEWBYTE  to be asserted.
tsu  Setup time of  FF1  in Figure 8-106.  NEWBYTE  must be asserted at or
before the setup time to guarantee detection.
DO NOT COPY
tSCLK  One  SCLK  period. Since  RCLK  and  SCLK  are asynchronous, there may
be a delay of up to one  SCLK  period before the next  SCLK  edge comes
along to sample  NEWBYTE.
tSCLK  After  NEWBYTE  is detected by  FF1,  SLOAD  is asserted on the next
DO NOT COPYSCLK  tick.
tSCLK  After SLOAD  is asserted,  SBYTE is loaded into  SREG on the next SCLK
tick.
Thus,  tmaxd  = 3tSCLK  +  tCQ  +  tSQ  +  tsu  –  tRCLK . A few other parameters must be
defined to complete the analysis:
DO NOT COPY
th  The hold time of  SREG.
tCQ(min)  The minimum  CLK-to-Q  delay of  HREG, conservatively assumed to
be 0.
DO NOT COPYtrec  The recovery time of the  S-R  latch, the minimum time allowed between
negating  S  and negating  R  (see box on page 441).
To be loaded successfully into  SREG, SBYTE  must be remain valid until at
least time  tend  +  th. The point at which  SBYTE  changes and becomes invalid is
8  RCLK  periods after  tstart , plus  tCQ(min). Thus, for proper circuit operation we
DO NOT COPY
must have
tend  +  th  ≤  tstart  + 8tRCLK
For the maximum-delay case, we substitute  tend  =  tstart  +  tmaxd  into this relation
and subtract  tstart  from both sides to obtain
DO NOT COPY
tmaxd  +  th  ≤  8tRCLK
Substituting the value of  tmaxd  and rearranging, we obtain
3tSCLK  +  tCQ  +  tSQ  +  tsu  +  th  ≤  9tRCLK  (8-1)
as the requirement for correct circuit operation. Too bad. Even if we assume veryDO NOT COPY
short component delays (tCQ ,  tSQ ,  tsu ,  th ), we know that 3tSCLK  (90 ns) plus
anything is going to be more than 9tRCLK  (also 90 ns). So this design will never
work properly in the maximum-delay case.
Even if the load-delay analysis gave a good result, we would still have to
DO NOT COPY
consider the requirements for proper operation of the  SCTRL  circuit itself. In
particular, we must ensure that when the  SYNC  pulse for the next byte occurs, it
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

682  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
is not negated until time  trec  after  SLOAD  for the previous byte was negated. So,
another condition for proper operation is
t +  t +  t ≤  t + 8t +  t
DO NOT COPYend  CQ  rec  start  RCLK  CQ(min)
Substituting and simplifying as before, we get another requirement that isn’t met
by our design:
3tSCLK  + 2tCQ  +  tSQ  +  tsu  +  trec  ≤  9tRCLK  (8-2)
DO NOT COPYThere are several ways that we can modify our design to satisfy the worst-
case timing requirements. Early in our discussion, we noted that we “cheated”
by asserting  SYNC  one  RCLK  period before the data in  HREG  is valid, and that
we actually might get away with asserting  SYNC  even soon. Doing this can help
us meet the maximum delay requirement, because it reduces the “8tRCLK ” term
DO NOT COPY
on the right-hand side of the relations. For example, if we asserted  SYNC  two
RCLK  periods earlier, we would reduce this term to “6tRCLK”. However, there’s
no free lunch, we can’t assert  SYNC  arbitrarily early. We must also consider a
minimum delay  case, to ensure that the new byte is actually available in  HREG
when  SBYTE  is loaded into  SREG. The minimum delay  tmaxd  between  tstart  and
DO NOT COPY
tend  is the sum of the following components:
–ntRCLK Minus  n  RCLK  periods, the delay from  tstart  back to the edge on which
SYNC  was asserted. In the original design,  n  = 1.
tCQ(min)  This is the minimum delay from the  RCLK  edge until  SYNC  is asserted,
DO NOT COPY
conservatively assumed to be 0.
tSQ  This is the delay for  NEWBYTE  to be asserted, again assumed to be 0.
–th  Minus the hold time of  FF1  in Figure 8-106.  NEWBYTE  might be
asserted at the end of the hold time and still be detected.
DO NOT COPY
0tSCLK  Zero times the  SCLK  period. We might get “lucky” and have the  SCLK
edge come along just as the hold time of  FF1  is ending.
tSCLK  A one-SCLK-period delay to asserting  SLOAD, as before.
tSCLK  A one-SCLK-period delay to loading  SBYTE  into  SREG, as before.
DO NOT COPY
In other words,  tmind  = 2tSCLK  –  th  –  ntRCLK .
For this case, we must ensure that the new byte has propagated to the
output of  HREG  when the setup time window of  SREG  begins, so we must have
tend  –  tsu  ≥  tstart  +  tco ,
DO NOT COPY
where  tco  is the maximum clock-to-output delay of  HREG. Substituting  tend  =
tstart  +  tmind  and subtracting  tstart  from both sides, we get
tmind  –  tsu  ≥  tco .
Substituting the value of  tmind  and rearranging, we get the final requirement,
DO NOT COPY
2tSCLK  –  th  –  tsu  –  tco  ≥  ntRCLK  (8-3)
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  683
If, for example,  th ,  tsu , and  tco  are 10 ns each, the maximum value of  n  is 3; we
can’t generate  SYNC  more than two clock ticks before its original position in
Figure 8-108. This may or may not be enough to solve the maximum-delay
DO NOT COPY
problem, depending on other delay values; this is explored for a particular set of
components in Exercise 8.76.
Moving the  SYNC  pulse earlier may not give enough delay improvement
or may not be an available option in some systems. An alternative solution that
can always be made to work is to increasing the time between successive data
DO NOT COPY
transfers from one clock domain to the other. We can always do this because we
can always transfer more bits per synchronization. In the Ethernet-interface
example, we could collect 16 bits at a time in the  RCLK  domain and transfer 16
bits at a time to the  SCLK  domain. This changes the previously stated 8tRCLK
terms to 16DO NOT COPYtRCLK , providing a lot more margin for the maximum-delay timing
requirements. Once 16 bits have been transferred into the  SCLK  domain, we can
still break them into two 8-bit chunks if we need to process the data a byte at a
time.
It may also be possible to improve performance by modifying the design of
the DO NOT COPYSCTRL  circuit. Figure 8-111 shows a version where  SLOAD  is generated
directly by the flip-flop that samples  NEWBYTE. In this way,  SLOAD  appears
one  SCLK  period sooner than in our original  SCTRL  circuit. Also, the S-R latch
is cleared sooner. This circuit works only if a couple of key assumptions are true:
1.DO NOT COPY  A reduced metastability resolution time for  FF1  is acceptable, equal to the
time that  SCLK  is  HIGH. Metastability must be resolved before  SCLK  goes
LOW, because that’s when the  S-R  latch gets cleared if  SLOAD  is  HIGH.
2.  The setup time of  SREG’s  CLKEN  input (Figure 8-102) is less than or
equal to the time that  SCLK  is  LOW. Under the previous assumption, the
DO NOT COPY
SLOAD  signal applied to  CLKEN  might be metastable until  SCLK  goes
LOW.
3.  The time that  SCLK  is  LOW  is long enough to generate a reset pulse on
RNEW  that meets the minimum pulse-width requirement of the  S-R  latch.
Note that these behaviors makes proper circuit operation dependent on the dutyDO NOT COPY
cycle of  SCLK. If  SCLK  is relatively slow and its duty cycle is close to 50%, this
circuit generally works fine. But if  SCLK  is too fast or has a very small, very
large, or unpredictable duty cycle, the original circuit approach must be used.
DO NOT COPY
NEWBYTE
SYNC S  Q D  Q SLOAD
RNEW 
R CLK Figure 8-109
Half-clock-period
FF1 SCTRL  circuit for
DO NOT COPY
generating  SLOAD.
SCLK
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

684  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
All of these synchronization schemes require the clock frequencies to be
within a certain range of each other for proper circuit operation. This must be
considered for testing, where the clocks are usually run slower, and for upgrades,
DO NOT COPY
where one or both clocks may run faster. For example, in the Ethernet interface
example, we wouldn’t change the frequency of standard 100-Mbps Ethernet, but
we might upgrade the PCI bus from 33 to 66 MHz.
The problems caused by clock frequency changes can be subtle. To get a
better handle on what can go wrong, it’s useful to consider how a synchronizer
DO NOT COPY
works (or doesn’t work!) if one clock frequency changes by a factor of 10 or
more.
For example what happens to the synchronizer timing in Figure 8-107 if
we change  RCLK  from 100 MHz to 10 MHz? At first glance, it would seem that
DO NOT COPYall is well, since a byte now arrives only once every 800 ns, giving much more
time for the byte to be transferred into the  SCLK  domain. Certainly, Eqn. 8-1 on
page 681 and Eqn. 8-2 on page 682 are satisfied with much more margin.
However, Eqn. 8-3 is no longer satisfied unless we reduce  n  to zero! This could
be accomplished by generating  SYNC  one  RCLK  tick later than is shown in
DO NOT COPYFigure 8-107.
But even with this change, there’s  still  a problem. Figure 8-110 shows the
new timing, including the later SYNC  pulse. The problem is that the  SYNC  pulse
is now 100 ns long. As before,  NEWBYTE  (the output of the  S-R  latch in
DO NOT COPY
Figure 8-110  Synchronizer timing with slow (10 MHz)  RCLK .
100 ns
RCLK
DO NOT COPY
SYNC
SCLK
30 ns
DO NOT COPYSBYTE  valid
NEWBYTE
SM
DO NOT COPY
SM1
SLOAD
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 8.9  Synchronizer Failure and Metastability  685
NEWBYTE  SM SM1 
1 D  Q D  Q D  Q SLOAD
Figure 8-111
SYNC CLK CLK CLK
CLR Synchronizer with
DO NOT COPY
FF1  FF2 edge-triggered
SYNC detection .
SCLK
Figure 8-106 on page 678) is set by  SYNC  and is cleared by  SLOAD. The
problem is that whenDO NOT COPY  SLOAD  goes away,  SYNC  is still asserted, as shown in the
new timing diagram. Thus, the new byte will be detected and transferred twice!
The solution to the problem is to detect only the leading edge of  SYNC, so
that the circuit is not sensitive to the length of the  SYNC  pulse. A common way
of doing this is to replace the  S-R  latch with an edge-triggered  D  flip-flop, as
shown in Figure 8-111. The leading edge ofDO NOT COPY  SYNC  sets the flip-flop, while
SLOAD  is used as an asynchronous clear as before.
The circuit in Figure 8-111 solves the slow-RCLK  problem, but it also
changes the derivation of Eqns. 8-1 through 8-3 and may make timing more
constrained in some areas (see Exercise 8.77). Another disadvantage that this
DO NOT COPY
circuit cannot be realized in a typical PLD, which has all flip-flops controlled by
the same clock; instead, a discrete flip-flop must be used to detect  SYNC.
After reading almost 10 pages to analyze just one “simple” example, you
should have a strong appreciation of the difficulty of correct synchronization-
circuit design. Several guidelines can help you:
DO NOT COPY
•  Minimize the number of different clock domains in a system.
•  Clearly  identify  all  clock  boundaries  and  provide  clearly  identified
synchronizers at those boundaries.
•  Provide sufficient metastability resolution time for each synchronizer so
DO NOT COPY
that synchronizer failure is rare, much more unlikely than other hardware
failures.
•  Analyze synchronizer behavior over a range of timing scenarios, including
faster and slower clocks that might be applied as a result of system testing
DO NOT COPYor upgrades.
•  Simulate system behavior over a wide range of timing scenarios as well.
The last guideline above is a catch-all for modern digital designers, who
usually rely on sophisticated, high-speed logic simulators to find their bugs. But
it’s not a substitute for following the first four guidelines. Ignoring them can leadDO NOT COPY
to problems that cannot be detected by a typical, small number of simulation
scenarios. Of all digital circuits, synchronizers are the ones for which it’s most
important to be “correct by design”!
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

686  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
References
Probably the first comprehensive set of examples of sequential MSI parts and
DO NOT COPYapplications appeared in  The TTL Applications Handbook, edited by Peter Alfke
and Ib Larsen (Fairchild Semiconductor, 1973). This highly practical and infor-
mative and book was invaluable to this author and to many others who developed
digital design curricula in the 1970s.
Another book that emphasizes design with larger-scale combinational and
DO NOT COPY
sequential logic functions is Thomas R. Blakeslee’s  Digital Design with Stan-
dard MSI and LSI, 2nd ed., (Wiley, 1979). Blakeslee’s coverage of the concept of
space/time trade-offs is excellent, and he also one of the first to introduce the
microprocessor as “a universal logic circuit.”
Moving quickly from the almost forgotten to the yet-to-be discovered,
DO NOT COPY
manufacturers’ web sites are an excellent source of information on digital design
practices. For example, a comprehensive discussion of bus hold circuits can be
found in Texas Instruments’ “Implications of Slow or Floating CMOS Inputs”
(publ. SCBA004B, December 1997), available on TI’s web site at  www.ti.com.
Another discussion appears in Fairchild Semiconductor’s “Designing with
DO NOT COPY
Bushold” (sic, publ. AN-5006, April 1999), at  www.fairchildsemi.com.
Announcements and data sheets for all kinds of new, improved MSI and
larger parts can also be found on the web. Following a certain automobile manu-
facturer’s proclamation in the 60s and then again in the late 90s that “wider is
DO NOT COPYbetter,” logic manufacturers have also introduced “wide-bus” registers, drivers,
and transceivers that cram 16, 18, or even 32 bits of function into a high pin-
count surface-mount package. Descriptions of many such parts can be found at
the Texas Instruments web site (search for “widebus”). Other sites with a variety
of logic data sheets, application notes, and other information include Motorola
DO NOT COPY
(www.mot.com),  Fairchild  Semiconductor  (www.fairchildsemi.com),  and
Philips Semiconductor (www.philipslogic.com).
The field of logic design is fast moving, so much so that sometimes I wish
that I wrote fiction, so that I wouldn’t have to revise the “practices” discussions
in this book every few years. Lucky for me, this book does cover some unchang-
DO NOT COPY
ing theoretical topics (a.k.a. “principles”), and this chapter is no exception.
Logic hazards have been known since at least the 1950s, and the function
hazards were discussed by Edward J. McCluskey in  Logic Design Principles
(Prentice Hall, 1986). Galois fields were invented centuries ago, and their appli-
cations to error-correcting codes, as well as to the LFSR counters of this chapter,
DO NOT COPY
are described in introductory books on coding theory, including  Error-Control
Techniques for Digital Communication  by A. M. Michelson and A. H. Levesque
(Wiley-Interscience, 1985). A mathematical theory of state-machine decompo-
sition has been studied for years; Zvi Kohavi devotes a chapter to the topic in his
DO NOT COPYclassic book  Switching and Finite Automata Theory, 2nd ed. (McGraw-Hill,
1978). Bur let us now return to the less esoteric.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

References  687
As we mentioned in Section 8.4.5, some PLDs and CPLDs contain  XOR
structures that allow large counters to be designed without a large number of
product terms. This requires a somewhat deeper understanding of counter exci-
DO NOT COPY
tation equations, as described in Section 10.5 of the second edition of this book.
This material can also be found on the web at  www.ddpp.com.
The general topics of clock skew and multiphase clocking are discussed in
McCluskey’s  Logic Design Principles, while an illuminating discussion of these
topics as applied to VLSI circuits can be found in  Introduction to VLSI Systems
DO NOT COPY
by Carver Mead and Lynn Conway (Addison-Wesley, 1980). Mead and Conway
also provide an introduction to the important topic of  self-timed systems  that self-timed systems
eliminate the system clock, allowing each logic element to proceed at its own
rate. To give credit where credit is due, we note that all of the Mead and Conway
material on system timing, including an outstanding discussion of metastability,DO NOT COPY
appears in their Chapter 7 written by Charles L. Seitz.
Thomas J. Chaney spent decades studying and reporting on the metastabil-
ity problem. One of his more important works, “Measured Flip-Flop Responses
to Marginal Triggering” (IEEE Trans. Comput., Vol. C-32, No. 12, December
1983, pp. 1207–1209, reports some of the results that we showed in Table 8-35.DO NOT COPY
For the mathematically inclined, Lindsay Kleeman and Antonio Cantoni
have written “On the Unavoidability of Metastable Behavior in Digital Systems”
(IEEE Trans. Comput.,  Vol. C-36, No. 1, January 1987, pp. 109–112); the title
says it all. The same authors posed the question, “Can Redundancy and Masking
DO NOT COPY
Improve the Performance of Synchronizers?” (IEEE Trans. Comput.,  Vol. C-35,
No. 7, July 1986, pp. 643–646). Their answer in that paper was “no,” but a
response from a reviewer caused them to change their minds to “maybe.”
Obviously, they’ve gone metastable themselves! (Having two authors and a
reviewer hasn’t improved their performance, so the obvious answer to their
DO NOT COPY
original question is “no!”) In any case, Kleeman and Antonio’s papers provide a
good set of pointers to mainstream scholarly references on metastability.
The most comprehensive set of early references on metastability (not
including Greek philosophers or Devo) is Martin Bolton’s “A Guided Tour of 35
Years of Metastability Research” (Proc. Wescon 1987, Session 16, “Everything
DO NOT COPY
You Might Be Afraid to Know about Metastability,” Wescon Session Records,
www.wescon.com, 8110 Airport Blvd., Los Angeles, CA 90045).
In recent years, as system clock speeds have steadily increased, many IC
manufacturers have become much more active in studying and publishing the
metastability characteristics of their devices on the web. Texas InstrumentsDO NOT COPY
(www.ti.com) provides a very good discussion including test circuits and
measured parameters for ten different logic families in “Metastable Response in
5-V Logic Circuits” by Eilhard Haseloff (TI pub. SDYA006, 1997). Cypress
Semiconductor (www.cypress.com) published an application note, “Are Your
DO NOT COPY
PLDs Metastable?” (1997) that is an excellent reference including some history
(going back to 1952!), an analog circuit analysis of metastability, test and
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

688  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
measurement circuits, and metastability parameters for Cypress PLDs. Another
recent  note  is  “Metastability  Considerations”  from  Xilinx  Corporation
(www.xilinx.com, publ. XAPP077, 1997), which gives measured parameters
DO NOT COPY
for their XC7300 and XC9500 families of CPLDs. Of particular interest is the
clever circuit and methodology that allows them to count metastable events
inside  the device, even though metastable waveforms are not observable on
external pins.
Most digital design textbooks now give good coverage to metastability,
DO NOT COPY
prompted by the existence of metastability in real circuits and perhaps also by
competition—since 1990, this textbook has been hammering on the topic by
introducing metastability in its earliest coverage of sequential circuits. On the
analog side of the house, Howard Johnson and Martin Graham provide a nice
DO NOT COPYintroduction and a description of how to observe metastable states in their
High-Speed Digital Design: A Handbook of Black Magic  (Prentice Hall, 1993).
Drill Problems
DO NOT COPY8.1  Compare the propagation delays from  AVALID  to a chip-select output for the two
decoding approaches shown in Figures 8-15 and 8-16. Assume that 74FCT373
latches and 10-ns GAL16V8C devices are used in both designs. Repeat for the
delay from  ABUS  to a chip-select output.
8.2  Suppose that in Table 8-2, the second RAM bank (RAMCS1) is decoded instead
DO NOT COPYusing the expression  ((ABUS  >=  0x010)  &  (ABUS  <  0x020)). Does this yield the
same results as the original expression,  (ABUS  ==  RAMBANK0)? Explain.
8.3  What would happen if you replaced the edge-triggered D flip-flops in Figure 7-38
with  D  latches?
8.4  What is the counting sequence of the circuit shown in Figure X8.4?
DO NOT COPY8.5  What is the behavior of the counter circuit of Figure 8-36 if it is built using a
74x161 instead of a 74x163?
8.6  A 74x163 counter is hooked up with inputs  ENP,  ENT,  A, and  D  always  HIGH,
inputs  B  and  C  always  LOW, input  LD_L  =  (QB  ⋅  QC)′, and input  CLR_L  =  (QC  ⋅
QD)′. The  CLK  input is hooked up to a free-running clock signal. Draw a logic
DO NOT COPYdiagram for this circuit. Assuming that the counter starts in state 0000, write the
output sequence on  QD  QC  QB  QA for the next 15 clock ticks.
8.7  Determine the widths of the glitches shown in Figure 8-43 on the  Y2_L output of
a 74x138 decoder, assuming that the ’138 is internally structured as shown in
Figure 5-37(a) on page 320, and that each internal gate has a delay of 10 ns.
DO NOT COPY
8.8  Calculate the minimum clock period of the data unit in Figure 8-82. Use the max-
imum propagation delays given in Table 5-3 for LS-TTL combinational parts.
Unless you can get the real numbers from a TTL data book, assume that all reg-
isters require a 10 ns minimum setup time on inputs and have a 20 ns propagation
delay from clock to outputs. Indicate any assumptions you’ve made about delays
DO NOT COPYin the control unit.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  689
74x169
2
CLOCK CLK
1
UP/DN
DO NOT COPY9
LD
7
ENP
10
ENT
3 14
A QA Q0
4 13
B QB Q1
5 12
C QC Q2
DO NOT COPY6 11
D QD  Q3
15
RCO 74x04
1 2
U1
U2
DO NOT COPY
Q3_L
Figure X8.4
8.9 DO NOT COPYCalculate the MTBF of a synchronizer built according to Figure 8-96 using
74F74s, assuming a clock frequency of 25 MHz and an asynchronous transition
rate of 1 MHz. Assume that the setup time of an ’F74 is 5 ns and the hold time is
zero.
8.10  Calculate the MTBF of the synchronizer shown in Figure X8.10, assuming a
DO NOT COPYclock frequency of 25 MHz and an asynchronous transition rate of 1 MHz.
Assume that the setup time  tsetup  and the propagation delay  tpd  from clock to  Q  or
QN  in a 74ALS74 are both 10 ns.
synchronizer
Figure X8.10
74ALS74 74ALS74
DO NOT COPY
META SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q
(asynchronous input) CLK CLK  Synchronous
system
FF1 FF2
74ALS74
DO NOT COPY
D  Q
CLK Q
FF3
CLOCK
(system clock)
DO NOT COPY
Exercises
8.11  What does the TTL Data Book have to say about momentarily shorting the out-
puts of a gate to ground as we do in the switch debounce circuit of Figure 8-5?
DO NOT COPY
8.12  Investigate the behavior of the switch debounce circuit of Figure 8-5 if 74HCT04
inverters are used; repeat for 74AC04 inverters.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

690  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.13  Suppose you are asked to design a circuit that produces a debounced logic input
from an SPST (single-pole,  single-throw) switch. What inherent problem are you
faced with?
DO NOT COPY
8.14  Explain why CMOS bus holder circuits don’t work well on three-state buses with
TTL devices attached. (Hint:  Consider TTL input characteristics.)
8.15  Write a single VHDL program that combines the address latch and latching
decoder of Figure 8-16 and Table 8-2. Use the signal name  LA[19:0]  for the
latched address outputs.
DO NOT COPY
8.16  Design a 4-bit ripple counter using four  D  flip-flops and no other components.
8.17  What is the maximum propagation delay from clock to output for the 4-bit ripple
counter of Exercise 8.16 using 74HCT flip-flops? Repeat, using 74AHCT and
74LS74 flip-flops.
8.18  Design a 4-bit ripple  down  counter using four  D  flip-flops and no other
DO NOT COPY
components.
8.19  What limits the maximum counting speed of a ripple counter, if you don’t insist
on being able to read the counter value at all times?
8.20  Based on the design approach in Exercise 8.16 and the answer to Exercise 8.19,
DO NOT COPYwhat is the maximum counting speed (frequency) for a 4-bit ripple counter using
74HCT flip-flops? Repeat, using 74AHCT and 74LS74 flip-flops.
8.21  Write a formula for the maximum clock frequency of the synchronous serial bina-
ry counter circuit in Figure 8-28. In your formula, let  tTQ  denote the propagation
delay from T  to Q in a T flip-flop,  tsetup the setup time of the EN input to the rising
DO NOT COPYedge of  T, and  tAND  the delay of an  AND  gate.
8.22  Repeat Exercise 8.21 for the synchronous parallel binary counter circuit shown in
Figure 8-29, and compare results.
8.23  Repeat Exercise 8.21 for an  n-bit synchronous serial binary counter.
8.24  Repeat Exercise 8.21 for an  n-bit synchronous parallel binary counter. Beyond
DO NOT COPYwhat value of  n  is your formula no longer valid?
8.25  Using a 74x163 4-bit binary counter, design a modulo-11 counter circuit with the
counting sequence 3, 4, 5,  …, 12, 13, 3, 4,  ….
8.26  Look up the internal logic diagram for a 74x162 synchronous decade counter in
a data book, and write its state table in the style of Table 8-11, including its count-
DO NOT COPY
ing behavior in the normally unused states 10–15.
8.27  Devise a cascading scheme for 74x163s, analogous to the synchronous parallel
counter structure of Figure 8-29, such that the maximum counting speed is the
same for any counter with up to 36 bits (nine ’163s). Determine the maximum
counting speed using worst-case delays from a manufacturer’s data book for the
DO NOT COPY
’163s and any SSI components used for cascading.
8.28  Design a modulo-129 counter using two 74x163s and a single inverter.
8.29  Design a clocked synchronous circuit with four inputs,  N3,  N2,  N1, and  N0, that
represent an integer  N  in the range 0–15. The circuit has a single output  Z  that is
asserted for exactly  N  clock ticks during any 16-tick interval (assuming that  N  is
DO NOT COPY
held constant during the interval of observation). (Hints: Use combinational logic
with a 74x163 set up as a free-running divide-by-16 counter. The ticks in which
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  691
Z  is asserted should be spaced as evenly as possible, that is, every second tick
when  N  =  8, every fourth when  N  =  4, and so on.)
8.30  Modify the circuit of Exercise 8.29 so that  Z  produces  N  transitions  in each 16-
DO NOT COPY
tick interval. The resulting circuit is called a  binary rate multiplier,  and was once binary rate multiplier
sold as a TTL MSI part, the 7497. (Hint:  Gate the clock with the level output of
the previous circuit.)
8.31  A digital designer (the author!) was asked at the last minute to add new function-
ality to a PCB that had room for just one more 16-pin IC. The PCB already had a
DO NOT COPY
16-MHz clock signal, MCLK, and a spare microprocessor-controlled select signal,
SEL. The designer was asked to provide a new clock signal,  UCLK, whose fre-
quency would be 8 MHz or 4 MHz depending on the value of  SEL. To make
things worse, the PCB had no spare SSI gates, and  UCLK  was required to have a
50% duty cycle at both frequencies. It took the designer about five minutes to
DO NOT COPYcome up with a circuit. Now it’s your turn to do the same. (Hint:  The designer had
long considered the 74x163 to be the fundamental building block of tricky
sequential-circuit design.)
8.32  Design a modulo-16 counter, using one 74x169 and at most one SSI package,
with the following counting sequence: 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14,
DO NOT COPY15, 7,  ….
8.33  Modify the VHDL program in Table 8-14 so that the type of ports  D  and  Q  is
STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, including conversion functions as required.
8.34  Modify the program in Table 8-16 to use structural VHDL, so it conforms exactly
to the circuit in Figure 8-45, including the signal names shown in the figure.
DO NOT COPY
Define and use any of the following entities that don’t already exist in your
VHDL library:  AND2,  INV,  NOR2,  OR2,  XNOR2,  Vdffqqn.
8.35  Modify the program in Table 8-17 to use VHDL’s  generic statement, so that the
counter size can be changed using the  generic  definition.
8.36  Design a parallel-to-serial conversion circuit with eight 2.048 Mbps, 32-channel
DO NOT COPY
serial links and a single 2.048 MHz, 8-bit, parallel data bus that carries 256 bytes
per frame. Each serial link should have the frame format defined in Figure 8-55.
Each serial data line  SDATAi  should have its own sync signal  SYNCi; the sync
pulses should be staggered so that  SYNCi  +  1 has a pulse one clock tick after
SYNCi.
DO NOT COPY
Show the timing of the parallel bus and the serial links, and write a table or for-
mula that shows which parallel-bus timeslots are transmitted on which serial links
and timeslots. Draw a logic diagram for the circuit using MSI parts from this
chapter; you may abbreviate repeated elements (e.g., shift registers), showing
only the unique connections to each one.
DO NOT COPY
8.37  Repeat Exercise 8.36, assuming that all serial data lines must reference their data
to a single, common  SYNC  signal. How many more chips does this design
require?
8.38  Show how to enhance the serial-to-parallel circuit of Exercise 8-57 so that the
byte received in each timeslot is stored in its own register for 125μs, until the next
DO NOT COPY
byte from that timeslot is received. Draw the counter and decoding logic for 32
timeslots in detail, as well as the parallel data registers and connections for
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

692  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
timeslots 31, 0, and 1. Also draw a timing diagram in the style of Figure 8-58 that
shows the decoding and data signals associated with timeslots 31, 0, and 1.
8.39  Suppose you are asked to design a serial computer, one that moves and processes
DO NOT COPY
data one bit at a time. One of the first decisions you must make is which bit to
transmit and process first, the LSB or the MSB. Which would you choose, and
why?
8.40  Design  an  8-bit  self-correcting  ring  counter  whose  states  are  11111110,
11111101,  …, 01111111, using only two SSI/MSI packages.
DO NOT COPY
8.41  Design two different 2-bit, 4-state counters, where each design uses just a single
74x74 package (two edge-triggered  D  flip-flops) and no other gates.
8.42  Design a 4-bit Johnson counter and decoding for all eight states using just three
SSI/MSI packages. Your counter need not be self-correcting.
8.43  Starting with state 0001, write the sequence of states for a 4-bit LFSR counter
DO NOT COPY
designed according to Figure 8-68 and Table 8-21.
8.44  Prove that an even number of shift-register outputs must be connected to the odd-
parity circuit in an  n-bit LFSR counter if it generates a maximum-length
sequence. (Note that this is a necessary but not a sufficient requirement. Also,
although Table 8-21 is consistent with what you’re supposed to prove, simply
DO NOT COPY
quoting the table is not a proof!)
8.45  Prove that  X0  must appear on the right-hand side of any LFSR feedback equation
that generates a maximum-length sequence. (Note:  Assume the LFSR bit order-
ing and shift direction are as given in the text; that is, the LFSR counter shifts
right, toward the  X0  stage.)
DO NOT COPY
8.46  Suppose that an  n-bit LFSR counter is designed according to Figure 8-68 and
Table 8-21. Prove that if the odd-parity circuit is changed to an even-parity cir-
n 
cuit, the resulting circuit is a counter that visits 2 −  1 states, including all of the
states except 11…11.
DO NOT COPY8.47  Find a feedback equation for a 3-bit LFSR counter, other than the one given in
Table 8-21, that produces a maximum-length sequence.
n 
8.48  Given an  n-bit LFSR counter that generates a maximum-length sequence (2 − 1
states), prove that an extra  XOR  gate and an  n − 1 input  NOR  gate connected as
n 
suggested in Figure 8-69 produces a counter with 2 states.
n 
DO NOT COPY8.49  Prove that a sequence of 2 states is still obtained if a  NAND  gate is substituted
for a  NOR  above, but that the state sequence is different.
8.50  Design an iterative circuit for checking the parity of a 16-bit data word with a sin-
gle even parity bit. Does the order of bit transmission matter?
8.51  Modify the shift-register program in Table 8-23 to provide an asynchronous clear
DO NOT COPYinput using a 22V10.
8.52  Write an ABEL program that provides the same functionality as a 74x299 shift
register. Show how to fit this function into a single 22V10 or explain why it does
not fit.
8.53  In what situations do the ABEL programs in Tables 8-26 and 8-27 give different
DO NOT COPY
operational results?
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  693
8.54  Modify the ABEL program in Table 8-26 so that the phases are always at least
two clock ticks long, even if  RESTART  is asserted at the beginning of a phase.
RESET  should still take effect immediately.
DO NOT COPY
8.55  Repeat the preceding exercise for the program in Table 8-27.
8.56  A student proposed to create the timing waveforms of Figure 8-72 by starting
with the ABEL program in Table 8-27 and changing the encoding of each of
states  P1F,  P2F,  … ,  P6F  so that the corresponding phase output is 1 instead of
0, so that the phase output is 0 only during the second tick of each phase, as
DO NOT COPY
required. Is this a good approach? Comment on the results produced by the ABEL
compiler produce when you try this.
8.57  The outputs waveforms produced by the ABEL programs in Tables 8-29 and 8-30
are not identical when the  RESTART  and  RUN  inputs are changed. Explain the
reason for this, and then modify the program in Table 8-30 so that its behavior
DO NOT COPY
matches that of Table 8-29.
8.58  The ABEL ring-counter implementation in Table 8-26 is not self-synchronizing.
For example, describe what happens if the outputs  [P1_L..P6_L] are initially all
0, and the  RUN  input is asserted without ever asserting  RESET  or  RESTART. What
other starting states exhibit this kind of non-self-synchronizing behavior? Modify
DO NOT COPY
the program so that it  is  self-synchronizing.
8.59  Repeat the preceding exercise for the VHDL ring-counter implementation in
Table 8-33.
8.60  Design an iterative circuit with one input  Bi  per stage and two boundary outputs
X  and  Y  such that  X  =  1 if at least two  Bi  inputs are 1 and  Y  =  1 if at least two
DO NOT COPY
consecutive  Bi  inputs are 1.
8.61  Design a combination-lock machine according to the state table of Table 7-14 on
page 486 using a single 74x163 counter and combinational logic for the  LD_L,
CLR_L, and  A–D  inputs of the ’163. Use counter values 0–7 for states  A–H.
8.62  Write an ABEL program corresponding to the state diagram in Figure 8-84 for
DO NOT COPY
the multiplier control unit.
8.63  Write a VHDL program corresponding to the state diagram in Figure 8-84 for the
multiplier control unit.
8.64  Write a VHDL program that performs with the same inputs, outputs, and func-
DO NOT COPYtions as the multiplier data unit in Figure 8-82.
8.65  Write a VHDL program that combines the programs in the two preceding exer-
cises to form a complete 8-bit shift-and-add multiplier.
8.66  The text stated that the designer need not worry about any timing problems in the
synchronous design of Figure 8-83. Actually, there is one slight worry. Look at
DO NOT COPYthe timing specifications for the 74x377 and discuss.
8.67  Determine the minimum clock period for the shift-and-add multiplier circuit in
Figure 8-83, assuming that the state machine is realized in a single GAL16V8-20
and that the MSI parts are all 74LS TTL. Use worst-case timing information from
the tables in this book. For the ‘194,  tpd  from clock to any output is 26 ns, and  ts
DO NOT COPYis 20 ns for serial and parallel data inputs and 30 ns for mode-control inputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

694  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices
8.68  Design a data unit and a control-unit state machine for multiplying 8-bit two’s-
complement numbers using the algorithm discussed in Section 2.8.
8.69  Design a data unit and control-unit state machine for dividing 8-bit unsigned
DO NOT COPY
numbers using the shift-and-subtract algorithm discussed in Section 2.9.
8.70  Suppose that the  SYNCIN signal in Drill 8.10 is connected to a combinational cir-
cuit in the synchronous system, which in turn drives the  D  inputs of 74ALS74
flip-flops that are clocked by  CLOCK. What is the maximum allowable propaga-
tion delay of the combinational logic?
DO NOT COPY
8.71  The circuit in Figure X8.71 includes a deskewing flip-flop so that the synchro-
nized output from the multiple-cycle synchronizer is available as soon as possible
after the edge of  CLOCK. Ignoring metastability considerations, what is the max-
imum frequency of  CLOCK? Assume that for a 74F74,  tsetup =  5 ns and  tpd =  7 ns.
DO NOT COPYsynchronizer
74F74 74F74  74F74
META SYNCIN  DSYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q D  Q D  Q
(deskewed
(asynchronous input) CLK CLK CLK  SYNCIN) Synchronous
system
FF1 FF2  FF4
DO NOT COPY
74F74
Figure X8.71
D  Q
CLK Q
FF3
DO NOT COPYCLOCK
(system clock)
8.72  Using the maximum clock frequency determined in Exercise 8.71, and assuming
an asynchronous transition rate of 4 MHz, determine the synchronizer’s MTBF.
DO NOT COPY8.73  Determine the MTBF of the synchronizer in Figure X8.71, assuming an asyn-
chronous transition rate of 4 MHz and a clock frequency of 40 MHz, which is less
than the maximum determined in Figure X8.71. In this situation, “synchronizer
failure” really occurs only if  DSYNCIN  is metastable. In other words,  SYNCIN
may be allowed to be metastable for a short time, as long as it doesn’t affect
DSYNCIN. This yields a better MTBF.
DO NOT COPY
8.74  A famous digital designer devised the circuit shown in Figure X8.74(a), which is
supposed to eliminate metastability within one period of a system clock. Circuit
M  is a memoryless analog voltage detector whose output is 1 if  Q  is in the meta-
stable state, 0 otherwise. The circuit designer’s idea was that if line  Q  is detected
to be in the metastable state when  CLOCK goes low, the  NAND gate will clear the
DO NOT COPY
D  flip-flop, which in turn eliminates the metastable output, causing a 0 output
from circuit  M  and thus negating the  CLR  input of the flip-flop. The circuits are
all fast enough that this all happens well before  CLOCK  goes high again; the
expected waveforms are shown in Figure X8.74(b).
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  695
SYNCIN
ASYNCIN D  Q
(asynchronous input)  CLK Synchronous
DO NOT COPYCLR  M system
CLOCK
(system clock)
CLOCK_L
(a) METACLR_L
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
ASYNCIN
DO NOT COPY
SYNCIN
META
DO NOT COPY(b) METACLR_L Figure X8.74
Unfortunately, the synchronizer still failed occasionally, and the famous digital
designer is now designing pockets for blue jeans. Explain, in detail, how it failed,
including a timing diagram.
8.75DO NOT COPY  Look up U.S. patent  number 4,999,528, “Metastable-proof flip-flop,”  and
describe why it doesn’t always work as advertised. (Hint:  There’s enough infor-
mation in the abstract to figure out how it can fail.)
8.76  In the synchronization circuit of Figures 8-102, 8-104, and Figure 8-106, you can
reduce the delay of the transfer of a byte from the  RCLK  domain to the  SCLK
DO NOT COPYdomain if you use an earlier version of the  SYNC  pulse to start the synchronizer.
Assuming that you can generate  SYNC during any bit of the received byte, which
bit should you use to minimize the delay? Also determine whether your solution
satisfies the maximum-delay requirements for the circuit. Assume that all the
components have 74AHCT timing and that the  S-R  latch is built from a pair of
DO NOT COPYcross-coupled  NOR gates, and show a detailed timing analysis for your answers.
8.77  Instead of using a latch in the synchronization control circuit of Figure 8-106,
some applications use an edge-triggered  D  flip-flop as shown in Figure 8-111.
Derive the maximum-delay and minimum-delay requirements for this circuit,
corresponding to Eqns. 8-1 through 8-3, and discuss whether this approach eases
DO NOT COPYor worsens the delay requirements.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

696  Chapter 8  Sequential Logic Design Practices

--- Page Break ---

c h a p t e r
DO NOT
9
COPY
DO NOT
Sequential-Circuit
Design ExamplesCOPY
ust about every real digital system is a sequential circuit—all it takes
is one feedback loop, latch, or flip-flop to make a circuit’s present
DO NOT
behavior depend on its past inputs. However, if we were to design or
J
analyze a typical digital system as a single sequential circuit, we
would end up with an enormous state table. For example, strictly speaking, a
PC with only 16 Mbytes of main memory is a sequential circuit with well
128,000,000 
over 2  COPYstates!
We noted in previous chapters that we typically deal with digital
systems in smaller chunks, for example, partitioning them into data paths,
registers, and control units (Section 8.7.1). In fact, a typical system has
multiple functional units with well defined interfaces and connections
between them (as supported by VHDL, Section 4.7.2), and each functionalDO NOT
unit may contain a hierarchy with several layers of abstraction (as supported
by both VHDL and typical schematic drawing packages [Section 5.1.6]).
Thus, we can deal with sequential circuits in much smaller chunks.
After all of this build-up, I have to admit that the design of complex,
COPY
hierarchical digital systems is beyond the scope of this text. However, the
heart of any system or any of its subsystems is typically a state machine or
other sequential circuit, and that’s something we  can  study here. So, this
chapter will try to reinforce your understanding of sequential circuit and
state-machine design by presenting several examples.
DO NOT
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited 795
• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

--- Page Break ---

796  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
Early digital designers and many designers through the 1980s wrote out
state tables by hand and built corresponding circuits using the synthesis methods
that we described in Section 7.4. However, hardly anyone does that anymore.
DO NOT COPY
Nowadays, most state tables are specified with a hardware description language
(HDL) such as ABEL, VHDL, or Verilog. The HDL compiler then performs the
equivalent of our synthesis methods, and realizes the specified machine in a
PLD, CPLD, FPGA, ASIC, or other target technology.
This chapter  gives state-machine  and other  sequential-circuit  design
DO NOT COPY
examples in two different HDLs. In the first section, we give examples in ABEL,
and we target the resulting machines to small PLDs. Some of these examples
illustrate the partitioning decisions that are needed when an entire circuit does
not fit into a single component. In the second section, we give examples in
DO NOT COPYVHDL, which can be targeted to just about any technology.
Like Chapter 6, this chapter has as prerequisites only the chapters that
precede it. Its two sections are written to be pretty much independent of each
other, and the rest of the book is written so that you can read this chapter now or
skip it and come back later.
DO NOT COPY
9.1 Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs
In Section 7.4, we designed several simple state machines by translating their
word descriptions into a state table, choosing a state assignment, and finally
DO NOT COPYsynthesizing a corresponding circuit. We repeated one of these examples using
ABEL and a PLD in Table 7-27 on page 634 and another in Table 7-31 on
page 637. These designs were much easier to do using ABEL and a PLD, for two
reasons:
DO NOT COPY•  You don’t have to be too concerned about the complexity of the resulting
excitation equations, as long as they fit in the PLD.
•  You may be able to take advantage of ABEL language features to make the
design easier to express and understand.
Before looking at more examples, let’s examine the timing behavior and pack-
DO NOT COPY
aging considerations for state machines that are built from PLDs.
9.1.1 Timing and Packaging of PLD-Based State Machines
Figure 9-1 shows how a generic PLD with both combinational and registered
DO NOT COPYoutputs might be used in a state-machine application. Timing parameters tCO and
tPD  were explained in Section 8.3.3;  tCO  is the flip-flop clock-to-output delay
and  tPD  is the delay through the  AND-OR  array.
State variables are assigned to registered outputs, of course, and are stable
at time  tCO  after the rising edge of  CLOCK. Mealy-type outputs are assigned to
DO NOT COPYcombinational outputs, and are stable at time  t after any input change that
PD 
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  797
tPD  tCO
CLOCK
DO NOT COPYD  Q
Q
D  Q
DO NOT COPYQ
state variables
AND–OR array
D  Q
Q
DO NOT COPY
primary
inputs Mealy outputs
DO NOT COPY
Moore outputs
D  Q
DO NOT COPY
Q
pipelined outputs
D  Q
Fi g ur e 9 - 1
Q Structure and timing
DO NOT COPY
of a PLD used as a
state machine.
affects them. Mealy-type outputs may also change after a state change, in which
case they become stable at timeDO NOT COPY  tCO +  tPD  after the rising edge of  CLOCK.
A Moore-type output is, by definition, a combinational logic function of
the current state, so it is also stable at time  tCO +  tPD  after the  CLOCK. Thus,
Moore outputs may not offer any speed advantage of Mealy outputs in a PLD
realization. For faster propagation delay, we defined and used pipelined outputs
DO NOT COPY
in Sections 7.3.2 and 7.11.5. In a PLD realization, these outputs come directly
from a flip-flop output, and thus have a delay of only  tCO  from the clock. Besides
having a shorter delay, they are also guaranteed to be glitch free, important in
some applications.
PLD-based state-machine designs are often limited by the number of input
DO NOT COPY
and output pins available in a single PLD. According to the model of Figure 9-1,
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

798  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
registered combinational
PLD PLD
Moore-type
outputs
DO NOT COPY
state
primary
DO NOT COPYinputs
combinational
PLD
Mealy-type
outputs
DO NOT COPY
Fi g ur e 9 - 2
Splitting a state-machine
design into three PLDs.
DO NOT COPY
one PLD output is required for each state variable and for each Mealy- or
Moore-type output. For example, the T-bird tail-lights machine of Section 7.5
starting on page 585 requires three registered outputs for the state variables and
six combinational outputs for the lamp outputs, too many for most of the PLDs
that we’ve described, except for the 22V10.
DO NOT COPY
On the other hand, an output-coded state assignment (Section 7.3.2)
usually requires a smaller total number of PLD outputs. Using an output-coded
state assignment, the T-bird tail-lights machine can be built in a single 16V8, as
we’ll show in Section 9.1.3.
DO NOT COPYLike any state variable or Moore-type output, an output-coded state vari-
able is stable at time  tCO  after the clock edge. Thus, an output-coded state
assignment improves speed as well as packaging efficiency. In T-bird tail lights,
turning on the emergency flashers 10 ns sooner doesn’t matter, but in a high-
performance digital system, an extra 10 ns of delay could make the difference
DO NOT COPYbetween a maximum system clock rate of 100 MHz and a maximum of only
50 MHz.
If a design  must  be split into two or more PLDs, the best split in terms of
both design simplicity and packaging efficiency is often the one shown in
Figure 9-2. A single sequential PLD is used to create the required next-state
DO NOT COPY
behavior, and combinational PLDs are used to create both Mealy- and Moore-
type outputs from the state variables and inputs.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  799
RELIEF FOR A Modern software tools for PLD-based system design can eliminate some of the trial
SPLITTING and error that might otherwise be associated with fitting a design into a set of PLDs.
DO NOT COPY
HEADACHE To use this capability, the designer enters the equations and state-machine descrip-
tions for the design, without necessarily specifying the actual devices and pinouts
that should be used to realize the design. A software tool called a partitioner attempts
to split the design into the smallest possible number of devices from a given family,
while minimizing the number of pins used for inter-device communication. Parti-
DO NOT COPY
tioning can be fully automatic, partially user controlled, or fully user controlled.
Larger  devices—CPLDs  and  FPGAs—often  have  internal,  architectural
constraints that may create headaches in the absence of expert software assistance.
It appear to the designer, based on input, output, and total combinational logic and
flip-flip requirements, that a design will fit in a single CPLD or FPGA. However, the
DO NOT COPYdesign must still be split among multiple PLDs or logic blocks inside the larger
device, where each block has only limited functionality.
For example, an output that requires many product terms may have to steal
some from physically adjacent outputs. This may in turn affect whether adjacent pins
can be used as inputs or outputs, and how many product terms are available to them.
DO NOT COPYIt may also affect the ability to interconnect signals between nearby blocks and the
worst-case delay of these signals. All of these constraints can be tracked by  fitter
software that uses a heuristic approach to find the best split of functions among the
blocks within a single CPLD or FPGA.
In many design environments, the partitioner and fitter software work together
DO NOT COPYand interactively with the designer to find an acceptable realization using a set of
PLDs, CPLDs, and FPGAs.
DO NOT COPY
9.1.2 A Few Simple Machines
In Section 7.4 we designed several simple state machines using traditional
methods. We presented an ABEL- and PLD-based design for the first of these in
Table 7-25 on page 631, and then we showed how we could make the machine’s
operation more understandable by making better use of ABEL features in
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-27 on page 634.
Our second example was a “1s-counting machine” with the following
specification:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  X  and  Y, and
DO NOT COPY
one output,  Z. The output should be 1 if the number of 1 inputs on  X  and  Y
since reset is a multiple of 4, and 0 otherwise.
We developed a state table for this machine in Table 7-12 on page 580. However,
we can express the machine’s function much more easily in ABEL, as shown in
Table 9-1. Notice that for this machine we were better off not using ABEL’sDO NOT COPY
“state diagram” syntax. We could express the machine’s function more naturally
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

800  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
T a b l e 9 - 1 module onesctsm
ABEL program for title 'Ones-counting State Machine'
ones-counting ONESCTSM device 'P16V8R';
DO NOT COPY
state machine.
" Inputs and outputs
CLOCK, RESET, X, Y  pin 1, 2, 3, 4;
Z  pin 13 istype 'com';
COUNT1..COUNT0  pin 14, 15 istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY" Sets
COUNT = [COUNT1..COUNT0];
equations
COUNT.CLK = CLOCK;
WHEN RESET THEN COUNT := 0;
DO NOT COPYELSE WHEN X & Y THEN COUNT := COUNT + 2;
ELSE WHEN X # Y THEN COUNT := COUNT + 1;
ELSE COUNT := COUNT;
Z = (COUNT == 0);
end onesctsm
DO NOT COPY
using a nested WHEN statement and the built-in addition operation. The first
WHEN  clause forces the machine to its initial state and count of 0 upon reset, and
the succeeding clauses increase the count by 2, 1, or 0 as required when the
DO NOT COPY
machine is not reset. Note that ABEL “throws away” the carry bit in addition,
which is equivalent to performing addition modulo-4. The machine easily fits
into a GAL16V8 device. It has four states, because there are two flip-flops its
realization.
Another example from Section 7.4 is a combination-lock state machine
DO NOT COPY
(below we omit the  HINT  output in the original specification):
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with one input,  X, and one
output,  UNLK. The  UNLK  output should be 1 if and only if X is 0 and
the sequence of inputs received on X at the preceding seven clock ticks
DO NOT COPY
was 0110111.
RESETTING In Chapter 7, we started the bad habit of designing state tables without including an
BAD HABITS explicit reset input. There was a reason for this—each additional input potentially
DO NOT COPY
doubles the amount work we would have had to do to synthesize the state machine
using manual methods, and there was little to be gained pedagogically.
Now that we’re doing language-based state-machine design using automated
tools, we should get into the habit of always providing an explicit reset input that
sends the machine back to a known state. It’s a requirement in real designs!
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  801
We developed a state table for this machine in Table 7-14 on page 582, and we
wrote an equivalent ABEL program in Table 7-31 on page 637. However, once
again we can take a different approach that is easier to understand. For this
DO NOT COPY
example, we note that the output of the machine at any time is completely deter-
mined by its inputs over the preceding eight clock ticks. Thus, we can use a so-
called “finite-memory” approach to design this machine, where we explicitly
keep track of the past seven inputs and then form the output as a combinational
function of these inputs.
DO NOT COPY
The ABEL program in Table 9-2 uses the finite-memory approach. It is
written using sets to make modifications easy, for example, to change the combi-
nation. However, note that the  HINT  output would be just as difficult to provide
in this version of the machine as in the original (see Exercise 9.2).
DO NOT COPY
Ta bl e 9 - 2  Finite-memory program for combination-lock state machine.
module comblckf
title 'Combination-Lock State Machine'
"COMBLCKF device ’P16V8R’;
DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins
CLOCK, RESET, X  pin 1, 2, 3;
X1..X7  pin 12..18 istype 'reg';
UNLK  pin 19;
DO NOT COPY
" Sets
XHISTORY = [X7..X1];
SHIFTX  =  [X6..X1, X];
equations
DO NOT COPY
XHISTORY.CLK = CLOCK;
XHISTORY := !RESET & SHIFTX;
UNLK = !RESET & (X == 0) & (XHISTORY == [0,1,1,0,1,1,1]);
END comblckf
DO NOT COPY
FINITE-MEMORY The finite-memory design approach to state-machine design can be generalized.
DO NOT COPYDESIGN Such a machine’s outputs are completely determined by its current input and outputs
during the previous n clock ticks, where n is a finite, bounded integer. Any machine
that can be realized as shown in Figure 9-3 is a finite-memory machine. Note that a
finite-state  machine need not be a finite-memory  machine. For example, the ones-
counting machine in Table 9-1 has only four states but is not a finite-memory
machine, its output depends on every value of  X  and  Y  since reset.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

802  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
n flip-flops
DO NOT COPYIN D  Q D Q D Q
CK CK CK
DO NOT COPY
combinational logic OUT
CLOCK
DO NOT COPY
D  Q D Q D Q
CK CK CK
Fi g ur e 9 - 3
General structureDO NOT COPY
n flip-flops
of a finite-memory
machine.
DO NOT COPY
9.1.3 T-Bird Tail Lights
We described and designed a “T-bird tail-lights” state machine in Section 7.5.
Table 9-3 is an equivalent ABEL “state diagram” for the T-bird tail-lights
machine. There is a close correspondence between this program and the state
DO NOT COPYdiagram of Figure 7-64 on page 589 using the state assignment of Table 7-16 on
page 590. Except for the added  RESET  input, the program produces exactly the
same reduced equations as the explicit transition equations resulting from the
transition list, which we worked out by hand in Section 7.6 on page 592.
The program in Table 9-3 handles only the state variables of the tail-lights
DO NOT COPYmachine. The output logic requires six combinational outputs, but only five
more outputs are available in the 16V8 specified in the program. A second PLD
could be used to decode the states, using the kind of partitioning that we showed
in Figure 9-2. Alternatively, a larger PLD, such as the 22V10, could provide
enough outputs for a single-PLD design.
DO NOT COPY
An even better approach is to recognize that the output values of the tail-
lights machine are different in each state, so we can also use an output-coded
state assignment. This requires only six registered outputs and no combinational
outputs of a 16V8, as shown in Figure 9-4. Only the device, pin, and state defini-
tions in the previous ABEL program must be changed, as shown in Table 9-4.
DO NOT COPY
The six resulting excitation equations each use four product terms.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  803
module tbirdsd T a b l e 9 - 3
title 'State Machine for T-Bird Tail Lights' ABEL program for
TBIRDSD device 'P16V8R'; the T-bird tail-lights
DO NOT COPY
machine.
" Input and output pins
CLOCK, LEFT, RIGHT, HAZ, RESET  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
Q0, Q1, Q2  pin 14, 15, 16 istype 'reg';
" Definitions
QSTATE = [Q2,Q1,Q0];DO NOT COPY  " State variables
IDLE  = [ 0, 0, 0];  " States
L1  = [ 0, 0, 1];
L2  = [ 0, 1, 1];
L3  = [ 0, 1, 0];
R1  = [ 1, 0, 1];
DO NOT COPY
R2  = [ 1, 1, 1];
R3  = [ 1, 1, 0];
LR3  = [ 1, 0, 0];
equations
QSTATE.CLK = CLOCK;
DO NOT COPY
state_diagram QSTATE
state IDLE: IF RESET THEN IDLE
ELSE IF (HAZ # LEFT & RIGHT) THEN LR3
ELSE IF LEFT THEN L1 ELSE IF RIGHT THEN R1
ELSE IDLE;
DO NOT COPY
state L1:  IF RESET THEN IDLE ELSE IF HAZ THEN LR3 ELSE L2;
state L2:  IF RESET THEN IDLE ELSE IF HAZ THEN LR3 ELSE L3;
state L3:  GOTO IDLE;
state R1:  IF RESET THEN IDLE ELSE IF HAZ THEN LR3 ELSE R2;
state R2:  IF RESET THEN IDLE ELSE IF HAZ THEN LR3 ELSE R3;
state R3:DO NOT COPY  GOTO IDLE;
state LR3:  GOTO IDLE;
end tbirdsd
DO NOT COPYGAL16V8R
1  F ig u re 9 - 4
CLOCK CLK
2 19 A single-PLD design for
LEFT I1  IO1
3 18 T-bird tail lights.
RIGHT  I2 IO2 L3Z
4 17
HAZ I3 IO3 L2Z
5 16
DO NOT COPYI4 IO4 L1Z
6 15
I5 IO5 R1Z
7 14
I6 IO6 R2Z
8 13
I7 IO7 R3Z
9 12
I8 IO8
11
OE
DO NOT COPYU1
TBIRDSDO
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

804  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
Ta bl e 9 - 4 module tbirdsdo
Output-coded state title 'Output-Coded T-Bird Tail Lights State Machine'
assignment for the TBIRDSDO device 'P16V8R';
DO NOT COPY
T-bird tail-lights
machine. " Input and output pins
CLOCK, LEFT, RIGHT, HAZ, RESET  pin 1, 2, 3, 4, 5;
L3Z, L2Z, L1Z, R1Z, R2Z, R3Z  pin 18..13 istype 'reg';
" Definitions
DO NOT COPY
QSTATE = [L3Z,L2Z,L1Z,R1Z,R2Z,R3Z];  " State variables
IDLE  = [  0,  0,  0,  0,  0,  0];  " States
L3  = [  1,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0];
L2  = [  0,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0];
L1  = [  0,  0,  1,  0,  0,  0];
DO NOT COPYR1  = [  0,  0,  0,  1,  0,  0];
R2  = [  0,  0,  0,  1,  1,  0];
R3  = [  0,  0,  0,  1,  1,  1];
LR3  = [  1,  1,  1,  1,  1,  1];
DO NOT COPY
9.1.4 The Guessing Game
A “guessing game” machine was defined in Section 7.7.1 starting on page 594,
with the following description:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with four inputs,  G1–G4, that
DO NOT COPYare connected to pushbuttons. The machine has four outputs,  L1–L4,
connected to lamps or LEDs located near the like-numbered pushbuttons.
There is also an  ERR  output connected to a red lamp. In normal operation,
the  L1–L4  outputs display a 1-out-of-4 pattern. At each clock tick, the
pattern is rotated by one position; the clock frequency is about 4 Hz.
DO NOT COPY
Guesses are made by pressing a pushbutton, which asserts an input  Gi.
When any  Gi  input is asserted, the  ERR  output is asserted if the “wrong”
pushbutton was pressed, that is, if the  Gi  input detected at the clock tick
does not have the same number as the lamp output that was asserted before
DO NOT COPYthe clock tick. Once a guess has been made, play stops and the  ERR  output
maintains the same value for one or more clock ticks until the  Gi  input is
negated, then play resumes.
As we discussed in Section 7.7.1, the machine requires six states—four in which
a corresponding lamp is on, and two for when play is stopped after either a good
DO NOT COPY
or a bad pushbutton push. An ABEL program for the guessing game is shown in
Table 9-5. Two enhancements were made to improve the testability and robust-
ness of the machine—a  RESET  input that forces the game to a known starting
state, and the two unused states have explicit transitions to the starting state.
DO NOT COPYThe guessing-game machine uses the same state assignments as the
original version in Section 7.7.1. Using these assignments, the ABEL compiler
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  805
module ggame T a b l e 9 - 5
Title 'Guessing-Game State Machine' ABEL program for
GGAME device 'P16V8R'; the guessing-game
DO NOT COPY
machine.
" Inputs and outputs
CLOCK, RESET, G1..G4  pin 1, 2, 3..6;
L1..L4, ERR  pin 12..15, 19 istype 'com';
Q2..Q0  pin 16..18 istype 'reg';
" SetsDO NOT COPY
G = [G1..G4];
L = [L1..L4];
" States
QSTATE = [Q2,Q1,Q0];
S1  = [ 0, 0, 0];
DO NOT COPY
S2  = [ 0, 0, 1];
S3  = [ 0, 1, 1];
S4  = [ 0, 1, 0];
SOK  = [ 1, 0, 0];
SERR  = [ 1, 0, 1];
EXTRA1 = [ 1, 1, 0];DO NOT COPY
EXTRA2 = [ 1, 1, 1];
state_diagram QSTATE
state S1:  IF RESET THEN SOK ELSE IF G2 # G3 # G4 THEN SERR
ELSE IF G1 THEN SOK ELSE S2;
DO NOT COPY
state S2:  IF RESET THEN SOK ELSE IF G1 # G3 # G4 THEN SERR
ELSE IF G2 THEN SOK ELSE S3;
state S3:  IF RESET THEN SOK ELSE IF G1 # G2 # G4 THEN SERR
ELSE IF G3 THEN SOK ELSE S4;
state S4:DO NOT COPY  IF RESET THEN SOK ELSE IF G1 # G2 # G3 THEN SERR
ELSE IF G4 THEN SOK ELSE S1;
state SOK:  IF RESET THEN SOK
ELSE IF G1 # G2 # G3 # G4 THEN SOK ELSE S1;
state SERR:  IF RESET THEN SOK
DO NOT COPYELSE IF G1 # G2 # G3 # G4 THEN SERR ELSE S1;
state EXTRA1:  GOTO SOK;
state EXTRA2:  GOTO SOK;
equations
QSTATE.CLK = CLOCK;
DO NOT COPY
L1  = (QSTATE == S1);
L2  = (QSTATE == S2);
L3  = (QSTATE == S3);
L4  = (QSTATE == S4);
ERR = (QSTATE == SERR);
DO NOT COPY
end ggame
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

806  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
T a b l e 9 - 6 P-Terms  Fan-in  Fan-out  Type  Name
Product-term usage ---------  ------  -------  ----  --------
in the guessing-game 1/3  3  1  Pin  L1
DO NOT COPY
state-machine PLD. 1/3  3  1  Pin  L2
1/3  3  1  Pin  L3
1/3  3  1  Pin  L4
1/3  3  1  Pin  ERR
6/2  7  1  Pin  Q2.REG
1/7  7  1  Pin  Q1.REG
DO NOT COPY
11/8  8  1  Pin  Q0.REG
=========
23/32  Best P-Term Total: 16
Total Pins: 14
Average P-Term/Output: 2
DO NOT COPY
cranks out minimized equations with the number of product terms shown in
Table 9-6. The  Q0  output just barely fits in a GAL16V8 (eight product terms). If
we needed to save terms, the way in which we’ve written the program allows us
DO NOT COPYto try alternate state assignments (see Exercise 9.4).
A more productive alternative might be to try an output-coded state assign-
ment. We can use one state/output bit per lamp (L1..L4), and use one more bit
(ERR) to distinguish between the  SOK  and  SERR  states when the lamps are all off.
This allows us to drop the equations for  L1..L4  and  ERR  from Table 9-5. The
DO NOT COPY
new assignment is shown in Table 9-7. With this assignment,  L1  uses two prod-
uct terms and  L2..L4  use only one product term each. Unfortunately, the  ERR
output blows up into 16 product terms.
T a b l e 9 - 7DO NOT COPY
module ggameoc
ABEL definitions for Title 'Guessing-Game State Machine'
the guessing-game "GGAMEOC device 'P16V8R';
machine with an
output-coded state " Inputs and outputs
assignment.DO NOT COPYCLOCK, RESET, G1..G4  pin 1, 2, 3..6;
L1..L4, ERR  pin 12..15, 18 istype 'reg';
" States
QSTATE = [L1,L2,L3,L4,ERR];
S1  = [ 1, 0, 0, 0,  0];
DO NOT COPYS2  = [ 0, 1, 0, 0,  0];
S3  = [ 0, 0, 1, 0,  0];
S4  = [ 0, 0, 0, 1,  0];
SOK  = [ 0, 0, 0, 0,  0];
SERR  = [ 0, 0, 0, 0,  1];
DO NOT COPY
...
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  807
Part of our problem with this particular output-coded assignment is that
we’re not taking full advantage of its properties. Notice that it is basically a
“one-hot” encoding, but the state definitions in Table 9-7 require all five state
DO NOT COPY
bits to be decoded for each state. An alternate version of the coding using “don’t-
cares” is shown in Table 9-8.
In the new version, we are assuming that the state bits never take on any
combination of values other than the ones we originally defined in Table 9-7.
Thus, for example, if we see that state bit  L1 is 1, the machine must be in state  S1
DO NOT COPY
regardless of the values of any other state bits. Therefore, we can set these bits to
“don’t care” in  S1’s definition in Table 9-8. ABEL will set each  X  to 0 when
encoding a next state, but will treat each  X  as a “don’t-care” when decoding the
current state. Thus, we must take  extreme  care to ensure that decoded states are
in fact mutually exclusive, that is, that no legitimate next state matches two orDO NOT COPY
more different state definitions. Otherwise, the compiled results will not have
the expected behavior.
The reduced equations that result from the output coding in Table 9-8 use
three product terms for  L1, one each for  L2..L4, and only seven for  ERR. So the
DO NOT COPY
X = .X.; T a b le 9 - 8
QSTATE = [L1,L2,L3,L4,ERR]; Output coding for
S1  = [ 1, X, X, X,  X]; the guessing-game
S2  = [ X, 1, X, X,  X]; machine using
DO NOT COPY
S3  = [ X, X, 1, X,  X]; “don’t cares.”
S4  = [ X, X, X, 1,  X];
SOK  = [ 0, 0, 0, 0,  0];
SERR  = [ X, X, X, X,  1];
DO NOT COPY
DON’T-CARE, To understand how the don’t-cares work in a state encoding, you must first under-
HOW IT WORKS stand how ABEL creates equations internally from state diagrams. Within a given
state  S, each transition statement (IF-THEN-ELSE  or  GOTO) causes the on-sets of
DO NOT COPY
certain state variables to be augmented according to the transition condition. The
transition condition is an expression that must be true to “go to” that target, including
being in state  S. For example, all of the conditions specified in a state such as  S1  in
Table 9-5 are implicitly  ANDed with the expression “QSTATE==S1”. Because of the
way  S1  is defined using don’t-cares, this equality check generates only a single lit-
DO NOT COPYeral (L1) instead of an  AND  term, leading to further simplification later.
For each target state in a transition statement, the on-sets of only the state vari-
ables that are 1 in that state are augmented according to the transition condition.
Thus, when a coded state such as S1 in Table 9-8 appears as a target in any transition
statement, only the on-set of  L1  is augmented. This explains why the actual coding
DO NOT COPYof state  S1  as a target is 100000.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

808  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
change was worthwhile. However, we must remember that the new machine is
different from the one in Table 9-7. Consider what happens if the machine ever
gets into an unspecified state. In the original machine with fully specified output
DO NOT COPY5 
coding, there are no next-states for the 2  – 6 = 26 unspecified states, so the state
machine will always go to the state coded 00000 (SOK) from unspecified states.
In the new machine, “unspecified” states aren’t really unspecified; for example,
the state coded 11111 actually matches five coded states,  S1–S4  and  SERR. The
next state will actually be the “OR” of next-states for the matching coded states.
DO NOT COPY
(Read the box on the previous page to understand why these outcomes occur.)
Again, you need to be careful.
DO NOT COPYRESETTING Reading the guessing-game program in Table 9-5, you would expect that the  RESET
EXPECTATIONS input would force the machine to the  SOK  state, and it does. However, the moment
that you have unspecified or partially coded states as in Tables 9-7 or 9-8, don’t take
anything for granted.
Referring to the box on the previous page, remember that transition statements
DO NOT COPYin ABEL state machines augment the on-sets of state variables. If a particular,
unused state combination does not match any of the states for which transition state-
ments were written, then no on-sets will be augmented. Thus, the only transition
from that state will be to the state with the all-0s coding.
For this reason, it is useful to code the reset state or a “safe” state as all 0s. If
DO NOT COPYthis is not possible, but the all-0s state is still unused, you can explicitly provide a
transition from the all-0s state to a desired safe state.
DO NOT COPY9.1.5 Reinventing Traffic-Light Controllers
Our final example is from the world of cars and traffic. Traffic-light controllers
in California, especially in the fair city of Sunnyvale, are carefully designed to
maximize  the waiting time of cars at intersections. An infrequently used inter-
section (one that would have no more than a “yield” sign if it were in Chicago)
DO NOT COPYhas the sensors and signals shown in Figure 9-5. The state machine that controls
the traffic signals uses a 1 Hz clock and a timer and has four inputs:
NSCAR  Asserted when a car on the north-south road is over either sensor
on either side of the intersection.
DO NOT COPYEWCAR  Asserted when a car on the east-west road is over either sensor on
either side of the intersection.
TMLONG  Asserted if more than five minutes has elapsed since the timer
started; remains asserted until the timer is reset.
DO NOT COPYTMSHORT  Asserted if more than five seconds has elapsed since the timer
started; remains asserted until the timer is reset.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  809
NSRED NSRED
NSYELLOW NSYELLOW
NSGREEN NSGREEN
DO NOT COPYEWRED EWRED
EWYELLOW EWYELLOW
EWGREEN EWGREEN
NSCAR
DO NOT COPY
EWCAR
EWCAR
DO NOT COPY
NSCAR
N
DO NOT COPY
Fi g ur e 9 - 5  Traffic sensors and signals at an intersection in Sunnyvale, California.
The state machine has seven outputs:
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREEN  Control the north-south lights.
DO NOT COPY
EWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN  Control the east-west lights.
TMRESET  When  asserted, resets  the  timer  and  negates  TMSHORT  and
TMLONG. The timer starts timing when  TMRESET  is negated.
A typical, municipally approved algorithm for controlling the traffic lights
DO NOT COPY
is embedded in the ABEL program of Table 9-9. This algorithm produces two
frequently seen behaviors of “smart” traffic lights. At night, when traffic is light,
it holds a car stopped at the light for up to five minutes, unless a car approaches
on the cross street, in which case it stops the cross traffic and lets the waiting car
go. (The “early warning” sensor is far enough back to change the lights before
DO NOT COPY
the approaching car reaches the intersection.) During the day, when traffic is
heavy and there are always cars waiting in both directions, it cycles the lights
every five seconds, thus minimizing the utilization of the intersection and
maximizing everyone’s waiting time, thereby creating a public outcry for more
taxes to fix the problem.
DO NOT COPY
The equations for the  TMRESET  output are worth noting. This output is
asserted during the “double-red” states,  NSDELAY  and  EWDELAY, to reset the
timer in preparation for the next green cycle. The desired output signal could be
generated on a combinational output pin by decoding these two states, but we
have chosen instead to generate it on a registered output pin by decoding theDO NOT COPY
predecessors  of these two states.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

810  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
Ta bl e 9 - 9  Sunnyvale traffic-lights program.
module svaletl
DO NOT COPYtitle 'State Machine for Sunnyvale, CA, Traffic Lights'
SVALETL device ’P16V8R’;
" Input and output pins
CLOCK, !OE  pin 1, 11;
NSCAR, EWCAR, TMSHORT, TMLONG  pin 2, 3, 8, 9;
Q0, Q1, Q2, TMRESET_L  pin 17, 16, 15, 14 istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPY
" Definitions
LSTATE  = [Q2,Q1,Q0];  " State variables
NSGO  = [ 0, 0, 0];  " States
NSWAIT  = [ 0, 0, 1];
NSWAIT2 = [ 0, 1, 1];
DO NOT COPY
NSDELAY = [ 0, 1, 0];
EWGO  = [ 1, 1, 0];
EWWAIT  = [ 1, 1, 1];
EWWAIT2 = [ 1, 0, 1];
EWDELAY = [ 1, 0, 0];
DO NOT COPYstate_diagram LSTATE
state NSGO:  " North-south green
IF (!TMSHORT) THEN NSGO  " Minimum green is 5 seconds.
ELSE IF (TMLONG) THEN NSWAIT  " Maximum green is 5 minutes.
ELSE IF (EWCAR & !NSCAR)  " If E-W car is waiting and no one
THEN NSGO  "  is coming N-S, make E-W wait!
DO NOT COPYELSE IF (EWCAR & NSCAR)  " Cars coming in both directions?
THEN NSWAIT  " Thrash!
ELSE IF (!NSCAR)  " Nobody coming N-S and not timed out?
THEN NSGO  " Keep N-S green.
ELSE NSWAIT;  " Else let E-W have it.
DO NOT COPYstate NSWAIT: GOTO NSWAIT2;  " Yellow light is on for two ticks for safety.
state NSWAIT2: GOTO NSDELAY;  " (Drivers go 70 mph to catch this turkey green!)
state NSDELAY: GOTO EWGO;  " Red in both directions for added safety.
state EWGO: " East-west green; states defined analogous to N-S
IF (!TMSHORT) THEN EWGO
DO NOT COPYELSE IF (TMLONG) THEN EWWAIT
ELSE IF (NSCAR & !EWCAR) THEN EWGO
ELSE IF (NSCAR & EWCAR) THEN EWWAIT
ELSE IF (!EWCAR) THEN EWGO  ELSE EWWAIT;
state EWWAIT: GOTO EWWAIT2;
state EWWAIT2: GOTO EWDELAY;
DO NOT COPY
state EWDELAY: GOTO NSGO;
equations
LSTATE.CLK = CLOCK;  TMRESET_L.CLK = CLOCK;
!TMRESET_L := (LSTATE == NSWAIT2)  " Reset the timer when going into
DO NOT COPY+ (LSTATE == EWWAIT2); "  state NSDELAY or state EWDELAY.
end svaletl
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.1  Design Examples Using ABEL and PLDs  811
FLASHCLK
OVERRIDE
NSCAR
GAL16V8R GAL16V8C
EWCARDO NOT COPY
1  1
CLOCK CLK I1
(1 Hz) 2 19 2 19
timer I1  IO1 I2 O1 NSRED
3 18 3 18
I2 IO2 I3 IO2 NSYELLOW
CLK 4 17 Q0 4 17
I3 IO3 I4 IO3 NSGREEN
5 16 Q1 5 16
DO NOT COPYI4 IO4 I5 IO4
6 15 Q2 6 15
RESTART I5 IO5 I6 IO5
7 14 7 14
I6 IO6 I7 IO6 EWRED
TMSHORT 8 13 8 13
SHORT I7 IO7 I8 IO7 EWYELLOW
TMLONG 9 12 9 12
LONG I8 IO8 I9 O8 EWGREEN
11 11
DO NOT COPYOE I10
U1  U2
TMRESET_L SVALETL  SVALETLO
Fi g ur e 9 - 6  Sunnyvale traffic-light controller using two PLDs.
DO NOT COPY
Ta b l e 9 - 1 0  Output logic for Sunnyvale traffic lights.
module svaletlo
title 'Output logic for Sunnyvale, CA, Traffic Lights'
"SVALETLO device ’P16V8C’;
DO NOT COPY
" Input pins
FLASHCLK, OVERRIDE, Q0, Q1, Q2  pin 1, 2, 4, 5, 6;
" Output pins
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREENDO NOT COPY  pin 19, 18, 17 istype 'com';
EWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN  pin 14, 13, 12 istype 'com';
" Definitions (same as in state machine SVALETL)
...
equationsDO NOT COPY
NSRED = !OVERRIDE & (LSTATE != NSGO) & (LSTATE != NSWAIT) & (LSTATE != NSWAIT2)
# OVERRIDE & FLASHCLK;
NSYELLOW = !OVERRIDE & ((LSTATE == NSWAIT) # (LSTATE == NSWAIT2));
NSGREEN  = !OVERRIDE & (LSTATE == NSGO);
DO NOT COPY
EWRED = !OVERRIDE & (LSTATE != EWGO) & (LSTATE != EWWAIT) & (LSTATE != EWWAIT2)
# OVERRIDE & FLASHCLK;
EWYELLOW = !OVERRIDE & ((LSTATE == EWWAIT) # (LSTATE == EWWAIT2));
EWGREEN  = !OVERRIDE & (LSTATE == EWGO);
DO NOT COPY
end svaletlo
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

812  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
The ABEL program in Table 9-9 defines only the state variables and one
registered Moore output for the traffic controller. Six more Moore outputs are
needed for the lights, more than remain on the 16V8. Therefore, a separate
DO NOT COPY
combinational PLD is used for these outputs, yielding the complete design
shown in Figure 9-6 on the preceding page. An ABEL program for the output
PLD is given in Table 9-10. We’ve taken this opportunity to add an  OVERRIDE
input to the controller. This input may be asserted by the police to disable the
controller and put the signals into a flashing-red mode (at a rate determined by
DO NOT COPY
FLASHCLK), allowing them to manually clear up the traffic snarls created by
this wonderful invention.
A traffic-light state machine including output logic can be built in a single
16V8, shown in Figure 9-7, if we choose an output-coded state assignment.
DO NOT COPYOnly the definitions in the original program of Table 9-9 must be changed, as
shown in Table 9-11. This PLD does not include the  OVERRIDE  input and
mode, which is left as an exercise (9.7).
Ta bl e 9 - 1 1  Definitions for Sunnyvale traffic-lights machine with output-coded
DO NOT COPY
state assignment.
module svaletlb
title 'Output-Coded State Machine for Sunnyvale Traffic Lights'
"SVALETLB device 'P16V8R';
DO NOT COPY
" Input and output pins
CLOCK, !OE  pin 1, 11;
NSCAR, EWCAR, TMSHORT, TMLONG  pin 2, 3, 8, 9;
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREEN  pin 19, 18, 17 istype 'reg';
DO NOT COPYEWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN  pin 16, 15, 14 istype 'reg';
TMRESET_L, XTRA  pin 13, 12 istype 'reg';
" Definitions
LSTATE  = [NSRED,NSYELLOW,NSGREEN,EWRED,EWYELLOW,EWGREEN,XTRA]; " State vars
NSGO  = [  0,  0,  1,  1,  0,  0,  0]; " States
DO NOT COPY
NSWAIT  = [  0,  1,  0,  1,  0,  0,  0];
NSWAIT2 = [  0,  1,  0,  1,  0,  0,  1];
NSDELAY = [  1,  0,  0,  1,  0,  0,  0];
EWGO  = [  1,  0,  0,  0,  0,  1,  0];
EWWAIT  = [  1,  0,  0,  0,  1,  0,  0];
DO NOT COPY
EWWAIT2 = [  1,  0,  0,  0,  1,  0,  1];
EWDELAY = [  1,  0,  0,  1,  0,  0,  1];
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  813
NSCAR
GAL16V8R
EWCAR
1 
CLOCK CLK
(1 Hz)DO NOT COPYtimer 2 I1  IO1 19 NSRED
3 18
I2 IO2 NSYELLOW
CLK 4 17
I3 IO3 NSGREEN
5 16
I4 IO4 EWRED
6 15
RESTART I5 IO5 EWYELLOW
7 14
DO NOT COPYI6 IO6 EWGREEN Fi g ur e 9 - 7
TMSHORT 8 13 Traffic-light state
SHORT I7 IO7
TMLONG 9 12 machine using
LONG I8 IO8 XTRA (N.C.)
11 output-coded state
OE
U1 assignment in a
TMRESET_L SVALETLB single PLD.
DO NOT COPY
9.2 Design Examples Using VHDL
As we explained Section 7.12, the basic VHDL language features that we intro-
DO NOT COPY
duced way back in Section 4.7, including processes, are just about all that is
needed to model sequential-circuit behavior. Unlike ABEL, VHDL does not
provide any special language elements for modeling state machines. Instead,
most programmers use a combination of existing “standard” features—most
notably enumerated types and case statements—to write state-machine descrip-
DO NOT COPY
tions. We’ll use this method in the examples in this section.
9.2.1 A Few Simple Machines
In Section 7.4.1 we illustrated the state-table design process using the
simple design problem below:
DO NOT COPY
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  A  and  B, and
a single output  Z  that is 1 if:
–  A  had the same value at each of the two previous clock ticks,  or
–  B  has been 1 since the last time that the first condition was true.
DO NOT COPY
Otherwise, the output should be 0.
In an HDL-based design environment, there are many possible ways of writing
a program that meets the stated requirements. We’ll look at several.
The first approach is to construct a state and output table by hand, and then
DO NOT COPY
manually convert it into a corresponding program. Since we already developed
such a state table in Section 7.4.1, why not use it? We’ve written it again in
Table 9-12, and we’ve written a corresponding VHDL program in Table 9-13.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

814  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
Ta bl e 9 - 1 2 A B
State and output table
S  00  01  11  10  Z
for the example state
DO NOT COPYmachine. INIT  A0  A0  A1  A1  0
A0  OK0  OK0  A1  A1  0
A1  A0  A0  OK1  OK1  0
OK0  OK0  OK0  OK1  A1  1
OK1  A0  OK0  OK1  OK1  1
DO NOT COPYS∗
T a b l e 9 - 1 3 library IEEE;
VHDL program for use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
state-machine
DO NOT COPYentity smexamp is
example.
port ( CLOCK, A, B: in STD_LOGIC;
Z: out STD_LOGIC );
end;
architecture smexamp_arch of smexamp is
DO NOT COPYtype Sreg_type is (INIT, A0, A1, OK0, OK1);
signal Sreg: Sreg_type;
begin
process (CLOCK) -- state-machine states and transitions
begin
DO NOT COPY
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
case Sreg is
when INIT => if  A='0' then Sreg <= A0;
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= A1;  end if;
when A0 =>  if  A='0' then Sreg <= OK0;
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= A1;  end if;
DO NOT COPY
when A1 =>  if  A='0' then Sreg <= A0;
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= OK1;  end if;
when OK0 =>  if  A='0' then Sreg <= OK0;
elsif A='1' and B='0' then Sreg <= A1;
elsif A='1' and B='1' then Sreg <= OK1;  end if;
DO NOT COPYwhen OK1 =>  if  A='0' and B='0' then Sreg <= A0;
elsif A='0' and B='1' then Sreg <= OK0;
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= OK1;  end if;
when others => Sreg <= INIT;
end case;
end if;
DO NOT COPY
end process;
with Sreg select  -- output values based on state
Z <= '0' when INIT | A0 | A1,
'1' when OK0 | OK1,
'0' when others;
DO NOT COPY
end smexamp_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  815
As usual, the VHDL entity declaration specifies only inputs and outputs—
CLOCK,  A,  B, and  Z  in this example. The architecture definition specifies the state
machine’s internal operation. The first thing it does is to create an enumerated
DO NOT COPY
type,  Sreg_type, whose values are identifiers corresponding to the state names.
Then it declares a signal,  Sreg, which will be used to hold the machine’s current
state. Because of the way  Sreg  is used later, it will map into an edge-triggered
register in synthesis.
The statement part of the architecture has two concurrent statements—a
DO NOT COPY
process and a selected-assignment statement. The process is sensitive only to
CLOCK  and establishes all of the state transitions, which occur on the rising edge
of  CLOCK. Within the process, an “if” statement checks for the rising edge, and
a  case  statement enumerates the transitions for each state.
DO NOT COPYThe  case  statement has six cases, corresponding to the five explicitly
defined states and a catch-all for other states. For robustness, the “others” case
sends the machine back to the  INIT  state. In each case we’ve used a nested “if”
statement to explicit cover all combinations of inputs  A  and  B. However, it’s not
strictly necessary to include the combinations where there is no transition from
the current state;DO NOT COPY  Sreg  will hold its current value if no assignment is made on a
particular process invocation.
The selected-assignment statement at the end of Table 9-13 handles the
machine’s single Moore output,  Z, which is set to a value as a function of the cur-
rent state. It would be easy to define Mealy outputs within this statement as well.
DO NOT COPY
That is, Z could be a function of the inputs as well as the current state. Since the
“with” statement is a concurrent state, any input changes will affect the  Z output
as soon as they occur.
We really should have included a reset input in Table 9-13 (see box on
page 808). A  RESET  signal is easily accommodated by modifying the entity
DO NOT COPY
declaration, and adding a clause to the “if” statement in the architecture defini-
tion. If  RESET  is asserted, the machine should go to the  INIT  state, otherwise the
case statement should be executed. Depending on whether we check  RESET
before or after the clock-edge check, we can create either an asynchronous or a
synchronous reset behavior (see Exercise 9.10).
DO NOT COPY
What about the state assignment problem? Table 9-13 gives no information
on how state-variable combinations are to be assigned to the named states, or
even how many binary state variables are needed in the first place!
A synthesis tool is free to associate any integer values or binary combina-
tions it likes with the identifiers in an enumerated type, but a typical tool willDO NOT COPY
assign integers in the order the state names are listed, starting with 0. It will then
use the smallest possible number of bits to encode those integers, that is,  log 2 s
bits for  s  states. Thus, the program in Table 9-13 will typically synthesize with
the same, “simplest” state assignment that we chose in the original example in
DO NOT COPY
Table 7-7 on page 571. However, VHDL supports a couple of ways that we can
force a different assignment.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

816  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
T a b l e 9 - 1 4 library IEEE;
Using an attribute to use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
force an enumeration library SYNOPSYS;
DO NOT COPYencoding. use SYNOPSYS.attributes.all;
...
architecture smexampe_arch of smexamp is
type Sreg_type is (INIT, A0, A1, OK0, OK1);
attribute enum_encoding of Sreg_type: type is
"0000 0001 0010 0100 1000";
DO NOT COPY
signal Sreg: Sreg_type;
...
One way to force an assignment is to use VHDL’s “attribute” statement
DO NOT COPYas shown in Table 9-14. Here, “enum_encoding” is a user-defined attribute
whose value is a string that specifies the enumeration encoding to be used by the
synthesis tool. The VHDL language processor ignores this value, but passes the
attribute  name  and  its  value  to  the  synthesis  tool.  The  attribute
“enum_encoding” is defined and known by most synthesis tools, including
DO NOT COPYtools from Synopsys, Inc. Notice that a Synopsys “attributes” package must
be “used” by the program; this is necessary for the VHDL compiler to recognize
“enum_encoding” as a legitimate user-defined attribute. By the way, the state
assignment that we’ve specified in the program is equivalent to the “almost one-
hot” coding in Table 7-7 on page 571.
DO NOT COPY
Another way to force an assignment, without relying on external packages
or synthesis attributes, is to define the state register more explicitly using stan-
dard logic data types. This approach is shown in Table 9-15. Here,  Sreg  is
defined as a 4-bit  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR, and constants are defined to allow the
states to referenced by name elsewhere in the program. No other changes in the
DO NOT COPY
program are required.
Going back to our original VHDL program in Table 9-13, one more
interesting change is possible. As written, the program defines a conventional
Moore-type state machine with the structure shown in Figure 9-8(a). What
DO NOT COPY
T a b l e 9 - 1 5 library IEEE;
Using standard logic use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
and constants to ...
specify a state architecture smexampc_arch of smexamp is
subtype Sreg_type is STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 4);
DO NOT COPYencoding.
constant INIT: Sreg_type := "0000";
constant A0  : Sreg_type := "0001";
constant A1  : Sreg_type := "0010";
constant OK0 : Sreg_type := "0100";
constant OK1 : Sreg_type := "1000";
DO NOT COPYsignal Sreg: Sreg_type;
...
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  817
happens if, we convert the output logic’s selected-assignment statement into a
case  statement and move it into the state-transition process? By doing this, we
create a machine that will most likely be synthesized with the structure shown in
DO NOT COPY
(b). This is essentially a Mealy machine with pipelined outputs whose behavior
is indistinguishable from that of the original machine, except for timing. We’ve
reduced the propagation delay from  CLOCK  to  Z  by producing  Z  directly on a
register output, but we’ve also increased the setup-time requirements of  A  and  B
to  CLOCK, because of the extra propagation delay through the output logic to the
DO NOT COPY
D  input of the output register.
Fi g ur e 9 - 8  State-machine structures implied by VHDL programs: (a) Moore
machine with combinational output logic; (b) pipelined Mealy
DO NOT COPYmachine with output register.
CLOCK
Next-state logic State register
case Sreg is
A, B when INIT => if  A='0' then Sreg <= A0; if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1'
DO NOT COPYSreg
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= A1; then ...
end if;
...
DO NOT COPY
Output logic
with Sreg select
Z <= '0' when INIT | A0 | A1,
Z
(a) '1' when OK0 | OK1,
'0' when others;
DO NOT COPY
CLOCK
Next-state logic State register
case Sreg is
DO NOT COPYA, B when INIT => if  A='0' then Sreg <= A0; if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1'
Sreg
elsif A='1' then Sreg <= A1; then ...
end if;
...
DO NOT COPY
Output logic Output register
case Sreg is
when INIT | A0 | A1 => Z <= '0'; if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1'
(b) when OK0 | OK1  => Z <= '1'; then ... Z
DO NOT COPYwhen others  => Z <= '0';
end case;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

818  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
TRICKY TIMING  When we write a VHDL architecture corresponding to Figure 9-8(b), it is very
important to add  Sreg  to the sensitivity list of the process. Notice that the output-
DO NOT COPY
logic  case  statement determines the value of  Z  as a function of  Sreg. Throughout
the first execution of the process after a rising clock edge,  Sreg  is contains the old
state value. This is true because  Sreg  is a signal, not a variable. As explained in
Section 4.7.9, signals that are changed in a process do not acquire their new values
until at least one delta delay  after  the process has executed. By putting  Sreg  in the
DO NOT COPY
sensitivity list, we ensure that the process is executed a second time, so the final
value of  Z  is based on the new value of  Sreg.
All of the solutions to the example state-machine design problem that
DO NOT COPY
we’ve shown so far rely on the state table that we originally constructed by hand
in Section 7.4.1. However, it is possible to write a VHDL program directly,
without writing out a state table by hand.
Based on the original problem statement on page 813, the key simplifying
idea is to remove the last value of A from the state definitions, and instead to have
DO NOT COPY
a separate register that keeps track of it (LASTA). Then only two non-INIT  states
T a b l e 9 - 1 6 architecture smexampa_arch of smexamp is
Simplified state type Sreg_type is (INIT, LOOKING, OK);
machine for VHDL signal Sreg: Sreg_type;
DO NOT COPY
example problem. signal lastA: STD_LOGIC;
begin
process (CLOCK) -- state-machine states and transitions
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
DO NOT COPY
lastA <= A;
case Sreg is
when INIT  =>  Sreg <= LOOKING;
when LOOKING => if  A=lastA then Sreg <= OK;
else  Sreg <= LOOKING;
end if;
DO NOT COPY
when OK  => if  B='1'  then Sreg <= OK;
elsif A=lastA then Sreg <= OK;
else  Sreg <= LOOKING;
end if;
when others  =>  Sreg <= INIT;
DO NOT COPYend case;
end if;
end process;
with Sreg select  -- output values based on state
Z <= '1' when OK,
'0' when others;
DO NOT COPY
end smexampa_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  819
must be defined:  LOOKING (“still looking for a match”) and  OK (“got a match or  B
has been 1 since last match”). A VHDL architecture based on this approach is
shown in Table 9-16. In the CLOCK-driven process, the first assignment statement
DO NOT COPY
creates the  LASTA  register, and the  case  statement creates the 3-state machine.
At the end of the program, the  Z  output is defined as a simple combinational
decode of the  OK  state.
Another simple state-machine example is a “1s-counting machine” with
the following specification:
DO NOT COPY
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with two inputs,  X  and  Y, and
one output,  Z. The output should be 1 if the number of 1 inputs on  X  and  Y
since reset is a multiple of 4, and 0 otherwise.
We developed a state table for this machine in Table 7-12 on page 580. However,DO NOT COPY
we can make use of the counting capabilities in the IEEE  std_logic_arith
package to write a VHDL program for this problem directly.
Table 9-17 shows our solution. As always, there are many different ways to
solve the problem, and we have picked a way that illustrates several different
language features. Within the architecture, we declare a subtypeDO NOT COPY  COUNTER  which
is a 2-bit  UNSIGNED value. We then declare a signal COUNT  of this type to hold the
ones count, and a constant  ZERO  of the same type for initializing and checking
the value of  COUNT.
DO NOT COPYT a b l e 9 - 1 7
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; VHDL program for
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all; a ones-counting
machine.
entity Vonescnt is
port ( CLOCK, RESET, X, Y: in STD_LOGIC;
DO NOT COPYZ: out STD_LOGIC );
end;
architecture Vonescnt_arch of Vonescnt is
subtype COUNTER is UNSIGNED (1 downto 0);
signal COUNT: COUNTER;
constant ZERO: COUNTER := "00";DO NOT COPY
begin
process (CLOCK)
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
DO NOT COPYif RESET = '1' then COUNT <= ZERO;
else COUNT <= COUNT + ('0', X) + ('0', X);
end if;
end if;
end process;
Z <= '1' when COUNT = ZERO else '0';
DO NOT COPY
end Vonescnt_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

820  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
T a b l e 9 - 1 8 process (CLOCK)
Alternative VHDL variable ONES: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 2);
process for ones- begin
counting machine.DO NOT COPY
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
ONES := (X, Y);
if RESET = '1' then COUNT <= ZERO;
else case ONES is
when "01" | "10" => COUNT <= COUNT + "01";
DO NOT COPY
when "11"  => COUNT <= COUNT + "10";
when others  => null;
end case;
end if;
end if;
DO NOT COPYend process;
Within the process, we use the usual method to check for a rising edge on
CLOCK. The “if” clause performs a synchronous reset when required, and the
DO NOT COPY“else” clause elegantly adds 0, 1 or 2 to  COUNT  depending on the values of  X
and  Y. Recall that an expression such as “('0',  X)” is an array literal; here we
get an array of two  STD_LOGIC  elements,  '0'  and the current value of  X. The
type of this literal is compatible with  UNSIGNED, since the number and type of
elements are the same, so they can be combined using the “+” operation defined
DO NOT COPYin the  std_logic_arith  package. Outside the process, the concurrent signal-
assignment statement sets the Moore output  Z  to 1 when  COUNT  is zero.
For synthesis purposes, the “if” statement and assignment to  COUNT  in
Table 9-17 doesn’t necessarily yield a compact or speedy circuit. With a simple-
minded synthesis tool, it could yield two 2-bit adders connected in series.
DO NOT COPY
Another approach is shown in Table 9-18. An intelligent tool may be able to
synthesize a more compact incrementer for each of the two additions. In any
case, formulating the choices in a case statement allows the two adders or
incrementers to operate in parallel, and a multiplexer can be used to select one of
their outputs according to the choices.
DO NOT COPY
A final example for this subsection is the combination-lock state machine
from Section 7.4 (below we omit the  HINT  output in the original specification):
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with one input,  X, and one
output,  UNLK. The  UNLK  output should be 1 if and only if X is 0 and the
DO NOT COPY
sequence of inputs received on X at the preceding seven clock ticks was
0110111.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  821
library IEEE; T a b l e 9 - 1 9
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all; VHDL program for
finite-memory design
DO NOT COPYof combination-lock
entity Vcomblck is
port ( CLOCK, RESET, X: in STD_LOGIC; state machine.
UNLK: out STD_LOGIC );
end;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vcomblck_arch of Vcomblck is
signal XHISTORY: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 1);
constant COMBINATION: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 1) := "0110111";
begin
process (CLOCK)DO NOT COPY
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
if RESET = '1' then XHISTORY <= "0000000";
else XHISTORY <= XHISTORY(6 downto 1) & X;
DO NOT COPYend if;
end if;
end process;
UNLK <= '1' when (XHISTORY=COMBINATION) and (X='0') else '0';
DO NOT COPY
end Vcomblck_arch;
We developed a state table for this machine in Table 7-14 on page 582. But once
again we can take a different approach that is easier to understand. Here, we note
DO NOT COPY
that the output of the machine at any time is completely determined by its inputs
over the preceding eight clock ticks. Thus, we can use the so-called “finite-
memory” approach to design this machine (see box on page 801). With this
approach, we explicitly keep track of the past seven inputs and then form the
output as a combinational function of these inputs.DO NOT COPY
The VHDL program in Table 9-19 is a finite-memory design. Within the
architecture, the process merely keeps track of the last seven values of  X  using
what’s essentially a shift register, bit 7 being the oldest value of  X. (Recall that
the “&” operator in VHDL is array concatenation.) Outside of the process, the
concurrent signal-assignment statement sets the Mealy outputDO NOT COPY  UNLK  to 1 when  X
is 0 and the 7-bit history matches the combination.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

822  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
9.2.2 T-Bird Tail Lights
We described and designed a “T-bird tail-lights” state machine in Section 7.5.
Table 9-20 is an equivalent VHDL program for the T-bird tail-lights machine.
DO NOT COPY
The state transitions in this machine are defined exactly the same as in the state
diagram of Figure 7-64 on page 589. The machine uses an output-coded state
assignment, taking advantage of the fact that the tail-light output values are
different in each state.
DO NOT COPY
T a b le 9 - 2 0 VHDL program for the T-bird tail-lights machine.
entity Vtbird is
port ( CLOCK, RESET, LEFT, RIGHT, HAZ: in STD_LOGIC;
LIGHTS: buffer STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) );
DO NOT COPYend;
architecture Vtbird_arch of Vtbird is
constant IDLE: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "000000";
constant L3  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "111000";
constant L2  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "110000";
DO NOT COPY
constant L1  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "100000";
constant R1  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "000001";
constant R2  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "000011";
constant R3  : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "000111";
constant LR3 : STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 6) := "111111";
DO NOT COPYbegin
process (CLOCK)
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
if RESET = '1' then LIGHTS <= IDLE; else
case LIGHTS is
DO NOT COPY
when IDLE => if HAZ='1' or (LEFT='1' and RIGHT='1') then LIGHTS <= LR3;
elsif LEFT='1'  then LIGHTS <= L1;
elsif RIGHT='1'  then LIGHTS <= R1;
else  LIGHTS <= IDLE;
end if;
when L1  => if HAZ='1' then LIGHTS <= LR3; else LIGHTS <= L2; end if;
DO NOT COPY
when L2  => if HAZ='1' then LIGHTS <= LR3; else LIGHTS <= L3; end if;
when L3  => LIGHTS <= IDLE;
when R1  => if HAZ='1' then LIGHTS <= LR3; else LIGHTS <= R2; end if;
when R2  => if HAZ='1' then LIGHTS <= LR3; else LIGHTS <= R3; end if;
when R3  => LIGHTS <= IDLE;
DO NOT COPYwhen LR3  => LIGHTS <= IDLE;
when others => null;
end case;
end if;
end if;
end process;
DO NOT COPY
end Vtbird_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  823
IDLE MUSINGS  In VHDL state machines, it’s not necessary to make an explicit assignment of a next
state if it’s the same state that the machine is already in. In the execution of a process,
DO NOT COPY
a VHDL signal keeps its value if no assignment is made to it. Thus, in Table 9-20,
the final “else” clause could be omitted in the  IDLE  state, with no effect on the
machine’s behavior.
Separately, the robustness of the state machine in Table 9-20 could be
improved by replacing the “null” statement in the “when  others” case with a
DO NOT COPY
transition to the  IDLE  state.
9.2.3 The Guessing GameDO NOT COPY
A “guessing game” machine was defined in Section 7.7.1 starting on page 594,
with the following description:
Design a clocked synchronous state machine with four inputs,  G1–G4, that
are connected to pushbuttons. The machine has four outputs,  L1–L4,
DO NOT COPY
connected to lamps or LEDs located near the like-numbered pushbuttons.
There is also an  ERR  output connected to a red lamp. In normal operation,
the  L1–L4  outputs display a 1-out-of-4 pattern. At each clock tick, the
pattern is rotated by one position; the clock frequency is about 4 Hz.
DO NOT COPYGuesses are made by pressing a pushbutton, which asserts an input  Gi.
When any  Gi  input is asserted, the  ERR  output is asserted if the “wrong”
pushbutton was pressed, that is, if the  Gi  input detected at the clock tick
does not have the same number as the lamp output that was asserted before
the clock tick. Once a guess has been made, play stops and the  ERR  output
DO NOT COPYmaintains the same value for one or more clock ticks until the  Gi  input is
negated, then play resumes.
As we discussed in Section 7.7.1, the machine requires six states—four in which
a corresponding lamp is on, and two for when play is stopped after either a good
or a bad pushbutton push. A VHDL program for the guessing game is shown inDO NOT COPY
Table 9-21. This version also includes a  RESET  input that forces the game to a
known starting state.
The program is pretty much a straightforward translation of the original
state diagram in Figure 7-66 on page 597. Perhaps its only noteworthy feature is
DO NOT COPY
in the “SOK  |  SERR” case. Since the next-state transitions for these two states are
identical (either go to  S1  or stay in the current state), they can be handled in one
case. However, this tricky style of saving typing isn’t particularly desirable from
the point of view of state-machine documentation or maintainability. In the
author’s case, the trick’s primary benefit was to help fit the program on one book
DO NOT COPY
page!
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

824  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
T a b le 9 - 2 1 VHDL program for the guessing-game machine.
library IEEE;
DO NOT COPYuse IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vggame is
port ( CLOCK, RESET, G1, G2, G3, G4: in  STD_LOGIC;
L1, L2, L3, L4, ERR:  out STD_LOGIC );
end;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vggame_arch of Vggame is
type Sreg_type is (S1, S2, S3, S4, SOK, SERR);
signal Sreg: Sreg_type;
begin
DO NOT COPYprocess (CLOCK)
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' then
if RESET = '1' then Sreg <= SOK; else
case Sreg is
when S1 => if  G2='1' or G3='1' or G4='1' then Sreg <= SERR;
DO NOT COPY
elsif G1='1'  then Sreg <= SOK;
else  Sreg <= S2;
end if;
when S2 => if  G1='1' or G3='1' or G4='1' then Sreg <= SERR;
elsif G1='1'  then Sreg <= SOK;
else  Sreg <= S3;
DO NOT COPY
end if;
when S3 => if  G1='1' or G2='1' or G4='1' then Sreg <= SERR;
elsif G1='1'  then Sreg <= SOK;
else  Sreg <= S4;
end if;
DO NOT COPYwhen S4 => if  G1='1' or G2='1' or G3='1' then Sreg <= SERR;
elsif G1='1'  then Sreg <= SOK;
else  Sreg <= S1;
end if;
when SOK | SERR => if G1='0' and G2='0' and G3='0' and G4='0'
then Sreg <= S1; end if;
DO NOT COPY
when others => Sreg <= S1;
end case;
end if;
end if;
end process;
DO NOT COPY
L1  <= '1' when Sreg = S1  else '0';
L2  <= '1' when Sreg = S2  else '0';
L3  <= '1' when Sreg = S3  else '0';
L4  <= '1' when Sreg = S4  else '0';
ERR <= '1' when Sreg = SERR else '0';
DO NOT COPY
end Vggame_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  825
The program in Table 9-21 does not specify a state assignment; a typical
synthesis engine will use three bits for  Sreg  and assign the six states in order to
binary combinations 000–101. For this state machine, it is also possible to use an
DO NOT COPY
output coded state assignment, using just the lamp and error output signals that
are already required. VHDL does not provide a convenient mechanism for
grouping together the entity’s existing output signals and using them for state,
but we can still achieve the desired effect with the changes shown in Table 9-22.
Here we used a comment to document the correspondence between outputs and
DO NOT COPY
the bits of the new, 5-bit  Sreg, and we changed each of the output assignment
statements to pick off the appropriate bit instead of fully decoding the state.
architecture Vggameoc_arch of Vggame is T a b l e 9 - 2 2
DO NOT COPYVHDL architecture
signal Sreg: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5);
-- bit positions of output-coded assignment: L1, L2, L3, L4, ERR for guessing game
constant S1:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "10000"; using output-coded
constant S2:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "01000"; state assignment.
constant S3:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "00100";
DO NOT COPY
constant S4:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "00010";
constant SERR: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "00001";
constant SOK:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 5) := "00000";
begin
process (CLOCK)DO NOT COPY
...  (no change to process)
end process;
L1  <= Sreg(1);
L2DO NOT COPY  <= Sreg(2);
L3  <= Sreg(3);
L4  <= Sreg(4);
ERR <= Sreg(5);
end Vggameoc_arch;DO NOT COPY
9.2.4 Reinventing Traffic-Light Controllers
If you read the ABEL example in Section 9.1.5, then you’ve already heard me
rant about the horrible traffic light controllers in Sunnyvale, California. TheyDO NOT COPY
really  do  seem to be carefully designed to  maximize  the waiting time of cars at
intersections. In this section we’ll design a traffic-light controller with distinctly
Sunnyvale-like behavior.
An infrequently used intersection (one that would have no more than a
“yield” sign if it were in Chicago) has the sensors and signals shown inDO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

826  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
Ta bl e 9 - 2 3  VHDL program for Sunnyvale traffic-light controller.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;DO NOT COPY
entity Vsvale is
port ( CLOCK, RESET, NSCAR, EWCAR, TMSHORT, TMLONG: in  STD_LOGIC;
OVERRIDE, FLASHCLK:  in  STD_LOGIC;
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREEN:  out STD_LOGIC;
DO NOT COPYEWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN, TMRESET:  out STD_LOGIC );
end;
architecture Vsvale_arch of Vsvale is
type Sreg_type is (NSGO, NSWAIT, NSWAIT2, NSDELAY,
EWGO, EWWAIT, EWWAIT2, EWDELAY);
DO NOT COPY
signal Sreg: Sreg_type;
begin
process (CLOCK)
begin
if CLOCK'event and CLOCK = '1' thenDO NOT COPY
if RESET = '1' then Sreg <= NSDELAY; else
case Sreg is
when NSGO =>  -- North-south green.
if  TMSHORT='0' then Sreg <= NSGO;  -- Minimum 5 seconds.
elsif TMLONG='1'  then Sreg <= NSWAIT;  -- Maximum 5 minutes.
DO NOT COPYelsif EWCAR='1' and NSCAR='0' then Sreg <= NSGO;  -- Make EW car wait.
elsif EWCAR='1' and NSCAR='1' then Sreg <= NSWAIT; -- Thrash if cars both ways.
elsif EWCAR='0' and NSCAR='1' then Sreg <= NSWAIT; -- New NS car? Make it stop!
else  Sreg <= NSGO;  -- No one coming, no change.
end if;
when NSWAIT  => Sreg <= NSWAIT2;  -- Yellow light,
DO NOT COPY
when NSWAIT2 => Sreg <= NSDELAY;  --  two ticks for safety.
when NSDELAY => Sreg <= EWGO;  -- Red both ways for safety.
when EWGO =>  -- East-west green.
if  TMSHORT='0' then Sreg <= EWGO;  -- Same behavior as above.
elsif TMLONG='1'  then Sreg <= EWWAIT;
DO NOT COPYelsif NSCAR='1' and EWCAR='0' then Sreg <= EWGO;
elsif NSCAR='1' and EWCAR='1' then Sreg <= EWWAIT;
elsif NSCAR='0' and EWCAR='1' then Sreg <= EWWAIT;
else  Sreg <= EWGO;
end if;
when EWWAIT  => Sreg <= EWWAIT2;
DO NOT COPY
when EWWAIT2 => Sreg <= EWDELAY;
when EWDELAY => Sreg <= NSGO;
when others  => Sreg <= NSDELAY;  -- "Reset" state.
end case;
end if;
end if;
DO NOT COPY
end process;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 9.2  Design Examples Using VHDL  827
Figure 9-5 on page 809. The state machine that controls the traffic signals uses a
1 Hz clock and a timer and has four inputs:
DO NOT COPYNSCAR  Asserted when a car on the north-south road is over either sensor
on either side of the intersection.
EWCAR  Asserted when a car on the east-west road is over either sensor on
either side of the intersection.
TMLONG  Asserted if more than five minutes has elapsed since the timer
DO NOT COPY
started; remains asserted until the timer is reset.
TMSHORT  Asserted if more than five seconds has elapsed since the timer
started; remains asserted until the timer is reset.
The state machine has seven outputs:
DO NOT COPY
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREEN  Control the north-south lights.
EWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN  Control the east-west lights.
TMRESET  When  asserted, resets  the  timer  and  negates  TMSHORT  and
TMLONG. The timer starts timing when  TMRESET  is negated.
DO NOT COPY
A typical, municipally approved algorithm for controlling the traffic lights
is embedded in the VHDL program of Table 9-23. This algorithm produces two
frequently seen behaviors of “smart” traffic lights. At night, when traffic is light,
it holds a car stopped at the light for up to five minutes, unless a car approaches
DO NOT COPY
on the cross street, in which case it stops the cross traffic and lets the waiting car
go. (The “early warning” sensor is far enough back to change the lights before
the approaching car reaches the intersection.) During the day, when traffic is
heavy and there are always cars waiting in both directions, it cycles the lights
every five seconds, thus minimizing the utilization of the intersection and
DO NOT COPY
maximizing everyone’s waiting time, thereby creating a public outcry for more
taxes to fix the problem.
Ta b l e 9 - 2 3  (continued) VHDL program for Sunnyvale traffic-light controller.
DO NOT COPY
TMRESET  <= '1' when Sreg=NSWAIT2 or Sreg=EWWAIT2 else '0';
NSRED  <= FLASHCLK when OVERRIDE='1' else
'1' when Sreg/=NSGO and Sreg/=NSWAIT and Sreg/=NSWAIT2 else '0';
NSYELLOW <= '0' when OVERRIDE='1' else
'1' when Sreg=NSWAIT or Sreg=NSWAIT2 else '0';
NSGREENDO NOT COPY  <= '0' when OVERRIDE='1' else '1' when Sreg=NSGO else '0';
EWRED  <= FLASHCLK when OVERRIDE='1' else
'1' when Sreg/=EWGO and Sreg/=EWWAIT and Sreg/=EWWAIT2 else '0';
EWYELLOW <= '0' when OVERRIDE='1' else
'1' when Sreg=EWWAIT or Sreg=EWWAIT2 else '0';
EWGREEN  <= '0' when OVERRIDE='1' else '1' when Sreg=EWGO else '0';
DO NOT COPY
end Vsvale_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

828  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
While writing the program, we took the opportunity to add two inputs that
weren’t in the original specification. The  OVERRIDE  input may be asserted by
the police to disable the controller and put the signals into a flashing-red mode at
DO NOT COPY
a rate determined by the  FLASHCLK  input. This allows them to manually clear
up the traffic snarls created by this wonderful invention.
T a b le 9 - 2 4  Definitions for Sunnyvale traffic-lights machine with output-coded
DO NOT COPYstate assignment.
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
entity Vsvale is
DO NOT COPYport ( CLOCK, RESET, NSCAR, EWCAR, TMSHORT, TMLONG: in  STD_LOGIC;
OVERRIDE, FLASHCLK:  in  STD_LOGIC;
NSRED, NSYELLOW, NSGREEN:  out STD_LOGIC;
EWRED, EWYELLOW, EWGREEN, TMRESET:  out STD_LOGIC );
end;
DO NOT COPY
architecture Vsvaleoc_arch of Vsvale is
signal Sreg: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7);
-- bit positions of output-coded assignment:  (1) NSRED, (2) NSYELLOW, (3) NSGREEN,
--  (4) EWRED, (5) EWYELLOW, (6) EWGREEN, (7) EXTRA
constant NSGO:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "0011000";
DO NOT COPY
constant NSWAIT:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "0101000";
constant NSWAIT2: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "0101001";
constant NSDELAY: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "1001000";
constant EWGO:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "1000010";
constant EWWAIT:  STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "1000100";
DO NOT COPYconstant EWWAIT2: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "1000101";
constant EWDELAY: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (1 to 7) := "1001001";
begin
DO NOT COPYprocess (CLOCK)
...  (no change to process)
end process;
TMRESET  <= '1' when Sreg=NSWAIT2 or Sreg=EWWAIT2 else '0';
NSRED  <= Sreg(1);
DO NOT COPY
NSYELLOW <= Sreg(2);
NSGREEN  <= Sreg(3);
EWRED  <= Sreg(4);
EWYELLOW <= Sreg(5);
EWGREEN  <= Sreg(6);
DO NOT COPY
end Vsvaleoc_arch;
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Exercises  829
Like most of our other examples, Table 9-23 does not give a specific state
assignment. And like many of our other examples, this state machine works well
with an output-coded state assignment. Many of the states can be identified by a
DO NOT COPY
unique combination of light-output values. But there are three pairs of states that
are not distinguishable by looking at the lights alone: (NSWAIT,  NSWAIT2),
(EWWAIT,  EWWAIT2), and (NSDELAY,  EQDELAY). We can handle these by adding
one more state variable, “EXTRA”, that has different values for the two states in
each pair. This idea is realized in the modified program in Table 9-24.
DO NOT COPY
Exercises
9.1  Write an ABEL program for the state machine described in Exercise 7.30.
9.2  Modify the ABEL program of Table 9-2 to include the  HINT  output from the
DO NOT COPY
original state-machine specification in Section 7.4.
9.3  Redesign the T-bird tail-lights machine of Section 9.1.3 to include parking-light
and brake-light functions. When the  BRAKE  input is asserted, all of the lights
should go on immediately, and stay on until  BRAKE  is negated, independent of
any other function. When the  PARK  input is asserted, each lamp is turned on at
DO NOT COPY
50% brightness at all times when it would otherwise be off. This is achieved by
driving the lamp with a 100 Hz signal  DIMCLK  with a 50% duty cycle. Draw a
logic diagram for the circuit using one or two PLDs, write an ABEL program for
each PLD, and write a short description of how your system works.
9.4  Find a 3-bit state assignment for the guessing-game machine in Table 9-5 that
DO NOT COPY
reduces the maximum number of product terms per output to 7. Can you do even
better?
9.5  The operation of the guessing game in Section 9.1.4 is very predictable; it’s easy
for a player to learn the rate at which the lights change and always hit the button
at the right time. The game is more fun if the rate of change is more variable.
DO NOT COPY
Modify the ABEL state machine in Table 9-5 so that in states S1–S4, the machine
advances  occurs only if a new input,  SEN, is asserted. (SEN  is intended to be
hooked up to a pseudo-random bit-stream generator.) Both correct and incorrect
button pushs should be recognized whether or not  SEN  is asserted.  Determine
whether your modified design still fits in a 16V8.
DO NOT COPY
9.6  In connection with the preceding exercise, write an ABEL program for an 8-bit
LFSR using a single 16V8, such that one of its outputs can be used as a pseudo-
random bit-stream generator. After how many clock ticks does the bit sequence
repeat? What is the maximum number of 0s that occur in a row? of 1s?
9.7  Add an  OVERRIDE  input to the traffic-lights state machine of Figure 9-7, still
DO NOT COPY
using just a single 16V8. When OVERRIDE is asserted, the red lights should flash
on and off, changing once per second. Write a complete ABEL program for your
machine.
9.8  Modify the behavior of the ABEL traffic-light-controller machine in Table 9-9 to
have more reasonable behavior, the kind you’d like to see for traffic lights in your
DO NOT COPY
own home town.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

830  Chapter 9  Sequential-Circuit Design Examples
9.9  Write a VHDL program for the state machine described in Exercise 7.30.
9.10  Show how to modify Table 9-13 to provide an asynchronous  RESET  input that
forces the state machine to the  INIT  state. Repeat for a synchronous version that
DO NOT COPY
forces the state machine to the  INIT  state if  RESET  is asserted on the rising clock
edge.
9.11  Write and test a VHDL program corresponding to Figure 9-8(b). Using an avail-
able synthesis tool, determine whether the circuit resulting from this version
differs from the one resulting from Figure 9-8(a), and how.
DO NOT COPY
9.12  Write a VHDL program for the ones-counting state machine as described by the
state table in Table 7-12.
9.13  Write a VHDL program for the combination-lock state machine as described by
the state table in Table 7-14.
9.14  Modify the VHDL program of Table 9-19 to include the  HINT  output from the
DO NOT COPY
original state-machine specification in Section 7.4.
9.15  Repeat Exercise 9.3 using VHDL, assuming you are targeting your design to a
single CPLD or FPGA.
9.16  Modify the VHDL guessing-game program of Table 9-21 according to the idea in
DO NOT COPYExercise 9.5. Add another process to the program to provide a pseudo-random bit
stream generator according to Exercise 9.6.
9.17  Modify the behavior of the VHDL traffic-light-controller machine in Table 9-23
to have more reasonable behavior, the kind you’d like to see for traffic lights in
your own home town.
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

850  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
*10.3.5 Synchronous SRAM
synchronous SRAM A new variety of SRAM, called a  synchronous SRAM (SSRAM)  (“S-S-ram”),
(SSRAM) still uses latches internally but has a clocked interface for control, address, and
DO NOT COPY
data. As shown in Figure 10-26, internal edge-triggered registers  AREG  and
CREG  are placed on the signal paths for address and control. As a result, an
operation that is set up before the rising edge of the clock is performed internally
during a subsequent clock period. Register  INREG  captures the input data for
write operations, and depending on whether the device has “pipelined” or “flow-
DO NOT COPY
through” outputs, register  OUTREG  is or is not provided to hold the output data
from a read operation.
late-write SSRAM with The first variety of SSRAM to be introduced was the  late-write SSRAM
flow-through outputs with flow-through outputs. For a read operation, shown in Figure 10-27(a), the
DO NOT COPYcontrol and address inputs are sampled at the rising edge of the clock, and the
AREG SRAM array
Fig ure 10 -2 6
Internal structure of a
ADDR ADDRESS
synchronous SRAM.
DO NOT COPY
ADS_L CE
CLK
CREG  control logic
CS
DO NOT COPY
CS
GW_L
WE
DO NOT COPY
INREG
DIO DIN  DOUT
DO NOT COPY
OUTREG
OE
DO NOT COPY
only in devices with pipelined outputs
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.3  Static RAM  851
internal address register  AREG  is loaded only if  ADS_L  is asserted. During the
next clock period, the internal SRAM array is accessed and read data is delivered
to the device’s  DIO  data-bus pins. The device also supports a burst mode, in
DO NOT COPY
which data at sequence of addresses is read. In this mode,  AREG  behaves as a
counter, eliminating the need to apply a new address at each cycle. (The control
signals that support burst mode are not shown in Figures 10-26 or 10-27.)
For a write operation, shown in (b), the write data is stored temporarily in
an on-chip register  INREG, which is sampled one clock tick  after  the address
DO NOT COPY
register is loaded. Therefore,  ADS_L  must be inhibited for at least one tick after
loading the address, so that the address in  AREG  is still valid when the write
takes place. The write takes place during the clock period following the edge on
which the “global write” control signal  GW_L  is asserted. As with reading, the
device has a burst mode where a sequence of addresses can be written withoutDO NOT COPY
supplying a new address.
Note that the “late-write” protocol makes it impossible to write to two dif-
ferent, nonsequential addresses in successive clock periods; the SRAM array is
idle for one clock period between writes (except in burst mode). From the point
of view of internal chip capabilities, this behavior is not necessary. However, theDO NOT COPY
late-write protocol was designed this way to match the bus protocols of micro-
processors that use these SSRAMs in their cache subsystems.
A  late-write SSRAM with pipelined outputs  is like the previous version, late-write SSRAM with
except that a register  OUTREG  is placed between the SRAM array output and pipelined outputs
DO NOT COPY
the device output for read operations. As shown in Figure 10-28, this delays the
read output data at the device pins until the beginning of the next clock period,
Fig ure 10 -2 7  Timing behavior for a late-write SSRAM with flow-through out-
puts: (a) read operations; (b) write operations.
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)
CLK CLK
CS, ADDR X  Y  Z CS, ADDR X  Y  Z
ADS_L X  Y  Z ADS_L X  Y  Z
DO NOT COPY
AREG, AREG,
X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3 Z X  Y  Y+1  Y+2 Y+3  Z
CREG  CREG 
SRAM array
idle X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3 Z GW_L  X  Y +1Y  +2Y +3Y Z
(reading)
DIO (out) X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3 Z DIO (in)  X  Y  +1Y +2Y +3Y Z
DO NOT COPY
Note: GW_L is HIGH throughout INREG  X  Y Y+1 Y+2 Y+3 Z
SRAM array
idle  idle X  idle Y  Y+1 Y+2  Y+3 idle  Z
(writing)
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

852  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
CLK
CS, ADDR X  Y  Z
DO NOT COPY
ADS_L X  Y  Z
AREG,
X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3 Z
CREG 
DO NOT COPYSRAM array
idle X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3 Z idle
Fig ure 10 -2 8 (reading)
Read-timing behavior
OUTREG X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3  Z
for a late-write
SSRAM with
DIO (out) X  Y  Y+1  Y+2  Y+3  Z
pipelined outputs.
DO NOT COPY
but it also provides the benefit that the data is now valid for almost the entire
clock period. The write cycle behaves the same as with flow-through outputs.
Compared to flow-through outputs, pipelined outputs provide much better setup
DO NOT COPYtime for the device received the read data, and thus may allow operation at higher
clock frequencies.
As we showed in Figure 10-26, conventional SSRAMs share the same pins
for both input data and output data. During a given clock period, the data I/O
pins can be used for reading or writing but not both. If you study the pattern of
DO NOT COPY
data-bus and SRAM-array use in both styles of late-write SSRAM, you’ll find
cases where it’s not possible to initiate a read one clock cycle after initiating a
write or vice versa, due to resource conflict (see Exercise 10.32). Thus, late-
turn-around penalty write SSRAMs suffer a  turn-around penalty, a clock period in which the internal
SRAM array must be idle when a read is followed by a write or vice versa.
DO NOT COPY
zero-bus-turn-around The turn-around penalty is eliminated in so called  zero-bus-turn-around
(ZBT) SSRAM (ZBT) SSRAMs. The timing for a  ZBT SSRAM with flow-through outputs  is
shown in Figure 10-29. The type of operation (read or write) is selected by a
control signal  R/W  that sampled at the same clock edge as the address. Regard-
less of whether the operation is a read or a write, the  DIO  bus is used during the
DO NOT COPY
next clock period to transfer the read or write data. As a result, there is no data-
bus-usage conflict, as long as  OE  is controlled properly to avoid bus-fighting
between successive cycles. However, if a write is followed by a read, both oper-
ations would like to use the SRAM array during the same clock period. To avoid
DO NOT COPYthis resource conflict, the write operation is deferred until the next available
SRAM-cycle. This opportunity occurs when either another write operation or no
operation is initiated on the address and control lines.
Although a ZBT SSRAM can use access the internal SRAM array on every
clock cycle, this performance improvement is not without a price. While a write
DO NOT COPYoperation is pending, the write address and related information must be stored in
another register,  WAREG, since  AREG  is reused by other operations; this costs
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.3  Static RAM  853
CLK
CS, ADDRDO NOT COPYR1  W1 R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
ADS_L R1  W1  R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
AREG,
R1  W1 R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5 R6  R7  R7
CREG 
DO NOT COPY
R/W R1  W1  R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
DIO (in) W1  W2  W3  W4
INREG,
W1  W2  W3  W4
DO NOT COPYWAREG
SRAM array R1  R2  W1  R3  R4  W2  W3  R5  R6  R7 W4
DIO (out)  R1  R2  R3  R4  R5  R6  R7
DO NOT COPY
Fig ure 10 -2 9  Timing behavior for a ZBT SSRAM with flow-through outputs.
chip area. More significantly for some applications, a write operation may be
deferred indefinitely if it is immediately followed by a continuous series of read
operations. This anomaly may require tricky controller design to detect the case
where one of these read operations attempts to access the address that was justDO NOT COPY
written, since the value stored in the SRAM array is “stale”!
A  ZBT SSRAM with pipelined outputs  adds  OUTREG  to the read data path
but is otherwise similar to the previous device. In this device, both reads and
writes use the  DIO  bus during the second clock period following the clock edge
DO NOT COPY
in which the operation was initiated. As in the previous device, writes to the
internal SRAM array are deferred until an available cycle, so that reads can take
precedence. Timing is shown in Figure 10-30. As implied by the timing, two
levels of internal registers are needed for write address and data, since up to two
writes may be deferred while a sequence of reads occurs.
DO NOT COPY
Synchronous SRAM access protocols are very beneficial in high-speed
systems. For example, address, control, and write inputs can be applied with
more-or-less conventional setup and hold times with respect to the system clock,
and read data on pipelined output pins is available for almost a complete clock
cycle. Very importantly, the designer does not have to worry about the trickyDO NOT COPY
circuits and timing paths that are otherwise needed to enable conventional
SRAM latch-style operation.
SSRAMs were available in 1999 with clock frequencies as high as 166
MHz. Note that among the four styles of SSRAM that we described, no single
one is the “best.” The best SSRAM is the one that best fits the bus protocol andDO NOT COPY
other requirements of the system in which it is used.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

854  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
CLK
CS, ADDR R1  W1 R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
DO NOT COPY
ADS_L R1  W1  R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
AREG,
R1  W1 R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5 R6  R7  R7
CREG 
DO NOT COPY
R/W R1  W1  R2  W2  R3  R4  W3  W4  R5  R6  R7  R8
DIO (in) W1  W2  W3  W4
INREG1,
W1  W2  W3  W4
DO NOT COPYWAREG1 
INREG2,
W1  W2  W3
WAREG2 
SRAM array R1  R2  R3  R4  W1  W2  R5  R6  R7 W3
DO NOT COPYOUTREG  R1  R2  R3  R4  R5  R6  R7
DIO (out)  R1  R2  R3  R4  R5  R6  R7
Fig ure 10 -3 0  Timing behavior for a ZBT SSRAM with pipelined outputs.
DO NOT COPY
10.4 Dynamic RAM
The basic memory cell in an SRAM, a D  latch, requires four gates in a discrete
design, and four to six transistors in a custom-designed SRAM LSI chip. In
DO NOT COPY
order to build RAMs with higher density (more bits per chip), chip designers
invented memory cells that use as little as one transistor per bit.
10.4.1 Dynamic-RAM Structure
It is not possible to build a bistable element with just one transistor. Instead, the
DO NOT COPY
dynamic RAM (DRAM) memory cells in a  dynamic RAM (DRAM)  store information on a tiny capacitor
accessed through a MOS transistor. Figure 10-31 shows the storage cell for one
bit of a DRAM, which is accessed by setting the word line to a  HIGH  voltage. To
store a 1, a  HIGH  voltage is placed on the bit line, which charges the capacitor
DO NOT COPYthrough the “on” transistor. To store a 0,  LOW  voltage on the bit line discharges
the capacitor.
precharge To read a DRAM cell, the bit line is first  precharged  to a voltage halfway
between  HIGH  and  LOW, and then the word line is set  HIGH. Depending on
whether the capacitor voltage is  HIGH  or  LOW, the precharged bit line is pulled
sense amplifierDO NOT COPYslightly higher or slightly lower. A  sense amplifier  detects this small change and
recovers a 1 or 0 accordingly. Note that reading a cell destroys the original
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

874  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
requirements, the chip generates an internal CAS signal at a later clock tick. How
many ticks later is a function of the  CLK  frequency and the speed grade of the
SDRAM chip itself. To accommodate differing requirements, the  RAS-to-CAS
DO NOT COPY
delay, called the CAS latency, is programmable. This and several other important
operating parameters must be downloaded into an SDRAM at initialization.
Downloading is fairly easy; the “load parameters” command is recognized when
RAS_L,  CAS_L, and  WE_L  control signals are all asserted simultaneously, and
the parameters themselves are transferred on the address lines.
DO NOT COPY
10.5 Complex Programmable Logic Devices
Since their introduction years ago, programmable logic devices such as the
16V8 and 22V10 have been very flexible workhorses of digital design. As IC
DO NOT COPY
technology advanced, there was naturally great interest in creating larger PLD
architectures to take advantage of increased chip density. The question is, why
didn’t manufacturers just scale the existing architectures?
For example, if DRAM densities increased by a factor of 64 over the last 10
DO NOT COPYyears, why couldn’t manufacturers scale the 16V8 to create a “128V64”? Such a
device would have 64 input pins, 64 I/O pins, and some number of 128-variable
product terms (say, 8) for each of its 128 logic macrocells. It could combine the
functions of a larger collection of 16V8s and offer terrific performance and
flexibility in using any input in any output function.
DO NOT COPYOr could it? Yes, a 128V64 would be very flexible, but it would not have
very good performance. Unlike the 16V8, which has 32 inputs (16 signals and
their complements) per  AND  term, this device would have 256. Due to capacitive
effects, leakage currents, and so on, such a large wired-AND  structure would be
at least eight times slower than the 16V8’s  AND  array.
DO NOT COPY
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 3 7
General CPLD
architecture.
DO NOT COPYPLD  PLD  PLD  PLD
Programmable Interconnect
DO NOT COPY
PLD  PLD  PLD  PLD
DO NOT COPY
= input/output block
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.5  Complex Programmable Logic Devices  875
Worse from a manufacturer’s point of view, a 128V64 would not make
very cost-effective use of chip area. It would use about 64 times the chip area of
a 16V8, but provide the same number of inputs and outputs as only eight 16V8s.
DO NOT COPY
That is, for  n  times as much logic (in terms of inputs, outputs and  AND  terms),
2 
the 128V64 uses  n as much chip area. In terms of efficiency of silicon use, a
clever designer would be better off partitioning a desired function into eight
16V8s, if such a partitioning were possible.
This is where the idea of complex programmable logic devices (CPLDs)
DO NOT COPY
came from. As shown in Figure 10-37, a CPLD is just a collection of individual
PLDs on a single chip, accompanied by a programmable interconnection
structure that allows the PLDs to be hooked up to each other on-chip in the same
way that a clever designer might do with discrete PLDs off-chip. Here, the chip
area forDO NOT COPY  n  times as much logic is only  n  times the area of a single PLD plus the
area of the programmable interconnect structure.
Different manufacturers have taken many different approaches to the
general architecture shown in the figure. Areas in which they differ include the
individual PLDs (AND  array and macrocells), the input/output blocks, and the
programmable interconnect. We’ll discuss each of these areas in the rest of thisDO NOT COPY
section, using the Xilinx 9500-series CPLD architecture as a representative
example.
10.5.1 Xilinx XC9500 CPLD Family
DO NOT COPY
The Xilinx XC9500 series is a family of CPLDs with a similar architecture but
varying numbers of external input/output (I/O) pins and internal PLDs (which
Xilinx calls function blocks—FBs). As we’ll see later, each internal PLD has 36
inputs and 18 macrocells and outputs and might be called a “36V18.” As shown
in Table 10-8, devices in the family are named according to the number of
DO NOT COPY
macrocells they contain. The smallest has 2  FBs and 36 macrocells, and the
largest has 16  FBs and 288 macrocells.
Another important feature of this and most CPLD families is that a given
chip, such as the XC95108, is available in several different packages. This is
important not only to accommodate different manufacturing practices but also to
DO NOT COPY
provide some choice and potential savings in the number of external I/O pins
provided. In most applications, it is not necessary for all internal signals of a
state machine or subsystem to be visible to and used by the rest of the system.
So, even though the XC95108 has 108 internal macrocells, the outputs of at
most 69 of them can be connected externally in the 84-pin-PLCC version of theDO NOT COPY
device. In fact, many of the 69 I/O pins would typically be used for inputs, in
which case even fewer outputs would be visible externally. That’s OK; the
remaining macrocell outputs are still quite usable internally, since they can be
hooked up internally through the CPLD’s programmable interconnect. Macro-
cells whose outputs are usable only internally are sometimes calledDO NOT COPY  buried buried macrocell
macrocells.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

876  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
Ta bl e 1 0 - 8  Function blocks and external I/O pins in Xilinx 9500-series CPLDs.
Part Number
DO NOT COPYXC9536  XC9572  XC95108  XC95144  XC95216  XC95288
FBs / macrocells  2 / 36  4 / 72  6 / 108  8 / 144  12 / 216  16 / 288
Package Device I/O Pins
44-pin VQFP  34
DO NOT COPY
44-pin PLCC  34  34
48-pin CSP  34
84-pin PLCC  69  69
100-pin TQFP  72  81  81
DO NOT COPY
100-pin PQFP  72  81  81
160-pin PQFP  108  133  133
208-pin HQFP  166  168
352-pin BGA  166  192
DO NOT COPY
Another important dimension of Table 10-8 is the horizontal one. All but
two of the packages support at least two different devices in the same package
and, as it turns out, with compatible pinouts. This is a life-saver in making last-
DO NOT COPYminute design changes. For example, suppose you were to target a design to an
XC9572 in an 84-pin PLCC. You might find that the 69 I/O pins of the device are
quite adequate. You would like to use the XC9572 for its low cost, but you might
be a little nervous if your initial design used 68 out of the 72 available internal
macrocells (I know that I would be!). Based on Table 10-8, you can sleep well
DO NOT COPY
knowing that if bug fixes or design-specification changes necessitate a more
complex design internally, you can always move up to the XC95108 in the same
package and pick up another 36 macrocells.
Figure 10-38 is a block diagram of the internal architecture of a typical
XC9500-family CPLD. Each external I/O pin can be used as an input, an output,
DO NOT COPY
or a bidirectional pin according to the device’s programming, as discussed later.
The pins at the bottom of the figure can also be used for special purposes. Any of
three pins can be used as “global clocks” (GCK); as we’ll see later, each macro-
cell can be programmed to use a selected clock input. One pin can be used as a
DO NOT COPY“global set/reset” (GSR); again, each macrocell can programmably use this sig-
nal as an asynchronous preset or clear. Finally, two or four pins (depending on
device) can be used as “global three-state controls” (GTS); one of these signals
can be selected in each macrocell to output-enable the corresponding output
driver when the macrocell’s output is hooked up to an external I/O pin.
DO NOT COPYOnly four  FBs are shown in the figure, but the XC9500 architecture scales
to accommodate 16  FBs in the XC95288. Regardless of the specific family
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.5  Complex Programmable Logic Devices  877
36
I/O Function
18
Block 1
I/O 18
(18 macrocells)
DO NOT COPYI/O
I/O
I/O Switch 36
Function
Blocks Matrix 18
Block 2
18
(18 macrocells)
I/O
DO NOT COPY
I/O
36
I/O Function
18
Block 3
I/O 18
(18 macrocells)
DO NOT COPYI/O
3
I/O/GCK
36
1 Function
I/O/GSR 18
Block 4
2 or 4  18
I/O/GTS (18 macrocells) Fi g ur e 1 0 - 3 8
Architecture of Xilinx
DO NOT COPY
9500-family CPLDs.
member, each FB  programmably receives 36 signals from the switch matrix. The
inputs to the switch matrix are the 18 macrocell outputs from each of the  FBs and
the external inputs from the I/O pins. We’ll say more about how the switch
DO NOT COPY
matrix hooks things up in Section 10.5.4.
Each  FB  also has 18 outputs that run “under” the switch matrix as drawn in
Figure 10-38 and connect to the I/O blocks. These are merely the output-enable
signals for the I/O-block output drivers; they’re used when the  FB  macrocell’s
output is hooked up to an external I/O pin.DO NOT COPY
10.5.2 Function-Block Architecture
The basic structure of an XC9500 FB is shown in Figure 10-39. The program-
mable  AND  array has just 90 product terms. Compared to 16V8- and 22V10-
style PLDs, the XC9500 and most CPLD macrocells have fewerDO NOT COPY  AND  terms per
macrocell—where the 16V8 has 8 and the 22V10 has 8–16, the XC9500 has
only 5. However, this is not all that bad, because of  product-term allocation. The product-term allocation
DO NOT COPYMacrocell 1
Macrocell 2 18 Fi g ur e 1 0 - 3 9
to switch
Architecture of
Product- Macrocell 3 matrix
Programmable
from 36 Term 18 function block (FB).
switch AND array OUT
Allocators 18
matrix PTOE
DO NOT COPY
Macrocell 17
Macrocell 18
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

878  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
to upper macrocell  from upper macrocell
DO NOT COPYProduct-term
allocator
S6
G1  G2  S8 G3
Product-term set
Global
DO NOT COPYS7 set/reset
M2
1
S1 0 M1
S to switch matrix
D/T Q
DO NOT COPYM3
S2 G4  G5
CLK
Global 3
clocks R
FF1
M4
S3
DO NOT COPY
Product-term reset
Global
S4 set/reset M5
OUT to I/O
Product-term OE 
PTOE blocks
DO NOT COPY
S5
from lower macrocell  to lower macrocell
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 0  XC9500 product-term allocator and macrocell.
DO NOT COPY
product-term allocator XC9500 and other CPLDs have product-term allocators  that allow a macrocell’s
unused product terms to be used by other nearby macrocells in the same  FB.
Figure 10-40 is a logic diagram of the XC9500 product-term allocator and
macrocell. In this figure, the rectangular boxes labeled  S1–S8 are programmable
signal-steering elements that connect their input to one of their two or three
DO NOT COPY
outputs. The trapezoidal boxes labeled  M1–M5  are programmable multiplexers
that connect one of their two to four inputs to their output.
The five  AND  gates associated with the macrocell appear on the lefthand
side of the figure. Each one is connected to a signal-steering box whose top out-
DO NOT COPYput connects the product term to the macrocell’s main  OR  gate  G4. Considering
just this, only five product terms are available per macrocell. However, the top,
sixth input of  G4  connects to another  OR  gate  G3  that receives product terms
from the macrocells above and below the current one.
Any of the macrocell’s product terms that are not otherwise used can be
DO NOT COPYsteered through  S1–S5  to be combined in an  OR  gate  G1  whose output can
eventually be steered to the macrocell above or below by  S8. Before steering,
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.5  Complex Programmable Logic Devices  879
ONE WAY  In a given XC9500 macrocell, you wouldn’t normally steer daisy-chained product
terms back in the direction from which they came. For example, if product terms are
DO NOT COPY
arriving at  S6  from above, we can use them locally by having  S6  steer them to  G3,
or  S6  can steer them to  G2. In the latter case,  S8  should steer the output of  G2  down
to the lower macrocell; there’s no point in steering the product terms back up to the
upper macrocell. In fact, if  S6  and  S8  in this macrocell were steering product terms
up, and S7  and  S8  the macrocell above were steering product terms down, we would
DO NOT COPY
have a nasty loop.
these product terms may be combined with product terms from below or above
throughDO NOT COPY  S6,  S7, and  G2. Thus, product terms can be “daisy-chained” through
successive macrocells to create larger sums of products. In principle, all 90
product terms in the  FB  could be combined and steered to one macrocell,
although that would leave 17 out of the  FB’s 18 macrocells with no product
terms at all.
DO NOT COPYBesides depriving other macrocells of product terms, daisy-chaining terms
has an additional price. A small additional delay is incurred for each “hop” made
by steered product terms. This delay can be minimized by careful allocation of
product-term-hungry macrocells so they are adjacent to macrocells with low
product-term requirements. For example, a macrocell can make use of 13
DO NOT COPY
product terms with only one extra hop delay if it is positioned between two
macrocells that use only one product term each.
The third, middle choice for each of the steering boxes  S1–S5  is to use the
product term for a “special function.” The special functions are flip-flop clock,
set, and reset;  XOR  control; and output enable. Most of these special functions
DO NOT COPY
are not normally used.
Getting closer to the heart of the macrocell,  OR  gate  G4  forms a sum-of-
products expression using all selected product terms and feeds it into  XOR  gate
G5. The other input of  G5  can be 0, 1, or a product term, as selected by
multiplexer  M1. Setting this input to 1 inverts  G4’s sum-of-products expression,
DO NOT COPY
so the macrocell can be configured to use either polarity of minimized logic
equations. Setting this input to a product term is useful in the design of counters.
The product term is arranged to be 1 when the lower-order counter bits are 1 and
counting is enabled, and the output of  G4  is arranged to be the current value of
the counter bit; thus, the counter bit is complemented as required.DO NOT COPY
The macrocell’s flip-flop  FF1  can be programmed to behave either as a  D
flip-flop or as a  T  flip-flop with enable; the latter is also useful in some styles of
counter realization. Multiplexer  M4  selects the flip-flop’s clock input from one
of four sources—the CPLD’s three global clock inputs or a product term. This
DO NOT COPY
last choice is a no-no in synchronous design methodologies, except in well-
defined synchronization applications, as in Figure 8-111 on page 784.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

880  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
The flip-flop also has asynchronous set and reset inputs with input sources
controlled by multiplexers  M2  and  M5. In most applications, set or reset would
be connected to the CPLD’s global set/reset input and would be used only at
DO NOT COPY
system initialization. However, these inputs can also be used to access an  S-R
latch in which the  CLK  input is not used, or, if you’re very careful, you can use
CLK  and  S  or  R  in synchronization applications as in Figure 8-111.
A final multiplexer  M3 selects either the flip-flop output or its data input to
be used as the macrocell output,  OUT. This signal is sent to the switch matrix,
DO NOT COPY
where it can be used by any other macrocell. It is also sent to the I/O blocks,
along with a product term selected by  S5  that can be used as the output-enable
signal  PTOE  if needed.
10.5.3 Input/Output-Block Architecture
DO NOT COPY
I/O block (IOB) The structure of the XC9500  I/O block (IOB)  is shown in Figure 10-41.
There are seven, count them, seven choices of output-enable signals for the
three-state driver buffer. It can be always on, always off, controlled by the
product term  PTOE  from the corresponding macrocell, or controlled by any of
DO NOT COPYup to four global output enables. The global output enables are selectable as
active-high or active-low versions of the external  GTS  pins.
The XC9500’s IOB is a good example of an important trend in CPLD and
FPGA I/O architectures—providing many “analog” controls in addition to
“logic” ones like output enables. Three different analog controls are provided:
DO NOT COPY
•  Slew-rate control. The rise and fall time of the output signals can be set to
be fast or slow. The fast setting provides the fastest possible propagation
delay, while the slow setting helps to control transmission-line ringing and
system noise at the expense of a small additional delay.
DO NOT COPY•  Pull-up resistor. When enabled, the pull-up resistor prevents output pins
from floating as the CPLD is powered up. This is useful if the outputs are
used to drive active-low enable inputs of other logic that is not supposed to
be enabled during power up.
•  User-programmable ground. This feature actually reallocates an I/O pin to
DO NOT COPY
be a ground pin, not a signal pin at all. This is useful in high-speed, high-
slew-rate applications. Extra ground pins are needed to handle the high
dynamic currents that flow when multiple outputs switch simultaneously.
In addition to these features, the XC9500 family provides compatibility
DO NOT COPY
with both 5-V and 3.3-V external devices. The input buffer and the internal logic
run from a 5-V power supply (VCCINT ). Depending on the operating voltage of
external devices, the output driver uses either a 5-V or a 3.3-V supply (VCCIO ).
Notice that the pull-up resistor pulls to the I/O supply voltage,  VCCIO . Diodes D1
and  D2  are used to clamp voltages above  VCCINT  or below ground that can occur
DO NOT COPY
due to transmission-line ringing.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.5  Complex Programmable Logic Devices  881
to other I/O blocks
VCCINT VCCIO
DO NOT COPYI/O block
input
buffer D1
to
switch
matrix
D2
DO NOT COPYPull-up
output resistor
driver
OUT
I/O
from
macrocell PTOE 1
DO NOT COPYUser-
programmable
M0 ground
0
Slew-rate
control
I/O/GTS1
DO NOT COPY
M1
Global OEs
I/O/GTS2DO NOT COPY
M2
DO NOT COPY
I/O/GTS3
M3
DO NOT COPY
I/O/GTS4 Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 1
M4 XC9500 I/O block.
10.5.4 Switch MatrixDO NOT COPY
Theoretically, a CPLD’s programmable interconnect should allow any internal
PLD output or external input pin to be connected to any internal PLD input.
Likewise, it should allow any internal PLD output to connect to any external out-
2
put pin. But if you think about this, you’ll see that we’re back to the same  n
DO NOT COPY
problem that we would have in building a 128V64.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

882  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
The case of a typical Xilinx XC9500 family member, the XC95108, is
shown in Figure 10-42. There are 108 internal macrocell outputs and 108
external-pin inputs, a total of 216 signals which should be connected as inputs to
DO NOT COPY
the switch matrix. Since the XC95108 has 6  FBs with 36 inputs each, the switch
matrix should have (coincidentally) 216 outputs, each of which is a 216-input
multiplexer driving one input of an  FB’s  AND  array.
A switch matrix such as the one shown in the figure can be built in a chip as
a rectangular structure, with a column for each input, a row for each output, and
DO NOT COPY
a pass transistor (or transmission gate) at each crosspoint to control whether a
given input is connected to a given output. But this is still a big structure—216
columns and 216 columns in the example.
With today’s high-density IC technology, the problem is not so much size
DO NOT COPYbut speed. Having a large number of transistors connected to each row or column
makes for high capacitance, which makes for slow speed. Therefore, CPLD
manufacturers look for ways to reduce the size of the switch matrix.
For example, we can observe in Figure 10-42 that not every switch-matrix
input must be connectable to every output. We only need every input to be
DO NOT COPYconnectable to  some  input of each  FB, since any  FB  input can connect to any
AND  gate within the  FB’s  AND  array.
Then again, the requirement is not quite as simple as we just stated.
Suppose that the switch-matrix output for  FB  input  i  (0 ≤ i ≤ 35) is created by a
simple 8-input multiplexer whose inputs are switch-matrix inputs 8i  through
DO NOT COPY
8i + 7. There are many interconnection patterns that cannot be accommodated by
such a switch matrix. For example, connecting switch-matrix inputs 0–35 to the
same  FB would not be possible. As soon as switch-matrix input 0 is connected to
FB  input 0, switch-matrix inputs 1–7 are blocked.
Thus, the switch-matrix connectivity requirement must be stated more
DO NOT COPY
broadly: For each  FB, any combination of switch-matrix inputs must be connect-
able to some combination of the  FB’s inputs.
from from
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 2 macrocell outputs external inputs
XC95108 switch-DO NOT COPY
108  108
matrix requirements.
36 
to FB1 AND array
36 
to FB2 AND array
DO NOT COPY
36 
Switch Matrix to FB3 AND array
36 
to FB4 AND array
36 
to FB5 AND array
DO NOT COPY36 
to FB6 AND array
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.5  Complex Programmable Logic Devices  883
A typical CPLD switch matrix is a compromise between the minimal
multiplexer scheme and a full, nonblocking crosspoint array. With anything less
than a nonblocking crosspoint array, the problem of allocating input-output
DO NOT COPY
connections in the switch matrix is nontrivial. For each different CPLD-based
design, a set of switch-matrix connections must be found by “fitter” software
provided to the designer by the CPLD’s manufacturer.
Finding a complete set of connections through a sparse switch matrix is
one of those  NP-complete problems that you hear about in computer science. In
DO NOT COPY
lay terms, that means that for some designers, the fitter software may have to run
a lot longer than you care to wait to find out whether there is a solution. If the
switch matrix has too few crosspoints, as in our minimal multiplexer example,
even the best fitter software running “forever” will not be able to find a complete
set of connections for some designs.DO NOT COPY
Thus, the design of a CPLD’s switch matrix is a compromise between chip
performance (speed, area, cost) and fitter-software  capabilities. The fitter
software usually determines not only the final connections through the switch
matrix, but also the assignment of CPLD inputs and outputs to  FBs, macrocells,
and external pins, and of “buried logic” toDO NOT COPY  FBs and macrocells. These assign-
ments interact in turn with both the switch-matrix-connection and product-term
allocation problems. The solutions to these problems are the “secret sauce” of
CPLD chip and software design, and are not typically disclosed by CPLD
manufacturers.
DO NOT COPY
PIN LOCKING  Another important issue in CPLD chip and software design is  pin locking. In most
CPLD applications, it’s OK to let the fitter software pick any pins that it likes for the
device’s external input and output signals. However, once the design is complete and
DO NOT COPY
a PCB has been fabricated, the designer would like to “lock down” the pin assign-
ments so they remain the same even if small (or large!) changes are made to the
design for bug-fixing purposes. This spares everyone the time, expense, and hassle
of reworking or redesigning and refabricating the PCB.
“Locked” pin assignments are typically specified in a file that is read by the
DO NOT COPY
fitter software. With early CPLDs and FPGAs, locking down pins after making a
small change did not guarantee success—the fitter would throw up its hands and
complain that it was too constrained. If you unlocked the pins, the fitter could find a
new allocation that worked, but it might be completely scrambled from the original.
These problems were not necessarily the fault of the fitter software; the CPLDs
DO NOT COPY
and FPGAs simply did not have rich enough internal connectivity to support frequent
design changes under the constraint of pin locking. The device manufacturers have
learned from this experience and improved their internal device architectures to
accommodate frequent design changes. For example, some devices contain an
“output switch matrix” that guarantees that any internal macrocell signal can be
DO NOT COPY
connected to any external I/O pin.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

884  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
Programmable I/O blocks
DO NOT COPY
= Programmable interconnect
= Programmable logic block
DO NOT COPY
= I/O pad
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 3
General FPGA chip
DO NOT COPY
architecture.
10.6 Field-Programmable Gate Arrays
DO NOT COPYA field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is kind of like a CPLD turned inside-
out. As shown in Figure 10-43, the logic is broken into a large number of
programmable logic blocks that are individually smaller than a PLD. They are
distributed across the entire chip in a sea of programmable interconnections, and
the entire array is surrounded by programmable I/O blocks. An FPGA’s
DO NOT COPY
programmable logic block is less capable than a typical PLD, but an FPGA chip
contains a lot more logic blocks than a CPLD of the same die size has PLDs.
Xilinx, Inc. invented FPGAs, and in this section we’ll use one of their
popular families, the XC4000E, to illustrate FPGA architecture.
DO NOT COPY
10.6.1 Xilinx XC4000 FPGA Family
The programmable logic blocks in the Xilinx XC4000E family of FPGAs are
configurable logic block called  configurable logic blocks (CLBs). The smallest part, the XC3003E,
(CLB) contains a 10 × 10 array of CLBs, and the largest, the XC4025E, contains a
32 × 32 array for a total of 1,024 CLBs. Xilinx also created extended XC4000EX
DO NOT COPY
and XC4000XL families, based on the XC4000E family, that have additional
resources and features not discussed here. The largest member of the extended
families, the XC4085XL, has 3,136 CLBs. Table 10-9 from Xilinx shows the
family members that were available in 1999.
DO NOT COPYLike a CPLD family, the XC4000 family spans a range of device sizes and
input/output capabilities. The table column labeled “Max. User I/O” refers to the
maximum number of input/output blocks that are provided on-chip. However,
XC4000 devices are available in a variety of packages, and not all of the I/Os are
brought out to external pins of the smaller packages. As with CPLDs, the FPGA
DO NOT COPY
user has the opportunity to migrate a design from smaller to larger devices in the
same package, or from a smaller package to a larger one.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.6  Field-Programmable Gate Arrays  885
Ta bl e 1 0 - 9  Resources in Xilinx XC4000-series FPGAs.
Max. Max. Typical Gate
DO NOT COPYCLB Total Max. Flip- RAM bits Gates Range (Logic
Device Matrix CLBs User I/O Flops (no logic) (no RAM) and RAM)
XC4002XL  8 × 8  64  64  256  2,048  1,600  1,000–3,000
XC4003E  10 × 10  100  80  360  3,200  3,000  2,000–5,000
XC4005E/XLDO NOT COPY  14 × 14  196  112  616  6,272  5,000  3,000–9,000
XC4006E  16 × 16  256  128  768  8,192  6,000  4,000–12,000
XC4008E  18 × 18  324  144  936  10,368  8,000  7,000–15,000
XC4010E/XL  20 × 20  400  160  1,120  12,800  10,000  7,000–20,000
XC4013E/XLDO NOT COPY  24 × 24  576  192  1.536  18,432  13,000  10,000–30,000
XC4020E/XL  28 × 28  784  224  2,016  25,088  20,000  13,000–40,000
XC4025E  32 × 32  1,024  256  2,560  32,768  25,000  15,000–45,000
XC4028EX/XL  32 × 32  1,024  256  2,560  32,768  28,000  18,000–50,000
DO NOT COPY
XC4036EX/XL  36 × 36  1,296  288  3,168  41,472  36,000  22,000–65,000
XC4044XL  40 × 40  1,600  320  3,840  51,200  44,000  27,000–80,000
XC4052XL  44 × 44  1,936  352  4,576  61,952  52,000  33,000–100,000
XC4062XL  48 × 48  2,304  384  5,376  73,728  62,000  40,000–130,000
DO NOT COPY
XC4085XL  56 × 56  3,136  448  7,168  100,352  85,000  55,000–180,000
The “Flip-Flops” column counts all of the flip-flops in the device, two per
CLB and two per I/O block, as we’ll see later. Only a fraction of the available
DO NOT COPY
flip-flops are used in a typical design, but this number is a figure of merit that
designers look at when roughly sizing an FPGA for an design. The “Max. RAM
Bits” column is another such figure of merit. As we’ll see, instead of being used
for logic, each CLB can be configured as a small SRAM storing up to 32 bits.
The “Max. Gates” number is fuzzy. For the XC4002XL, the table claims
DO NOT COPY
that each CLB can perform the same function as about 25 gates in a discrete
design. The XC4003E is even better, at 30 gates per CLB. Is this reasonable?
And just what is a “gate”? Do  XORs or wide  NAND  gates count as one gate? You
can decide for yourself later, after you know more about the CLB architecture.
At the same time, you can decide whether this column was created by engineer-DO NOT COPY
ing or by marketing people.
The last column of the table must certainly have been written by marketing
folks, since the high end of each “typical” gate range is higher than the
maximum in the column before it! Actually, there  is  a reasonable explanation for
this seeming inconsistency. This column assumes that 20–30% of the CLBs areDO NOT COPY
used for memory rather than logic, at 32 bits of SRAM per CLB. The minimum
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

886  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
C1-C4 
4 4  4  4
M3 M4 M5 M6
DO NOT COPYDIN/H2  SR/H0  EC
S/R
H1
control
G4 S
YQ
D Q
G3 G(G1-G4) M11
DO NOT COPYG2 CLK
M7
G1 M9
EN
1
M10 R
H(F, G, H1) FF1
M1
M8 Y
DO NOT COPY
S/R
M2
control
F4
S
XQ
F3 F(F1-F4) D Q
M16
F2
M12 CLK
DO NOT COPYF1
M14
EN
K 1
M15 R
(CLK)
FF2
X
M13
DO NOT COPY
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 4  XC4000 configurable logic block.
gate-level implementation of an SRAM cell is a  D  latch using four gates
DO NOT COPY
(Figure X7.27 on page 650), so we can count each CLB as 128 gates when it’s
used as SRAM. The number in the last column, therefore, is the number of gates
used for logic  plus  the number of equivalent gates used for SRAM.
10.6.2 Configurable Logic Block
DO NOT COPY
Since an FPGA can have lots and lots of CLBs, it’s important that we understand
them first! Figure 10-44 shows the internal structure of an XC4000-series CLB.
The CLBs most important programmable elements are the logic-function
generators  F,  G, and  H. Both  F  and  G  can perform any combinational logic
function of their four inputs, and  H  can perform any combinational logic
DO NOT COPY
function of its three inputs.
How do  F,  G, and  H  work? Given the task of building a “universal”
function generator for 4-input logic functions, what kind of gate-level circuit
would you come up with? Think about it, and we’ll come back to it later.
DO NOT COPYAs in our CPLD discussion, the trapezoidal boxes in Figure 10-44 repre-
sent programmable multiplexers. Notice that the outputs of  F  and  G  as well as
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.6  Field-Programmable Gate Arrays  887
additional CLB inputs can be directed to inputs of  H  by multiplexers  M1–M3,
so it’s possible to realize some functions of more than four inputs. A taxonomy
of the functions that can be realized by  F,  G, and  H  in a single CLB is given
DO NOT COPY
below:
•  Any function of up to four variables, plus any second function of up to four
unrelated variables, plus any third function of up to three unrelated
variables.
DO NOT COPY
•  Any single function of five variables (see Exercise 10.34).
•  Any function of four variables, plus some second functions of six unrelated
variables.
•  Some functions of up to nine variables, including parity checking and
DO NOT COPYa cascadable equality checker for two 4-bit inputs (see Exercises 10.35
and 10.36).
With appropriate programming of multiplexers  M7–M8  and  M12–M13, the
outputs of the function generators can be directed to CLB outputs  X  and  Y, or
they can be captured in edge-triggered  D  flip-flops  FF1  and  FF2. The flip-flops
DO NOT COPY
can use the rising or falling edge of a common clock input,  K, as selected by
multiplexers  M9  and  M14. They can also make use of a clock-enable signal,  EC,
selected by  M10  and  M15. The sources of  EC  and three other internal signals are
selected from a set of four miscellaneous inputs  C1–C4  by multiplexers  M3–M6
at the top of the CLB.DO NOT COPY
The  XQ  and  YQ  outputs of the CLB carry the flip-flop outputs out of the
CLB. If a flip-flop is not used in the CLB, multiplexer  M11 or M16 can select XQ
or  YQ  to be a “bypass output” that is simply a copy of a CLB input selected by
M4  or  M6.
DO NOT COPYThe block labeled “S/R control” from each flip-flop determines whether
the flip-flop is set or reset at configuration. It also determines whether the flip-
flop responds to a global set/reset signal (not shown) or to the CLB’s  SR  signal
selected by multiplexer  M5.
Wow, that’s a lot of programmability! Naturally, the configuration of CLBs
DO NOT COPY
within an XC4000 part, whether it has 3,136 CLBs or only 64, is not carried out
by hand. The manufacturer provides a fitter tool that allocates, configures, and
connects CLBs to match a higher-level design description written in ABEL,
VHDL, Verilog, or schematic form.
Let’s come back to our question of how to build a universal function
DO NOT COPY
generator for 4-input logic functions. It’s a hard problem if you think about it at
the gate level, but pretty easy if you think about it from another point of view.
Any 4-input logic function can be described by its truth table, which has 16
rows. Suppose we store the truth in a 16-word by 1-bit-wide memory. When we
apply the function’s four input bits to the memory’s address lines, its data outputDO NOT COPY
is the value of the function for that input combination.
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

888  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
This is exactly the approach that was taken by the FPGA designers at
Xilinx. Function generators  F  and  G  are actually just very compact and fast
16 × 1 SRAMs, and  H  is an 8 × 1 SRAM. When a CLB is used to perform logic,
DO NOT COPY
the truth tables of logic functions  F,  G, and  H  are loaded into SRAM at configu-
ration time from an external read-only memory. The programmable multiplexers
in Figure 10-44 are also controlled by “SRAM,” actually individual  D  latches
that are also loaded at configuration time. This programming is done for all of
the CLBs in the FPGA.
DO NOT COPY
Besides convenience, using memory to store the truth tables has another
important benefit. Any XC4000 CLB can be configured at start-up to be used as
memory rather than logic. Several different modes can be configured:
•  Two 16 × 1 SRAMs.  F  and  G  are used as SRAMs with independent address
DO NOT COPY
and write-data inputs. They share a common write-enable input, however.
•  One 32 × 1 SRAM. The same four address bits are used for  F  and  G, and a
fifth address bit is applied to the  H  function generator and the write-enable
circuitry to select between  F  and  G, the upper and lower halves of the
memory.
DO NOT COPY
•  Asynchronous or synchronous. For write operations, the SRAMS above
can be configured to have “normal” asynchronous latching behavior, or
they can be configured to occur on a designated edge of the  K  clock signal.
•  One 16 × 1 dual-port SRAM. The two sets of address inputs are used to
DO NOT COPY
independently read and write different locations in the same SRAM. Only
synchronous write operations are supported in this mode.
In these modes, function inputs  F1–F4  and  G1–G4  supply address, other CLB
inputs  H0–H2  provide data inputs and the write-enable signal, and data outputs
DO NOT COPYare provided on the  F  and  G  generator outputs and can be captured in flip-flops
FF1  and  FF2  or exit at CLB outputs  X  and  Y.
DO NOT COPY10.6.3 Input/Output Block
I/O block (IOB) The structure of the XC4000  I/O block (IOB)  is shown in Figure 10-45. An I/O
pin can be used for input or output or both.
The XC4000 IOB has more “logic” controls than its cousin in the XC9500
CPLD. In particular, its input and output paths contain edge-triggered  D  flip-
DO NOT COPY
flops selectable by multiplexers  M5–M7. Placing input and output flip-flops “up
close” to the device I/O pins is especially useful in FPGAs. On output, relatively
long delays from internal CLB flip-flop outputs to the IOBs can make it difficult
to connect to external synchronous systems at very high clock rates. On input,
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.6  Field-Programmable Gate Arrays  889
V CC
Input/Output Block (IOB)
Passive
Slew-rate
DO NOT COPYpull-up/
control
pull-down
T
M1
D  Q
OUT M7
DO NOT COPYM2 CLK Output
EN driver I/O
OCLK
M3 FF1
I1
M5 Input
DO NOT COPY
buffer
I2
Q  D
M6 Delay
CLK M8
EN
FF2
DO NOT COPY
ICLKEN
M4
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 5
ICLK
XC4000 I/O block.
DO NOT COPY
long delays from the I/O pins to CLB flip-flop inputs can make it difficult to
meet external system setup and hold times if external inputs are clocked directly
into a CLB flip-flop without being captured first by a flip-flop at the IOB pin. Of
course, using IOB flip-flops is possible only if the FPGA’s external interface
specifications allow “pipelining” of inputs and outputs.
DO NOT COPY
For pipelined inputs, the XC4000 IOB actually goes one step further by
providing a delay element, selectable by  M8, in series with the  D  input of input
flip-flop  FF2. The effect of this element is to delay the  D  input relative to the
FPGA’s internal copies of the system clock, guaranteeing that the input will have
a zero hold-time requirement with respect to the external system clock. ThisDO NOT COPY
benefit comes at the expense of increased setup time, of course.
The IOB’s other logic controls are selectable polarity, using multiplexers
M1–M4, for its four inputs that come from the CLB array via the programmable
interconnect. These inputs,  OUT,  T,  OCLK, and  ICLKEN, are the output bit, its
three-state enable, the output clock, and the input clock enable, respectively.DO NOT COPY
Like the XC9500 IOB, the XC4000 IOB also has analog controls. The
output driver’s slew rate is programmable, and a pull-up or pull-down resistor
may be connected to the I/O pin.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

890  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
8 Single
DO NOT COPY
4 Double
3 Long
2
DO NOT COPYDirect
2 CLB 2
Connect
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 6
3 Long
XC4000 general
6 4 8 4 2
interconnect
DO NOT COPY
structure. Long Double Single Global Direct
Clock Connect
10.6.4 Programmable Interconnect
DO NOT COPY
Well, we saved the best for last. The XC4000 programmable interconnect
architecture is fascinating example of a structure that provides rich, symmetric
connectivity in a small silicon area.
As we showed in Figure 10-43 on page 884, each CLB in an FPGA is
embedded in the interconnect structure, which is really just wires with program-
DO NOT COPY
mable connections to them. Figure 10-46 gives a little more detail of the
XC4000’s connection scheme. Wires are not really “owned” by any one CLB,
but an XC4000 CLB array is created by tiling the chip with exactly the structure
shown in the figure. For example, 100 copies of this figure make the 10 × 10
DO NOT COPYCLB array of an XC4003.
The number in each arrow indicates the number of wires in that signal path.
Thus, you can see that a CLB has two wires (outputs) each going to the CLBs
immediately below and to the right of it. It also connects to three groups of wires
above, one below, and four to its left. Signals on these wires can flow in either
DO NOT COPYdirection.
The four wires in the group labeled “Global Clock” are optimized for use
as clock inputs to the CLBs, providing short delay and minimal skew. The two
“Singles” groups are optimized for flexible connectivity between adjacent
blocks, without the small number and unidirectional limitation of wires in the
DO NOT COPY
“Direct Connect” groups.
It’s possible to connect a CLB to another that’s more than one hop away
using “Single” wires, but they have to go through a programmable switch for
each hop, which adds delay. Wires in the “Doubles” groups travel past two CLBs
before hitting a switch, so they provide shorter delays for longer connections.
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

Section 10.6  Field-Programmable Gate Arrays  891
DOUBLE
DO NOT COPY
SINGLE
DO NOT COPY
DOUBLE
LONG
DO NOT COPY
F4 C4 G4 Y0
DIRECT
Y
G1
C1
DO NOT COPYF1
CLB
G3
C3 FEEDBACK
F3
K
X
XQ
F2 C2 G2
DO NOT COPY
LONG
DO NOT COPY
LONG  DBL  SINGLE  DBL  LONG  GLOBAL  DIRECT  FEEDBACK
Fi g ur e 1 0 - 4 7  XC4000 CLB and wire connection details.
For really long connections, the “Long” groups don’t go through any program-DO NOT COPY
mable switches at all; instead, they travel all the way across or down a row or
column and are driven by three-state drivers near the CLB.
Figure 10-47 shows a CLB and wires in a lot more detail. The small
squares are programmable connections—a horizontal wire is connected or not to
a vertical one, depending on the state of the programming bit (again, in a latch)DO NOT COPY
for that switch. Additional, specialized programmable interconnect is provided
at the edges of the CLB array for connections to the IOBs.
In the figure, the shaded area in color is called a  programmable switch programmable switch
matrix (PSM). The PSM is shown in more detail in Figure 10-48. Each of the matrix (PSM)
DO NOT COPY
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

892  Chapter 10  Memory, CPLDs, and FPGAs
DO NOT COPY
(a)  (b)  (c)
DO NOT COPY
F i gu re 1 0 - 4 8  XC4000 programmable connections: (a) programmable switch matrix (PSM);
(b) programmable switch element (PSE); (c) a few possible connections.
programmable switch diamonds in (a) is a  programmable switch element (PSE)  that can connect any
element (PSE)DO NOT COPYline to any other, as shown in (b). With four lines, there are 6 possible pairwise
connections as shown in (b), and the PSE has a transmission gate for each one of
them. Some, none, or all of the transmission gates in a PSE may be enabled—
again, by configuration bits stored in latches. Thus, many different connection
patterns are possible, as shown in (c).
DO NOT COPY
The PSM is essential for hooking things up in the wiring structure of
Figure 10-47. By enabling and disabling connections, PSEs extend or isolate
wire segments in the “Single” and “Double” groups. More importantly, the PSM
allows signals to “turn the corner” by connecting a horizontal wire to a vertical
one. Without this, CLBs would not be able to connect to others in a different row
DO NOT COPY
or column of the array.
While the PSM is essential, using it has a price—signals incur a small
delay each time they hop through a PSE. Therefore, high-quality FPGA fitter
software searches for not just any CLB placement and wire connections that
DO NOT COPYwork. The “placement and routing” tool spends a lot of time trying to optimize
device performance by finding a placement that allows short connections, and
then routing the connections themselves.
Like CPLDs, FPGAs are judged by the flexibility of their architectures and
the consistency of the results obtained from a fitter after small design changes
DO NOT COPYare made. There’s nothing more frustrating than making a small change to a
large design and finding that it no longer meets timing requirements. Thus,
FPGA manufacturers have learned to provide “extra” resources in their architec-
tures to help ensure consistent results.
DO NOT COPY
GOOD PRACTICE  Placement and routing is actually a pretty well understood problem, because it is the
major part of the “back end” of any custom chip design. Thus, the same kind of tools
and the same tool vendors are involved with placement and routing for both FPGAs
and ASICS. So, you might like to consider any FPGA experience that you get to be
DO NOT COPYgood practice for ASIC design!
Copyright © 1999 by John F. Wakerly  Copying Prohibited

--- Page Break ---

HPRI/BIN
A P P E N D I X
10 ≥1
0/Z10 10
11 A
1/Z11 11
12
2/Z12 12
13 15
3/Z13 13 18
1
4/Z14 14
2 α 14
5/Z15 15
3
6/Z16 16
4
7/Z17 17
IEEE STANDARD
1α 9
V18 7
5 2α
ENα 4α 6
SYMBOLS
Together with the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the Institute of  ANSI
Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) has developed a standard set of logic  IEEE
symbols. The most recent revision of the standard is ANSI/IEEE Std 91-1984,
IEEE Standard Graphic Symbols for Logic Functions.  It is compatible with
standard 617 of the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and must
be used in all logic diagrams drawn for the U.S. Department of Defense.
A.1  GENERAL DEFINITIONS
The IEEE standard supports the notion of bubble-to-bubble logic design with the
following definitions:
•  An  internal logic state  is a logic state assumed to exist inside a symbol  internal logic state
outline at an input or an output.
•  An  external logic state  is a logic state assumed to exist outside a symbol  external logic state
outline either (1) on an input line prior to any external qualifying symbol at
that input, or (2) on an output line beyond any external qualifying symbol
at that output.
791

--- Page Break ---

792  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
qualifying symbol A  qualifying symbol  is graphics or text added to the basic outline of a device’s
logic symbol to describe the physical or logical characteristics of the device. The
“external qualifying symbol” mentioned above is typically an inversion bubble,
which denotes a “negated” input or output, for which the external 0-state corre-
sponds to the internal 1-state. This concept is illustrated in Figure A–1. When
internal 1-state the standard says that a signal is in its  internal 1-state, we would say that the
internal 0-state signal is asserted. Likewise, when the standard says that a signal is in its  internal
0-state, we would say that the signal is negated.
Figure A–1
Internal and external logic states.  external internal
logic logic
states  states external
logic state
external internal
logic logic
states  states external
logic state
distinctive-shape The IEEE standard provides two different types of symbols for logic gates.
symbols  One type, called  distinctive-shape symbols, is what we’ve been using all along.
rectangular-shape The other type, called  rectangular-shape symbols, uses the same shape for all
symbols  the gates, along with an internal label to identify the type of gate. Figure A–2
compares the two types.  According to the IEEE standard, “the distinctive-
shape symbol is not preferred.”  Some people think this statement means that
rectangular-shape symbols  are  preferred. However, all the standard really says is
that it gives no preference to distinctive-shape symbols compared to rectangular-
shape symbols.  On the other hand, since most digital designers, authors, and
computer-aided design systems prefer the distinctive-shape symbols, that’s what
we use in this book.
Before the promulgation of the IEEE standard, logic symbols for larger-
scale logic elements were drawn in an ad hoc manner; the only standard rule
was to use rectangles with inputs on the left and outputs on the right. Although
the logic symbol might contain a short description of the element (e.g., “3–8
ANOTHER KIND In addition to the familiar bubble, the IEEE standard also allows an external,
OF BUBBLE triangular “polarity symbol” to be used to specify active-low inputs and outputs,
for which the external  LOW  level corresponds to the internal 1-state.  However,
under a positive-logic convention, the bubble and the triangular polarity symbol
are equivalent, so we use the more traditional bubble in this appendix.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.2  DECODERS  793
Figure A–2 &
AND
Distinctive- and rectangular-
shape logic symbols.
&
NAND
1 ≥1
BUFFER  OR
1 ≥1
INVERTER NOR
decoder,” “2–1 multiplexer”), it was usually necessary to refer to a separate
table to determine the element’s logic function.  However, the IEEE standard
contains a rich set of concepts, such as bit grouping, common control blocks,
and dependency notation, that allow some or all of a larger-scale logic element’s
function to be displayed in the symbol itself.  We’ll introduce these concepts
as appropriate as we cover the symbols for various categories of devices in the
sections that follow.
A.2  DECODERS
Chapter 5 used “traditional” logic symbols for decoders and other MSI logic
elements. Although traditional symbols show the active levels of the inputs and
outputs, they do not indicate the logical function of the device—you already have
to know what a 74x138 or 74x139 does when you read its symbol.
The IEEE standard for logic symbols, on the other hand, allows a decoder’s
logic function to be displayed as part of the symbol, shown in Figure A–3. These
symbols use several concepts of the standard:
•  Internal qualifying symbols.  Individual input and output signals may be  internal qualifying
labeled with qualifying symbols inside the logic-symbol outline to describe symbol
the signals’ characteristics. In this book, we call such symbols  qualifying  qualifying label
labels  for short.
•  General qualifying symbols.  The top of a logic symbol may contain an  general qualifying
alphanumeric label to denote the general function performed by the device. symbol
Decoders and encoders (called  coders) use the general qualifying symbol  coder
X/Y  to indicate the type of coding performed, where  X  is the input code
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

794  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
Figure A–3 (a) (b) 74x139
IEEE standard symbols for de- 74x138 BIN / 1-OF-4
coders: (a) 74x138; (b) 74x139. BIN / 1-OF-8 2 4
1 0
15 3 5
0 2 1
1 14 6
1 1 2
2 13 1 7
2 2 EN 3
3 12
4 3
11 14 12
4 1 0
6 & 10 13 11
5 2 1
4 9 10
EN 6 2
5 7 15 9
7 EN 3
and  Y  is the output code.  For example, a 3-to-8 decoder may be labeled
BIN/1-OF-8.
internal value •  Internal values.  Each input combination of a coder produces an “internal
value” that is displayed by the coder’s outputs. The internal values for a
3-to-8 decoder are 0–7.
input weight •  Input weights.  The inputs of a coder may have qualifying labels indicating
the numerical weights associated with those inputs. In this case, the internal
value at any time is the sum of the weights of the asserted inputs. The input
weights for a 3-to-8 decoder are 1, 2, and 4.
output value •  Output values.  Each output may have a qualifying label listing the internal
values that cause that output to be asserted. In a binary decoder, each output
is asserted for just one internal value.
enable input •  Enable input.  An enable input has the qualifying label  EN  and permits
action when asserted.  When negated, an enable input imposes the exter-
nal high-impedance state on three-state outputs, and the negated state on
other outputs. The 74x138 and 74x139 have active-low outputs, which are
therefore 1 when the enable input is negated.
embedded element •  Embedded and abutted elements.  The outlines of individual logic elements
abutted element may be embedded or abutted to form a larger composite symbol.  There
is at least one common logic connection when the dividing line between
two outlines is perpendicular to the direction of signal flow, as shown in
Figure A–4.  For example, the 74x138 symbol has an embedded 3-input
AND  gate that drives the internal  EN  input. There is no connection between
the elements when the dividing line is in the direction of signal flow, as
shown in Figure A–5. For example, the 74x139 contains two separate 2-
to-4 decoders.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.2  DECODERS  795
Figure A–4
A composite symbol with one or
more logic connections between
its elements.
OR
The ability to embed individual logic elements in a larger symbol is probably
the most useful feature of the IEEE standard. For example, Figure A–6 shows
the symbol for a 3-to-8 decoder with a different set of enable inputs than the
74x138. The fictitious  74x328  decoder is enabled when pin 6 is 0 or both pins  74x328
4 and 5 are 1.
Figure A–5
A composite symbol with no
connection between its elements.
Figure A–6 74x328
IEEE standard symbol for a BIN / 1-OF-8
fictitious decoder, the 74x328. 15
0
1 14
1 1
2 13
2 2
3 12
4 3
11
4
6 ≥1 10
5
4 9
& EN 6
5 7
7
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

796  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
1 1 1 1
EN EN EN EN
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Figure A–7  IEEE  standard  rectangular-shape  symbols  for  three-state  buffers:
(a) noninverting, active-high enable; (b) noninverting, active-low en-
able; (c) inverting, active-high enable; (d) inverting, active-low enable.
A.3  THREE-STATE BUFFERS
Three-state-buffer symbols use one more feature of the IEEE standard:
downward-pointing •  Downward-pointing triangle.  This denotes a three-state output.
triangle 
Also recall that an enable input, labeled  EN, is specifically understood to force
all affected outputs to a disabled state. For three-state outputs, the disabled state
is Hi-Z. Thus, the three-state buffers of Figure 5–35 are drawn as shown in
Figure A–7. Another important feature of the IEEE standard is introduced in the
symbols for MSI three-state buffers:
common control •  Common control block.  This concept, illustrated in Figure A–8, may be
block  used with an array of related elements. Inputs to the common control block
are understood to affect all the elements of the array.
Figure A–8
a
Common control block in an a
IEEE standard symbol. b
b
c
c
d
d
Thus, symbols may be drawn for the 74x541 and 74x245 as shown in
Figure A–9. The enable and direction inputs (pins 1 and 19) apply to all elements
of the device. The ’541 and ’245 symbols introduce several other features of the
standard:
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.3  THREE-STATE BUFFERS  797
Figure A–9 74x245
IEEE standard logic symbols for 74x541 1
G3
the 74x541 and 74x245.  1 & 19
3EN1
19 EN
3EN2
2 18
1
2 18
2
3 17 3 17
4 16 4 16
5 15 5 15
6 14 6 14
7 13 7 13
8 12 8 12
9 11 9 11
•  Hysteresis symbol.  Inputs bearing this symbol have hysteresis.  hysteresis symbol
•  Right-pointing or left-pointing triangle.  These symbols are used to denote  right-pointing
“amplification”; in the case of three-state buffers, they indicate an output triangle
circuit that has more fanout and can drive a heavier load than an ordinary left-pointing
triangle
output circuit.
•  Arrows.  These denote the direction of signal flow when it is not strictly  arrows
left to right, as in the ’245 symbol.
•  Identical elements.  Only the first of two or more identical elements in an  identical elements
array must be drawn in detail. Thus, the bottom seven elements of the ’245
symbol are understood to be identical to the top element (which in this case
happens to be divided into two subelements, the three-state buffers for the
two directions).
The ’245 symbol also introduces  dependency notation, a means of display-  dependency notation
ing some of the more common logical relationships among input and output
signals. A few more concepts are needed to make this notation fly:
•  Affecting signals.  An input signal (or, occasionally, an output signal) may  affecting signal
affect other inputs or outputs in a way that can be displayed on the symbol.
Such a signal has a qualifying label  Li, where  L  is a letter that indicates the
type of relationship or effect, and  i  is an integer that identifies the affected
signals. The ’245 internal signal labeled  G3  is such a signal.
•  Affected signals.  Inputs or outputs that are affected by a signal  Li  bear the  affected signal
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

798  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
WHOOPS!  The discussion of “affected signals” said “G3” when it should have said “the signal
labeled  G3.” In the IEEE standard,  G3  is a qualifying label, and other signals may
have the same label. The standard does not specify unique names for internal and
external signals.  However, in the rest of this appendix, we’ll take the liberty of
using an internal signal’s qualifying label as its name if no ambiguity results.
qualifying label  i.  If an affected signal requires a qualifying label of its
own, then  i  is used as a prefix to that label. Thus, the signal labeled  3EN1
in the ’245 symbol affects signals labeled  1, and is itself affected by  G3.
AND  dependency • AND  dependency.  This relationship is denoted by  Gi, and is a sort of enable
Gi  function.  Affected signals perform their “normal” functions only if  Gi  is
asserted; otherwise, they are negated. In the ’245 symbol, inputs  3EN1  and
3EN2  can “do their thing” only if  G3  is asserted.  Figure A–10 shows an
equivalent notation for the dependent signals.  Notice that dependency is
defined in terms of internal, not external, signal values.
Figure A–10
a &
Illustration of  AND  dependency. a G3  EN1
b
b 3 EN1 &
EN2
3 EN2
enable dependency •  Enable dependency.  This dependency is denoted by  ENi, and has the same
ENi  effect as  EN  inputs defined earlier. Thus, in the ’245 symbol, the internal
signal  3EN1, which is asserted only if pins 1 and 19 are  LOW, enables the
three-state drivers for pins 2 through 9.
Whewww!  You might be thinking that this is a lot of trouble for a few
lousy three-state buffers, but just wait until you see some of the IEEE-standard
counter and shift-register symbols later in this appendix!
A.4  PRIORITY ENCODERS
Figure A–11 shows the IEEE standard symbol for a 74x148. Still more features
of the standard are used in this symbol:
solidus •  Solidus.  The slash in a label such as  0/Z10, called a  solidus  in the stan-
dard, separates multiple functions of a single internal signal. An equivalent
notation is shown in Figure A–12.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.4  PRIORITY ENCODERS  799
Figure A–11 74x148
IEEE standard logic symbol HPRI/BIN
for the 74x148 8-input priority 10 ≥1
0/Z10 10
encoder. 11
1/Z11 11
12
2/Z12 12
13 15
3/Z13 13 18
1
4/Z14 14
2 α 14
5/Z15 15
3
6/Z16 16
4
7/Z17 17
1α 9
2α 7
V18
5  4α 6
ENα
• OR  dependency.  This relationship is denoted by  Vi; the  Vi  signal is  OR’ed OR  dependency
with affected signals. Thus, affected signals perform their “normal” func- Vi
tions only if the  Vi  signal is negated; otherwise, they are asserted.
•  Virtual inputs and outputs.  These are internal signals, denoted by a horizon-  virtual input
tal line going nowhere, such as the ones labeled  10–17  in the ’148 symbol. virtual output
These signals have no external connection but affect or are affected by other
signals via dependency notation.
•  Interconnection dependency.  This relationship is denoted by  Zi, and indi-  interconnection
cates an internal connection.  Affected signals equal the  Zi  signal, unless dependency
modified by additional dependency notation.  Think of the  Z  as a zig-zag Zi
internal wire.
•  Greek letters.  A Greek letter may be used instead of an integer in qualifying  Greek letters
labels to avoid ambiguity when the affected signals have a numeric function
label, as in the inputs or outputs of a coder.
If you understand these and the previously introduced features of the standard,
you can “read” the functional behavior of a ’148 right from its symbol. However,
most people do the opposite—already knowing how a ’148 works, they try to
deduce how the standard works from the ’148 symbol!
Figure A–12
0
Equivalent notation for solidi. a 0 / Z10  a
Z10
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

800  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
A.5  MULTIPLEXERS AND DEMULTIPLEXERS
The IEEE standard provides a special notation for multiplexers and demultiplex-
ers.  For example, Figure A–13 shows the IEEE symbols for multiplexer ICs
that we discussed in Chapter 5. The general qualifying symbol  MUX  identifies a
bit-grouping symbol multiplexer. The bracket is called a  bit-grouping symbol  and indicates that the
internal value grouped inputs produce an  internal value  that is a weighted sum. The weights
are given by the qualifying labels on the individual inputs; if the weights are all
powers of 2, they may be replaced by the corresponding exponents, and all but
the first and last exponents may be omitted “if no confusion is likely.” Thus, the
2  1  0 
weights of pins 9, 10, and 11 of the 74x151 are 2  , 2 , and 2 , respectively; if
the input signal on these pins is 110, the internal value is 6.
The internal value produced by bit grouping affects other internal values
or outputs according to the qualifying label written to the right of the grouping
0
range notation symbol.  In the 74x151 multiplexer symbol, the notation  G  indicates  AND
7 
dependency with signals whose labels are in the range 0–7.  In other words,
input  i  is selected (and transferred to the output) if and only if the internal
value is  i.  There are two outputs, normally equal to the selected input and its
complement. However, these outputs are asserted only if the enable input  EN  is
asserted.
The 74x153 symbol also uses bit grouping for the select inputs, and it uses
a common control block to indicate that the select inputs affect both sections of
74x153
14
0  0
74x151 2 G
1 3
MUX
74x157
7
EN 15
11 MUX EN
0  1
10 0 1 G1
G EN
9 7 6
2 0
4 5 2 MUX
0 1 7 1 4
3 4  3
1 2 1
2 3  5
2 3 7
1 5 15 6
3
15 6 10 11
4 9
14 11 10
5 9
13 12 14
6 12
12 13 13
7
Figure A–13  IEEE standard symbols for multiplexers.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.5  MULTIPLEXERS AND DEMULTIPLEXERS  801
the multiplexer. Since the bottom half of the multiplexer is identical in function
to the top, its qualifying labels are not repeated.  Notice that each half has an
independent  EN  input.
The symbol for the 74x157 does not use bit grouping, because it has only
one select input. Instead, the select input is labeled  G1, indicating that it has an
AND  dependency with signals bearing the identifier “1.” Thus, pin 3 is selected
only if  G1  is asserted.  Pin 2, on the other hand, bears the identifier “1”; the
overbar indicates that pin 2 is selected only if  G1  is negated. All four sections
are controlled by  G1  in this way.
74x155
Figure A–14
IEEE standard symbols 13 0 
0
for demultiplexers. 3  1 G
3
74x139
74x138 DMUX DMUX
DMUX 2 4 7
0  0 0 2 0
15 3 G  5 G4 6
0 1 3 1 1
1 14 6 1 5
0 1 2 4 2
2 0 13 1 7 4
G 2 3 3
3 7 12
2 3
11 14 12 9
4 14
6 & 10 13 11 10
5
4 9 10 15 11
6
5 7 15 9 12
7
Figure A–14 shows the IEEE standard demultiplexer symbols for the MSI
decoder/demultiplexer ICs that we discussed in Chapter 5.  The general quali-
0
fying symbol  DMUX  identifies a demultiplexer. The notation  G  indicates  AND
7 
dependency with outputs whose labels are in the range 0–7.  In other words,
output  i  may be asserted only if the internal value is  i.  In addition, all of the
other inputs (pins 4–6) must be asserted.
A similar notation is used in the 74x139, which contains two independent
demultiplexers.  Since the second demultiplexer is identical in function to the
first, the qualifying labels are not repeated.
The symbol for the 74x155 uses a common control block to show that
the same select inputs (and internal value produced by bit grouping) are used
for both sections of the demultiplexer. Also, the input labeled “4” has an  AND
dependency on the input labeled “G4,” so the selected output is asserted only if
both of these inputs are asserted. Now, is that all clear?
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

802  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
A.6  EXCLUSIVE-OR AND PARITY FUNCTIONS
The IEEE standard symbols for  EXCLUSIVE OR  and  EXCLUSIVE NOR  gates are
shown in Figure A–15. Either of two different notations may be used, depending
on how you’re thinking about the gate’s function. The top symbols, with “=1”
inside the symbol outline, assert their outputs when exactly one of the inputs is
asserted. The bottom symbols, with “=” inside the symbol outline, assert their
outputs when their inputs are equal.
(a) (b)
=1  =1  =1  =1
=  =  =  =
Figure A–15  IEEE standard symbols:  (a)  EXCLUSIVE OR  gates; (b)  EXCLUSIVE
NOR  gates.
The IEEE standard symbol for 74x280 9-bit parity generator is shown in
Figure A–16(a).  The general qualifying symbol “2k” at the top of the symbol
indicates that the outputs are asserted if 2k  of the inputs are asserted for some
integer  k. Thus, pin 5, an active-high output, and pin 6, an active-low output,
both indicate even parity. The nature of the function, of course, is such that pin
6 could instead be viewed as an active-high output that denotes odd parity. The
standard symbol for this interpretation of the device function is shown in (b).
74x280 74x280
Figure A–16
(a)  (b)
IEEE standard symbols for the 2k 2k
8 8
74x280 9-bit parity generator:
9 9 5
(a) normal symbol; (b) both [EVEN]
10 10
outputs active high.
11 5 11
12 12
13 6 13
1 1
6
2 2 [ODD]
4 4
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.7  COMPARATORS  803
A.7  COMPARATORS
IEEE standard symbols for MSI comparators are shown in Figure A–17.  Like
the select inputs of multiplexers, the data inputs have qualifying labels indicating
0  3 
their arithmetic weights in powers of 2 (0–3 corresponding to 2  –2  in the ’85).
The cascading inputs and outputs are labeled with the appropriate arithmetic
function. In the ’682 symbol, the right-pointing triangle indicates that the outputs
have high fanout capability, and hysteresis is indicated on the data inputs.
74x85 74x682
Figure A–17
IEEE standard symbols COMP COMP
10
for MSI comparators. 0 2
12 0
4
13 P
6
15
3 8
2 < 7
P<Q 11 P
3 = 6
P=Q 13
4 > 5
P>Q 15  19
9 P=Q
0 17
11 7
3
14 Q 0
5 11
1 P>Q
3 7
9
12 Q
14
16
18
7
A.8  ADDERS
The IEEE standard uses the general qualifying symbol “Σ” to identify an adder
or addition function. Figure A–18(a) shows the symbol for a 74x283 4-bit adder.
The numbers on the addend inputs and sum output indicate the weight of each
pin, as a power of 2.
The IEEE symbol for a 74x181 4-bit ALU is shown in Figure A–18(b).
The first five inputs of the common control block form a “mode control” word,
which the standard designates by the letter  M. The weights of the mode control
bits are shown as powers of 2, and they designate a mode number in the range
0–31. According to the standard, a separate table accompanies the logic symbol
to define the functions performed in each mode. The  CP,  CG, and  CO  outputs
are enabled in modes 0–15.  The four individual ALU blocks are labeled with
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

804  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
the weights of the bits they process.  The IEEE symbol for the 74x182 carry
lookahead circuit is much simpler, and is shown in (c).
Figure A–18 74x181
IEEE standard symbols: 6  ALU
0
(a) 74x283; (b) 74x181; 5 15
(0 . . . 15) CP
(c) 74x182. 4 0 17
M (0 . . . 15) CG
3 31 14 74x182
6 (P=Q)
8 16 13  CPG
74x283 4 (0 . . . 15) CO CI 12
Σ 7 CO0
5 CI 11
0 3 CO1
3 0 4 CG0 9
2 1 CO2
14 P 1 P 9 CG1
1 [1] 14
12 Σ 13 Q CG2
3 23 5
6 10 P 10 CG3
0 3 22  [2]
2 Q
21  4 10
15 Q P 11 CP0 CG
20 [4] 2 7
11  9 Q CP1 CP
3 CO 19  15
7  P 13 CP2
CI 18 [8] 6
Q CP3
(a)  (b)  (c)
A.9  LATCHES, FLIP-FLOPS, AND REGISTERS
There are a few differences between traditional and IEEE symbols for latches
and flip-flops. Figure A–19 shows IEEE standard symbols for SSI latches and
flip-flops.  A major difference is that the asynchronous preset and clear inputs
S  (set) are drawn on the left, not on the top and bottom.  The names for these inputs
R  (reset) are different, too: S  (set)  and R  (reset). Also, a clock input is simply named  Ci,
where  i  is an integer and all other inputs labeled with  i  (e.g.,  iD) are controlled
by  Ci; this is just another instance of dependency notation:
control dependency •  Control dependency.  This relationship is denoted by  Ci  and, like enable
Ci  dependency, is a sort of enable function. It is intended to be used only for
clock or timing inputs. Affected signals are enabled when the  Ci  input is in
the internal 1-state or, if the  Ci  input has a dynamic indicator, on the 0-to-1
change in internal state.
The symbols for the ’74, ’109, and ’112 follow the usual IEEE convention
that only the first of two or more identical elements must be drawn in detail when
they are abutted in an array. Alternatively, the two independent sections of each
SSI package in Figure A–19 may be drawn separately, as are other traditional
and IEEE symbols for devices with independent sections, such as the 74x139.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.9  LATCHES, FLIP-FLOPS, AND REGISTERS  805
74x109 74x112
Figure A–19
5 4
IEEE standard symbols for SSI S S
74x74 2  6 3 5
latches and flip-flops. 1J 1J
4  4 1
S 5 C1 C1
74x375 3 3  7 2 6
1 3 C1 1K 1K
1D 2  1 15
2 1D 6 R R
4 C1 1
5 R
C2 11 10
7 6
2D 10 14 10 11 9
9 11 9
3D 11 12 13
10
12 C3 12  13  9 12  7
13 8
C4 13 16 14
15 14
4D
This is especially useful if the logic functions performed by the two sections in
a particular application are unrelated.
Figure A–20 shows the IEEE standard symbols for MSI latches and reg-
isters. All of these symbols make good use of the IEEE notation for common
control blocks. In the ’373 and ’374 symbols, the label  C1  on the clock input in-
dicates that it controls all inputs that bear the label  1, that is, all of the  1D  inputs.
The downward-pointing triangles indicate three-state outputs; by convention, an
input labeled  EN  enables such outputs.
In the ’377 symbol, the input labeled  G1  is an enable for inputs bearing the
label  1, that is, for the clock input  1C2. The clock input in turn controls all of
the inputs bearing the label  2, that is, data inputs  2D. As usual, only the first of
the eight identical flip-flop elements is drawn in detail.
74x373 74x374 74x377
11 11 1
C1 C1 G1
1  1  11
EN EN 1C2
3 2 3 2 3 2
1D 1D 2D
4 5 4 5 4 5
7 6 7 6 7 6
8 9 8 9 8 9
13 12 13 12 13 12
14 15 14 15 14 15
17 16 17 16 17 16
18 19 18 19 18 19
Figure A–20  IEEE standard symbols for MSI latches and registers.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

806  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
A.10  COUNTERS
IEEE standard symbols for popular counters are shown in Figure A–21.  Like
the IEEE symbols for other MSI devices, the counter symbols make good use
of the common-control-block and array features of the standard.  The general
qualifying symbol  CTRDIV16  indicates that the device is a divide-by-16 counter,
and labels  [1]–[8]  indicate the arithmetic weight of each counter bit.  However,
the additional notation used within the common control blocks to describe the
devices’ functions, though precise, is hardly intuitive. We’ll have to describe a
few more features of the standard to understand these symbols:
content input •  Content input.  When an input signal bearing the label  CT=m  is asserted,
CT=m  input  the value  m  is loaded into the device. In the counter symbols, you might
read “CT” as “count,” but in general it means “content.”
The only difference between the ’161 and ’163 symbols in Figure A–21 is that the
163’s  5CT=0  has a control dependency on the clock input (C5), and is therefore
a synchronous clear; the ’161 has an asynchronous clear.
content output •  Content output.  An output bearing the label  CT=m  is asserted when the
CT=m  output  content of the device is  m.
In the ’161 and ’163 symbols, the output  3CT=15  is asserted when the counter
is in state 15 and  G3  is asserted.
mode dependency •  Mode dependency.  This dependency is denoted by  Mi  and, like enable
Mi  dependency, is a sort of enable function.  Affected signals perform their
74x169
CTRDIV16
9
74x161 74x163 M1 [LOAD]
CTRDIV16 CTRDIV16 M2 [COUNT]
1 1 1
CT=0 5CT=0 M3 [UP]
9  9 
M1 M1 M4 [DOWN]
10 15
M2 15 M2 15 G5 3,5CT=15
10  3CT=15 10  3CT=15 7 
G3 G3 G6 4,5CT=0
7  7  2
G4 G4 2,3,5,6+/C7
2 2
C5/2,3,4+ C5/2,3,4+ 2,4,5,6–
3 14 3 14 3 14
1,5D [1] 1,5D [1] 1,7D [1]
4 13 4 13 4 13
[2] [2] [2]
5 12 5 12 5 12
[4] [4] [4]
6 11 6 11 6 11
[8] [8] [8]
Figure A–21  IEEE standard symbols for counters.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.10  COUNTERS  807
“normal” functions only if  Mi  is asserted; otherwise, the affected signals
have no effect on the device’s function and are ignored.
•  Multiple dependencies.  A signal may be affected by several other signals.  multiple
The identifiers of the affecting signals are listed, separated by commas, in dependencies
the qualifying label of the affected signal. The dependencies are applied in
the order that they are written, from left to right. If all of the dependencies
are of the same type (e.g.,  AND  dependency), then the order is irrelevant.
•  Multifunction outputs.  A single external output signal, such as pin 15 in the  multifunction output
’169 symbol, may have several sets of qualifying labels corresponding to
multiple modes of operation. Such a signal may be represented by multiple
outputs that are connected together externally. Such outputs normally have
a functional  OR  relationship—the external signal is asserted if any internal
signal is asserted.
In the ’161 and ’163 symbols, the label  1,5D  indicates that the data will be stored
when  M1  and  C5  are asserted (but  C5  is “asserted” only on an edge, because of
its dynamic indicator).  In the ’169 symbol, the output  3,5CT=15  is asserted if
M3  and  G5  are asserted and the counter is in state 15; and  4,5CT=0  is asserted
if  M4  and  G5  are asserted and the counter is in state 0; the external signal (pin
15) is asserted (LOW) if either of these internal signals is asserted.
•  Counting inputs.  When asserted, an input labeled with a  +  causes the device  counting input
to count up once.  An input labeled with a  –  causes the device to count +
down once. –
According to the ’161 and ’163 symbols, the device counts up on the rising edge
of the signal on pin 2 if  M2,  G3, and  G4  are asserted. The ’169 counts up if  M2,
M3,  G5, and  G6  are asserted, and down if  M2,  M4,  G5, and  G6  are asserted. In
each device, the qualifying labels for two separate functions of pin 2—load and
count up—are drawn on the same input line, separated by a solidus; they could
also have been drawn on two separate input lines, as we showed in Figure A–12
on page 799.
•  Nonstandardized information.  Descriptive function names and other non-  nonstandardized
standardized (i.e., helpful) information may be written in brackets next to information
the qualifying labels in a symbol.
The ’169 symbol has four “nonstandard” labels to describe the traditional /LD
and /ENP  inputs. Theoretically, you don’t need such labels if you understand the
standard.  Conversely, if signals are given meaningful names (as in traditional
logic symbols), then you don’t need the standard!
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

808  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
A.11  SHIFT REGISTERS
Figure A–22 shows the IEEE standard symbols for popular shift registers. The
general qualifying symbol  SRGn  denotes an  n-bit shift register. We’ve used most
of the other notation in these symbols previously; there’s just one new thing:
shifting input •  Shifting inputs.  When asserted, an input labeled with a  →  causes the device
→  to shift its information one position in the direction from left to right or
← from top to bottom. An input labeled with a  ←  causes a shift in the opposite
direction.
Figure A–22 74x299
IEEE standard symbols for SRG8
9
R
shift registers. 2
& 
3 3EN13
1
0 0
74x166 19 M
1 3
SRG8 12
9 C4/1→/2←
R 74x194
74x164 15
M1 [SHIFT] SRG4 11 8
SRG8 1,4D
9 M2 [LOAD] 1 7
R 6 R 3,4D
8 ≥1 9
C1/→ 7 C3/1→ 0 0 5,13 Z5
10 M 13
1 3 3,4D
1 1 11
& 3 1,3D C4 6,13 Z6
2 1D 2  6
2,3D 1→/2←
4 3 14
2,3D
5 4 2 5
1,4D 15
6 5 3  15
3,4D
10 10 4  14 4
3,4D
11 11 5  13 16
3,4D 3,4D
12 12 6 
3,4D 12 12,13 Z12
13 14 13 7 18 17
2,4D 2,4D
A.12  PROS AND CONS OF IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS
The absence of a standardized method of giving unique  names  to pins and dis-
playing the names on the logic symbol is probably the biggest defect of the
IEEE standard.  For example, how do we name the internal signals on pins 4,
5, and 6 of the 74x328 in Figure A–6? Worse, how can we distinguish between
the internal signals on pins 3 and 11, which are both labeled “4” on the logic
symbol? Apparently, the standard makers expected us to refer to these signals by
pin number only. But this is awkward and inconvenient, not only in textbooks,
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. A.12  PROS AND CONS OF IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  809
but also in design and debugging. It is far more natural to refer to a signal by
a functional name than by a pin number. (Indeed, in ASIC design there are no
pin numbers for internal signals!)
Still, the standard has several strengths:
•  It’s a standard.
•  It’s consistent.
•  It supports, indeed, defines, the symbology used in bubble-to-bubble design.
•  It is very complete. In addition to the basic devices covered in this book,
the full IEEE standard covers many other less commonly used devices and
structures.
•  In most cases, the standard allows the function of a logic device to be
defined unambiguously by the device symbol. For example, the ’299 sym-
bol in Figure A–22 conveys as much information as the function table in
Table 9–3, and more.
That’s the good news; now here’s more bad news, if you hadn’t already noticed:
•  Although the standard allows you to figure out, with moderate effort, the
precise function of an unfamiliar symbol, it does not provide any standard
way to remind you quickly of the function of a familiar symbol. That is, it
does not provide any standard, descriptive names for internal signals. Such
items are relegated to the status of “nonstandard information,” and their use
is not encouraged.
•  Many signals in IEEE symbols have no qualifying labels, while others have
duplicates. This makes it awkward to talk about signals during design and
debugging (e.g., “Connect  X  to the third bit up from the bottom. . . ”).
•  The standard encourages the omission of qualifying labels “if no confusion
will result.”  That’s like saying “Don’t use your turn signal if nobody’s
nearby to see it.” It’s precisely when someone is driving in your blind spot
that the habit of  always  using your turn signal can avert an accident. IEEE
symbols have lots of “blind” inputs and outputs that may be hooked up
incorrectly while drawing a schematic, or misapplied during debugging.
•  Many possible symbols exist for moderately complex devices. For example,
in the ’194 symbol in Figure A–22, pin 11 could be handled as shown, or
could be drawn as a single input line with the label  C4/1→/2←  or as three
lines with the labels  C4,  1→, and  2←. If used, these variations make it even
more difficult to “eyeball” the symbol for a familiar device and recognize
its functions.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

810  IEEE STANDARD SYMBOLS  APP. A
What logic designers really need is a standard set of descriptive, functional,
naming conventions for the inputs and outputs of MSI and LSI devices, one that
is consistently followed by all data books and CAD systems. For example, it’s
ridiculous that in the present environment, a single manufacturer can produce 2-,
4-, and 8-input multiplexers with descriptive input names ranging from  A–B  to
C0–C3  to  D0–D7! Unfortunately, the industry has too much invested in documen-
tation and CAD software for both inconsistent traditional symbols and unhelpful
IEEE standard symbols, for a consistent, helpful naming standard to be deployed
anytime soon. At least, today’s ASIC designers can work to ensure a modicum
of naming consistency and helpfulness in the logic “macrocells” that they define
and use in their own designs.
E X E R C I S E S
A.1  Draw and explain the IEEE standard symbol for a 74x49 seven-segment decoder.
A.2  Draw the IEEE standard symbol for the device in Exercise 5.43.
A.3  Explain all of the notation used in the IEEE standard symbol for a 74x148. (Some
research is required to answer this one.)
A.4  Draw the IEEE standard symbol for the 74x155 used as a dual 2-to-4 decoder.
A.5  Draw the IEEE standard symbol for a 74x251 multiplexer.
A.6  Draw the IEEE standard symbol for the circuit in Exercise 5.56.
A.7  How does the meaning of the label  1D  differ between the traditional and the IEEE
symbols for registers like the 74x374? (Hint:  How might pin 4 of a ’374 be labeled
in the IEEE standard?)
A.8  Draw an IEEE-standard symbol for the modified multiplexer of Figure 10–15.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

A P P E N D I X
B
ELECTRICAL
CIRCUITS REVIEW
by Bruce M. Fleischer
This appendix is recommended reading if you want a review of electronics’ basic
ideas. Why, you may ask, does a digital circuit designer need to know this analog
“stuff”? You need it to understand the abilities and shortcomings of components
available in the real world, which must be used in building circuits that will work
in the real world.
A practical problem that motivates this appendix is the calculation of the
rise and fall times of a logic circuit output driving one or more inputs of other
logic circuits (see Section 3.6 of the text). That problem is really one of analog,
not digital circuits.  Therefore, much of this appendix consists of building up
enough ideas from analog electronics to make a simple model for rise and fall
times.
B.1  FUNDAMENTALS
B.1.1  Charge
In the Bohr theory of the atom (named after Niels Bohr, 1885–1962),  electrons  electron
orbit a nucleus containing  neutrons  and  protons. Attraction between the opposite  neutron
charges of electrons and protons keeps atoms together. Particles with the same proton
charge repel each other.  You may wonder what attraction holds the nucleus
together, with all those protons.  The answer is that the physicists have it all
under control, and be glad this isn’t an appendix on particle physics.
B–1

--- Page Break ---

B–2  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
The nearly equal numbers of electrons and protons in most objects, such
as a piece of fur, cancel out, so electrons in a neighboring object, such as an
amber rod, usually don’t feel any overall attraction for the fur. In some atoms,
however, the electrons are not as tightly held as in others, and there are situations
in which some electrons come loose.
For example, if we rub the amber rod on the fur, some of the electrons
from the fur end up on the amber. The fur is missing some electrons, while the
amber has extras. You can see the attraction of these charges for each other; the
hairs in the fur are pulled towards the rod. If the two are brought close enough,
some electrons in the rod will jump back to the fur, making a spark. The ancient
Greeks didn’t know about the Bohr model of the atom, but they were familiar
with fur and amber (which is just petrified tree sap); in fact, our word “electron”
comes from the Greek for amber.
coulomb Electric charge is measured in  coulombs. An individual electron or proton
−19 
has much much less than one coulomb of charge,  −1.6×10 coulomb on an
−19 
electron, +1.6×10 on a proton.  The decision to call the electrons negative
is simply a convention started by Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790). Nature says
only that an electron’s charge is the opposite of a proton’s; there is nothing
inherently negative about electrons, they could just as easily be called positive
and protons negative.
B.1.2  Voltage
energy The attraction of opposite charges means that  energy  is required to pull them
apart, and that energy can be recovered when they come together again.  In
potential energy between, we say that the energy is kept as  potential energy. When a system has
work potential energy, it has the potential to do work.  Work  here just means a more
visible form of energy, not necessarily something we want done.
The most familiar form of potential energy is gravitational potential energy.
Because of the gravitational attraction between the earth and the objects on it,
lifting objects gives them potential energy.  When an object is dropped, that
potential energy is rapidly converted into kinetic energy, which is even more
rapidly converted into other forms of energy when the object hits something (e.g.,
sound, heat, kinetic energy of broken pieces). The more mass something has and
the higher we lift it, the more potential energy it has. Fans of David Letterman
(1947– ) may remember just how much potential for mayhem a bowling ball has
when lifted up six stories.
voltage,  V In electricity, the quantity analogous to height is  voltage, usually indicat-
volt (V) ed by the symbol  V. Voltage is measured in  volts  (symbol:  V), named after
Alessandro Volta (1745–1827). (Notational example:  Vobject  = 2.5 V.) In digital
millivolt (mV) circuits, we sometimes measure voltage in thousandths of a volt, or  millivolts
(mV). Increasing the voltage of one coulomb of charge by one volt gives it one
joule (J) joule (J)  of electrical potential energy, named after James P. Joule (1818–1889).
Because electrons have negative charge, we have to take electrons from a
higher to a lower voltage to increase their potential energy. This is what happens

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.1  FUNDAMENTALS  B–3
in a battery: electrons go into the positive terminal and come out of the negative
terminal with more potential energy, which is converted to other forms of energy
as the electron travels “up” through the circuit. There is a special unit for the
amount of energy one electron gets when its potential is reduced by one volt, an
−19 
electron-volt  (symbol: eV), which equals 1.6×10 J.  electron-volt (eV)
There are several lessons to remember about voltage and potential energy.
One is that nearly all everyday systems have tremendous reservoirs of potential
energy of various kinds, and any give and take of potential represents a minuscule
fraction of a system’s total potential energy.
As a simple example, shown in Figure B–1, get a fresh bowling ball and
carry it up one story, giving it one bowling-ball-story (bbs) of gravitational  bbs
potential energy.  Then drop it back to ground level to let loose that 1 bbs of
energy. Does the bowling ball now have no potential energy? Certainly not—if
you stand in a ditch under it, it clearly has lots of potential!
Figure B–1
Bowling balls and energy.
1 bbs potential
0 bbs kinetic
0 bbs potential?
0 bbs potential 0 bbs potential
0 bbs kinetic  ~0 bbs potential 0 bbs kinetic
~1 bbs kinetic 1 bbs heat & sound
–1 bbs potential?
Stepping out of the way, let the ball drop into the ditch. Does it have  −1 bbs
of potential energy now?  Clearly, some sort of convention needs to be set up
here. We could try to find an absolute scale, say with 0 corresponding to ball at
the center of the earth, but that would cause more problems than it would solve.
There are two workable conventions.  The first is to consider potential
energy as a purely relative term, and always speak of potential differences: the
ball on the second floor has 1 bbs more potential than the one on the ground,
and the one in the ditch is at  −2 bbs relative to the second floor.
The second, shortcut convention uses the fact that many things sit at ground
level. Thus, when we talk about the ball’s potential at a given spot, we can imply
the comparison, “relative to ground level.” In this convention, “zero potential”
just means that something is at ground level, not that it has absolutely no potential
energy.

--- Page Break ---

B–4  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
In electrical terms, we can use the full form to describe the voltage differ-
ence, or voltage drop, between two points, or we can use the short form and talk
about the voltage at a point. The short form always implies an unspoken com-
parison with a common reference point. In most circuits that common reference
ground point is called  ground, and may actually be connected to the ground through a
water pipe, but it is not at zero volts in any absolute sense. (Strange problems,
and sometimes fireworks, can result from connecting circuits whose “grounds”
have a voltage difference between them.)
B.1.3  Current
current, I Electrical  current  has the same relation to charge as a river’s current does to
water; it is the rate at which charge crosses a line cutting through part of the
ampere (A) circuit. Current is usually indicated by the symbol  I  and is measured in  amperes,
amp or  amps  (symbol:  A), named after A. M. Amp`ere (1775–1836).  One ampere
second (s) equals one coulomb per second (s). In digital circuits, we seldom have currents
as high as one amp flowing into a single device.  More often, we deal with
milliampere (mA) currents of  milliamperes (mA)  and  microamperes (πA).
microampere (πA)  Like the flow of water, current has a size and direction. Usually, we decide
on a direction beforehand, and then call current flowing that way positive and
the other way negative. The one tricky thing about electrical current is that in
electronic circuits, the protons stay put and the (negatively charged) electrons
18 
move around. If 6.25×10 electrons per second flow through a wire from left
to right, we can call that current  −1 A flowing to the right or 1 A flowing to the
left.
As shown in Figure B–2, the convention is that a certain current flows in the
direction in which positive charge would move to make that current, which is the
opposite of the direction in which electrons actually flow. To explicitly indicate
positive current the use of this convention, current is sometimes called  positive current. If this
seems confusing at first, blame it on Ben Franklin. We’re all too committed to
this system to flip things around, so you might as well get used to it.
Figure B–2 1 A –1 A
Conventions for current flow.
18
1 coulomb/sec 6.25×10 –1 coulomb/sec
electrons/sec
B.1.4  Circuits
The schematic diagrams that we use to represent circuits on paper are similar
to figures studied in graph theory, a topic in abstract mathematics.  We can
use some ideas from graph theory to make formal rules about how circuits work.
Fortunately, the abstract ideas we need can be directly related to physical circuits;
there isn’t any heavy math here.

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.1  FUNDAMENTALS  B–5
Figure B–3 branch
A graph. loop
node
An example of a  graph  is shown in Figure B–3. It is made of points, called  graph
nodes, connected by lines, called  branches. The only other abstract concept we  node
need is a  loop, which is just a path starting at some node, passing through a branch
sequence of nodes and branches, and returning to the starting node. A direction loop
is associated with each branch in the loop when we specify the loop’s direction.
The graph in Figure B–3 looks like a circuit diagram, albeit a boring one.
We could use it to represent a circuit, though, with some rules for transforming
schematics into graphs.  It’s simpler, however, just to refer to schematics as if
they were graphs. When we do, there are two concepts we need to consider.
The first concept is the difference between nodes and connection dots. A
node is any “point” in a circuit, as shown in Figure B–4. Part (a) indicates that
there is a node between the resistors, although we wouldn’t put a connection
dot there.  The points where we do put connection dots, as in (b), generally
correspond to nodes. The circled part of the schematic in (c) would usually be
considered to be a single node, unless the connecting wiring is so nonideal that
it must be treated as additional components.
Figure B–4
Nodes and branches.
node  node  node
(a)  (b)  (c)
The second concept is how to treat components, as shown in Figure B–5.
Two-lead components, such as resistors, are like single branches with a node at
each end.  Transistors and other larger components have at least one node per
lead. Depending on how much detail we’re interested in, we might imagine that
there are one or more internal nodes also; that way we can give names to the
voltages at and currents in each of the components’ leads.
If a circuit diagram includes a node for ground, then the “single-ended” volt-
age at a node means the voltage difference from there to ground. The branches
in the circuit diagram indicate physical paths through which current can flow,
such as wires. Because current can’t jump out of the circuit, the current flowing

--- Page Break ---

B–6  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
Figure B–5
VC IC
Components.
IB
one or more unnamed
VB
internal nodes
VE IE
in a branch is the same anywhere along the branch. In other words, there is a
definite value of current in each branch of the circuit.  There is also a voltage
drop (a “differential” voltage) along each branch, the voltage difference between
the nodes it connects. The one term you should avoid is the current at a node;
always refer to the current through some branch of a circuit.
Once we’ve picked a direction for a branch, its current (or voltage drop) is
a positive or negative number depending on whether the current flows (or voltage
decreases) in the chosen direction. Figure B–6 shows part of a circuit diagram
with several named voltages and currents.  The + and  −  signs and the arrows
show which polarity of voltage or current is called positive.
Figure B–6 V
R1
A circuit diagram with explicit
IR1 R1
voltages and currents.
VCC = 5V VX
R2 ID VD
Using the terms defined above, we can write down two basic laws that apply
Kirchhoff’s current to all circuits.  They are called  Kirchhoff’s current law (KCL)  and  Kirchhoff’s
law (KCL) voltage law (KVL), after Gustav Robert Kirchhoff (1824–1887).
Kirchhoff’s voltage
law (KVL) KVL  The sum of the voltage drops around any loop is zero.
KCL  The sum of the currents into any node of a circuit is zero.
All these laws really say is that the business of assigning voltages to nodes, and
currents to branches, is consistent.
KVL is like saying: if you start at any point in a building and follow any
path (up and down stairs, elevators, and escalators) that comes back to the same
point, the net number of stories you went up or down is zero.
One way of restating KCL is to say that nodes don’t store charge; any
current that comes into a node through one connection has to go out through
another. Implicit in KCL is a rule about components: any current going into a

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.2  RESISTORS AND EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS  B–7
component through one lead must come out elsewhere. A resistor, for example,
1
has two leads. Current can go through a resistor, but can’t accumulate there. 
Kirchhoff’s laws may seem obvious.  In a way, that’s their point: to for-
malize the basic ideas we take as axioms.  They’re not proof that our picture
makes sense, just a formal statement of the rules we use. In other words, they’re
a way of avoiding lame answers like “that’s how electricity works.” When we
calculate series and parallel resistances in the next section and you ask “why can
you make that step?” we can point to Kirchhoff’s laws.
What makes Kirchhoff’s laws true? That’s how electricity works. This may
not seem like much of an improvement, but at least we know exactly what we
need to have faith in, which is about the most you can hope for in science.
B.2  RESISTORS AND EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS
B.2.1  Ohm’s Law and Resistors
Take a chunk of any material and hook up two wires to it, to make a two-
lead component. Call the voltage across the component  Vchunk , and the positive
current flowing through the component  Ichunk . For most materials, the current in
a component made in this way would be proportional to the voltage. The ratio
Vchunk  / Ichunk  is  R, the component’s  resistance, and is measured in  ohms  (symbol:  resistance, R
Ω), named after Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854). ohm
The equation  V  =  I  ⋅  R  is called  Ohm’s law. Either current or voltage can  Ohm’s law
be thought of as the driving term.  A resistance of one ohm means that one
volt is required to get one amp to flow, or that a current of one amp produces
a voltage drop of one volt.  Because such a component can be described by
giving its resistance, it is called a  resistor.  Most of the resistors used in real  resistor
circuits have resistances of many ohms, so larger units are used for convenience
(1 kΩ  = 1000  Ω, 1 MΩ  = 1000 kΩ). In circuit diagrams, a resistor is usually
drawn together with a name and its resistance, often with the “Ω” omitted from
the resistance (e.g., 470, 10k) since no other units would be appropriate.
If any number of resistors are connected in a network with two external
terminals, the resulting object is also a resistor. That is, the total current flowing
through the network from one terminal to the other is proportional to the voltage
between the two terminals.  Careful application of Kirchhoff’s laws and some
linear algebra can be used to calculate the resistance of any such network, but
most of the circuits you’ll work with don’t need this level of math. Usually, a
couple of simple rules about series and parallel combinations, given below, are
enough. These rules can be derived from Kirchhoff’s laws, but will be easier to
1 
Those of you who are ahead of the game may protest this statement, because we can always
force some charge onto any finite-sized component.  The response is that to do so changes the
voltage on that component, and the proper model includes a capacitance to ground from at least
one interior node.  When current through this capacitor is included, the terminal currents of the
component sum to zero.

--- Page Break ---

B–8  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
apply and will seem almost obvious given the right intuitive picture of current
and resistance.
The bowling-ball analogy, used earlier to introduce the concept of voltage,
suggests that current flowing in a resistor might be something like a bowling-
ball waterfall. This is not the right intuitive picture; in fact, it is best to avoid
picturing individual electrons at all when thinking about macroscopic currents.
Instead, water flowing in pipes provides a better analogy for electric current.
Pressure represents voltage, current is current, and resistance is resistance (see
Figure B–7.  Fat pipes are the wires, and capillary tubes or pipes packed with
porous material are resistors. The flow through such a resistor is proportional to
the pressure imposed across it. To make the resistance greater, finer packing can
be used, or the tube can be made narrower or longer. Coarser packing or a shorter
or fatter piece of tubing reduces the resistance. The discussion to follow is given
in electrical terms, but you can translate it to this “water in pipes” vocabulary if
you want.
Figure B–7 (a)  (b) flow
Water-pipe analogy for resis-
tance.
+  pressure –
series resistance The simplest resistor combination is two identical resistors in  series, as
shown in Figure B–8(a). The current is the same in the two resistors, so the total
voltage drop is just double the drop across one. Therefore, the resistance (V/ I
ratio) of the combination is twice that of a single resistor, or 2 R. In the more
general case in (b), the resistance of any number of resistors in series is the sum
of the individual resistances:
Rseries  =  R1  +  R2  +  ⋅ ⋅ ⋅  +  Rn
If one of the resistors has a much larger value than the others, it will dominate
the series resistance (a plugged pipe has about the same resistance regardless of
whether the unplugged section is short or long).
Take another look at the  R  +  R  series combination. If one end is grounded
and the other is connected to a known voltage, as in Figure B–9(a), what’s the
voltage at the node between the resistors? The answer is obvious:  Vout  =  VCC  / 2.
voltage divider This circuit is an example of a  voltage divider.  A voltage divider takes two
R  R  2R
Figure B–8
(a)
Series resistance: (a) identical
resistors; (b) different resistors.
R1  R2  Rn  Rseries
(b)

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.2  RESISTORS AND EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS  B–9
V V = 5 V
Figure B–9 CC  CC 
Voltage dividers: (a) identical
resistors; (b) different resistors. R R1
99 kΩ
VOUT = ? VOUT = 0.05 V
R2
R
1 kΩ
(a)  (b)
voltages (one of which can be ground, but doesn’t have to be) and produces a
new voltage that is between them, dividing the original voltage difference into
two smaller voltages.
Given the two input voltages, a divider’s output voltage is set by the ratio
of the resistors. It is halfway between the inputs if the resistors are equal, and
is closer to one input if the resistor on that side is smaller.  The divider in
Figure B–9(b), for example, has an output voltage of 0.05 V. This result is easy
to calculate, assuming that the current is the same through both resistors. If any
current enters or leaves the divider at  Vout , this assumption does not hold, and
the output voltage is harder to see intuitively. We’ll return to this point later.
When resistors are arranged to offer  parallel  paths for the current, the  parallel resistance
combination’s resistance is less than that of the individual resistors. Once again,
the simplest case uses two identical resistors, as in Figure B–10(a). Both resistors
see the same voltage drop, but now the total current is the sum of the two currents.
Therefore, the net resistance is  R / 2.
(a) (b)
R  R  R/2 R R R R
1  2  n  parallel
Figure B–10  Parallel resistance: (a) identical resistors; (b) different resistors.
The general case in Figure B–10(b) is easiest to work out if we think in
terms of 1 / R  =  I /  V, called the  conductance  or  admittance.  Because the total  conductance
current through parallel resistors is just the sum of the individual currents (all admittance
resulting from the one applied voltage), the conductance of resistors in parallel
can be written as the sum of individual conductances:
1 1 1 1
=  +  +  ⋅ ⋅ ⋅  + 
Rparallel R1 R2 R n
The symbol “||” is frequently used as shorthand for “in parallel”:  ||
Rparallel  =  R1  || R2  || ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ || Rn

--- Page Break ---

B–10  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
When there are only two resistors, the formula is often written in this form:
R1  ⋅  R2
R1  || R2  = 
R1  +  R2
If one resistor has a much smaller resistance (larger conductance) than the others,
it dominates the parallel combination. Resistors in parallel can be viewed as a
current divider, although they’re seldom used that way.
Sometimes we find a network of resistors that is not a simple series or
parallel combination, but that can be solved by successive applications of the
series and parallel formulas above (see Exercise B.3).  Some networks are just
too complicated to analyze with these rules.  As noted above, however, the
resistance can always be found through more explicit use of Kirchhoff’s laws
(see Exercise B.4).
B.2.2  Power
Batteries and power supplies give energy to the electrons passing through.  In
most circuits, the electrons’ energy is converted to heat as the electrons flow
through the circuit back to the supply.  Heat is produced any time that current
flows through a voltage drop, so the electrons come out having less potential
energy than when they went in.
power dissipation, P The  power dissipation, P, is the rate at which electrical energy is converted
to heat energy, and is given by the voltage (energy/charge) times the current
watt (charge/s). The unit for power is the  watt  (symbol: W), named after James E.
Watt (1736–1819); 1 W = 1 V-A = 1 joule / s .
Most of the heat dissipated by TTL circuits comes from the circuits’ internal
resistors.  Because the current through a resistor is proportional to the voltage
across it, power goes as the square of the voltage or current. One line of algebra
2  2 
gets you from Ohm’s law to  P  =  I ⋅  R  =  V / R.
B.2.3  Th ´evenin Equivalent
ideal voltage source The symbol for an  ideal voltage source  is shown in Figure B–11. This hypothet-
ical device creates a voltage difference between its terminals that is independent
of the current through those terminals. Like irresistible forces and immovable ob-
jects, ideal sources are only abstractions, but are useful in describing the behavior
of real sources, such as batteries. The voltage difference between a battery’s ter-
minals is nearly independent of the current taken from it, but if you pull enough
current out of a battery, its voltage will drop noticeably.
Figure B–11
An ideal voltage source. 
VCC

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.2  RESISTORS AND EQUIVALENT CIRCUITS  B–11
I
Figure B–12 1 Ω out
Model for a real voltage source—
a battery.
1.5 V Voc 
 
1.5 V Vout
1.5 V
One way to describe this behavior of a real battery is to say that it acts
like, or is modeled by, the circuit in Figure B–12, an ideal voltage source in
series with a resistor. If the circuit doesn’t have to supply any current, there is
no drop across the resistor, and the source’s voltage appears across the terminals
(this is called the battery’s  open-circuit voltage,  Voc ). If the battery’s terminals  open-circuit voltage
are shorted together, the source’s (unchanged) voltage is dropped entirely in the
resistor, and the current through the short (the battery’s  short-circuit current) is  short-circuit current
Voc  / Rout  = (1.5 V) / (1  Ω) = 1.5 A.
More completely, we can write a general formula relating the model’s cur-
rent and output voltage:
Vout  =  Voc  −  Iout  ⋅  Rout
This linear model has two parameters,  Voc  and  Rout , that can be found from
two measurements of  Vout  and  Iout , such as the open-circuit voltage (Vout  given
2
Iout  = 0) and the short-circuit current (Iout  at which  Vout  = 0).
Th´evenin’s theorem (named for Charles Leon Th´evenin, 1857–1926) proves
that any network of resistors and ideal voltage sources with only two terminals
is equivalent to a single source in series with a resistor (see Figure B–13). The
smaller circuit, called the  Th´evenin equivalent, is equivalent in the sense that  Th´evenin equivalent
it has the same  I-V  characteristics (the full circuit may dissipate more power
than its Th´evenin equivalent). As shown in the figure, the voltage and resistance
used in the equivalent circuit are called  VTh  and  RTh , the  Th´evenin voltage  and  Th´evenin voltage
Th´evenin resistance. These parameters can be found from two measurements of  Th´evenin resistance
the circuit’s voltage and current, as described in the preceding paragraph.
To illustrate Th´evenin equivalent circuits, let’s take another look at the
voltage divider in Figure B–9(a), with  VCC  = 5 V. With no load connected to
Vout , the output voltage is obviously 2.5 V. What happens when we try to use that
voltage, though? Figure B–14(a) shows a similar divider driving a load resistance
(Rload ) of 2 kΩ. It’s not impossible to find  Vout  now, thinking of all the resistors as
2 
Real batteries or voltage sources are even less ideal than our model allows—the voltage is not
necessarily a linear function of the current. One way to get around this is to use a linear model, but
state that it only applies over a limited range. That is, we could say that the battery acts like the
model in the figure, with  Voc  = 1.5 V and  R  = 1  Ω, for output currents between 0 and 100 mA. The
measurements from which the parameters are found (or extracted) must be made within the stated
range. Outside that range, the battery’s behavior would have to be described by other parameter
values, or perhaps even by a different model, such as one including flames or oozing chemicals.

--- Page Break ---

B–12  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
Figure B–13
Th ´evenin equivalent circuit.
Iout RTh Iout
VTh
Vout Vout
one network, but it’s easier to replace the source-plus-divider with its Th´evenin
equivalent, as shown in Figure B–14(b).  Looking at the resulting divider, we
see that  Vout  is 2.0 V. You might try putting in different load resistances and
recalculating  Vout . Which approach is easier when you do this?
Th´evenin equivalents make calculations easier once we have them, but you
may wonder where the foregoing values of  VTh  and  RTh  came from. A network’s
Th´evenin voltage is just the network’s open-circuit voltage, and is often pretty
easy to figure out. One way to find the Th´evenin resistance, which equals  Rout ,
is to calculate the network’s short-circuit current and then solve for  Rout  from
that and the open-circuit voltage. This approach is a bit messy, but if you work
through it, you’ll get
R1  ⋅  R2
RTh  = 
R1  +  R2
At least you only have to do that once, and the answer is easy to remember
because it equals  R1  || R2 . Actually, that equality is no coincidence. It’s a conse-
(a)  (b)
R1
R
1 kΩ Th
0.5 kΩ
5 V  V = ? V = 2 V
OUT  OUT 
R2 R VTh R
load load
1 kΩ 2.5 V
2 kΩ 2 kΩ
Figure B–14  Using the Th ´evenin equivalent:  (a) a voltage divider under load;
(b) Th ´evenin equivalent.

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.3  CAPACITORS  B–13
quence of a theorem that says: If you replace all voltage sources in a network with
shorts (i.e., set them to 0 V sources) and open all current sources, the resistance
of the resulting network equals the Th´evenin resistance of the original network.
B.3  CAPACITORS
A  capacitor  is a component that stores charge. The simplest capacitor is made  capacitor
from a pair of parallel metal plates, as shown in Figure B–15 (it’s called a
parallel-plate capacitor). Let’s say that we take some electrons out of one plate,  parallel-plate
leaving it positively charged, and put them on the other plate, making it negatively capacitor
charged. It’s not hard to see that there’s now a voltage difference between the
two plates.
Try grabbing an electron on the positive plate and moving it over to the
negative plate. It is attracted to the positive charge behind it and repelled by the
electrons in front, so you’ve got to push to move it. That push gives it potential
energy, which means that its voltage is decreasing.  The more charge there is
on the plates, the more push is needed, and therefore the bigger the voltage
difference between the plates. In a resistor, current and voltage are proportional,
but in a capacitor, charge and voltage are proportional.  The proportionality is
usually expressed as
Q  =  C  ⋅  V
where  Q  represents the charge on the first plate (in coulombs),  V  is the voltage
between the plates (positive if the first plate is at the higher voltage), and  C  is the
capacitance  of the capacitor, which is measured in  farads  (symbol: F), named  capacitance, C
after Michael Faraday (1791–1867). farad
A capacitance of one farad means that putting +1 and  −1 coulomb on the
plates makes the voltage drop 1 V. You can also think of it the other way around:
at a voltage of 1 V, a 1-farad capacitor holds 1 coulomb.  Most capacitors are
much smaller than 1 farad, so they’re usually measured in  picofarads  (1 pF =  picofarad, pF
−12  −6 
10 F) or  microfarads  (1  πF = 10 F).  microfarad,  πF
The capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor is directly related to the size
and spacing of the plates.  With the amount of charge fixed, pulling the plates
farther apart takes work, and therefore increases the voltage drop. Said the other
way, the farther apart the plates are, the less charge is accumulated per volt.
Capacitance decreases for farther plates and increases for closer plates. Also, the
Figure B–15
A parallel-plate capacitor.
V  I

--- Page Break ---

B–14  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
more area each plate has, the more charge can be stored, so a bigger area also
means more capacitance.
One way to get a large capacitance in a small space is to use large sheets
of very thin foil for the plates with a thin spacer to hold them apart, and roll
everything up like a jellyroll. Larger capacitors, 1  πF and above, are often made
this way.  Smaller capacitors look more like the parallel-plate model, although
their plates are usually separated by a solid material, such as ceramic or mica,
dielectric rather than air. This material, called the  dielectric, supports the metal plates and
helps the capacitor hold more charge.
Can other components, such as resistors or transistors, build up charge? If
we stick electrons on a component, they’ll make it harder to stick more on—and
the component’s voltage will drop. But remember, that’s the voltage relative to
ground. We can describe this effect by imagining that there are little capacitors
between every part of every circuit and ground. The size of each capacitor tells
us how much charge gets stored on that part of the circuit per volt.
As mentioned previously, changing the voltage across a capacitor requires
changing the charge stored on each plate of the capacitor, which requires current
through the capacitor. Each electron that goes in one lead of a capacitor can’t
come out the other lead because of the gap between the plates, but it does “push”
one electron from the other plate out through the other lead. In a resistor, a fixed
current creates a fixed voltage drop, but in a capacitor, a fixed current creates a
steadily increasing voltage drop as charge accumulates on the plates. It’s easy
to put this relationship is quantitative terms. First, since the charge on one plate
has to come through the attached lead, we can write
I  =  dQ / dt
We can take the derivative of charge equation  Q  =  C ⋅  V  and combine it with the
preceding equation to derive the following equations:
dQ / dt  =  C  ⋅  dV/ dt
I  =  C  ⋅  dV/ dt
dV/ dt  =  I / C
Thus, we can’t instantly change the voltage across a capacitor, because that would
require an infinite current. Capacitors are often explicitly placed at nodes (such
as the power supply) where we want to hold a steady voltage.  On the other
hand, unavoidable stray circuit capacitances can prevent voltages from changing
as fast as we might like them to, as we’ll see in the next section.
B.4  RC CIRCUITS
Changing the voltage on a capacitor requires current. If that current must flow
through a resistor, it requires a voltage across the resistor. If that voltage decreas-
es as the capacitor charges, the current and the rate of charging will decrease
exponentially with time.

--- Page Break ---

SEC. B.4  RC CIRCUITS  B–15
S1
Figure B–16
RC  discharge.
Vcap S2
VCC
Icap C  VR
5 V
IR R
For example, consider the circuit in Figure B–16.  The circuit starts with
switch  S1  closed and switch  S2  open, so the capacitor is charged to  VCC  = 5 V
and no current can flow through the resistor. Now, suppose that we disconnect the
voltage source by opening  S1  and then start our stopwatches (or oscilloscopes) as
we close  S2. With  S2  closed, notice that  VR  =  Vcap  and  IR  =  −Icap  (if you agree,
then you understand Kirchhoff’s laws).  We can write another two equations
relating these variables, from the rules for resistors and capacitors:
IR  =  VR  / R
dVcap  / dt  =  Icap  / C
Substituting into the last equation we get
dVcap  / dt  =  Icap  / C
=  −IR  / C
=  −Vcap  / RC
The solution to this equation is
−t / RC
Vcap (t)  =  Vcap (0)  ⋅  e
−t / RC
=  VCC  ⋅  e
In words, the capacitor’s voltage decreases exponentially, with a time constant
equal to  RC.  In order for the solution to make sense, the units for an  RC
product must be units of time, and this is indeed the case (1  Ω ×  1 F = 1 s,
1 MΩ ×  1  πF = 1 s, 1 kΩ ×  1 pF = 1 ns).
Now open  S2, and close  S1  again, as in Figure B–17, so  Vcap  goes back
to 5 V. Does  Vcap  change instantaneously? Not in a real circuit, it doesn’t. To
make our figure a more accurate model, we need to include some resistance in
series with the switch. This resistor, labeled  R2  in Figure B–17, can represent the
resistance of the switch itself, or of a transistor serving as the switch, or perhaps
of the voltage source. In any case, using the voltages and currents indicated in
the figure, and ignoring  R  since no current can flow through it, we can now write
dVcap  / dt  =  (VCC  −  Vcap ) / R2C

--- Page Break ---

B–16  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
R S1
Figure B–17 2
RC  charge.
S2
Vcap
VCC
Icap C
5 V
R
If the capacitor starts with no charge at  t  = 0, the solution to this equation is
−t / R2C
Vcap (t)  =  VCC  ⋅  (1  −  e )
The capacitor’s voltage approaches 5 V with an exponential time constant equal
to  R2C. We can also write down the solution for an arbitrary initial voltage:
−t / R2C
Vcap (t)  =  VCC  + (Vcap (0)  −  VCC )  ⋅  e
This solution reduces to the previous one if  Vcap (0) = 0. Actually, the simple  RC
discharge is also a special case of this solution, with  VCC  = 0.
The natural next step is to close both switches at the same time.  It is
possible, using Kirchhoff’s laws, to write equations relating all the voltages and
currents, and get a new differential equation for  Vcap .  There is, however, a
much easier and much more intuitive way to figure out what happens, using
the Th´evenin equivalent of the divider. First, redraw the schematic so that the
capacitor is separate, as in Figure B–18(a).  Now the rest of the circuit can be
replaced by its Th´evenin equivalent, as in (b). The equivalent circuit has the same
form as the charging circuit that we just analyzed, so the capacitor’s voltage is
−t / RTh C
Vcap (t)  =  VTh  + (Vcap (0)  −  VTh )  ⋅  e
As discussed above, a divider’s Th´evenin voltage is just its open-circuit voltage,
and its Th´evenin resistance is the parallel combination of the two resistors.
More complicated problems can often be solved with this approach.  Just
move the capacitor off to one side, and draw a box around everything else. Since
“everything else” is a two-terminal circuit, a Th´evenin equivalent can be found,
and the equation above can be used.
R2 R
Figure B–18 Th
Charging circuit: (a) redrawn;
(b) Th ´evenin equivalent.
Vcap  Vcap
VCC
R  C VTh C
5 V
(a)  (b)

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISES  B–17
E X E R C I S E S
B.1  Over the lifetime of a D-size battery (2000 mA-hr capacity), how many electrons
flow out of the negative terminal? Be more specific than “billions and billions.”
B.2  There is one electronic device that is something like a bowling-ball waterfall in the
“electrons as bowling balls” analogy. That device is a cathode ray tube (CRT), used
in televisions and computer displays. The electron gun in a CRT gives electrons a
whole lot of potential energy with a high-voltage power supply, then converts all
of that potential to kinetic energy as the electrons are fired at the face of the tube.
The molecules of  phosphor, a chemical coated on the inside of the tube, receive  phosphor
the electrons’ kinetic energy and radiate it away as visible light.
Consider a computer display that accelerates the electrons through a volt-
age drop of 18,500 volts, has a beam current of 85  πA, and scans the beam
across a display with 640×864 pixels, 69 times each second. An electron’s mass
−31 
is 9.1×10 kg. Ignoring relativistic effects, how fast do the electrons go? What
fraction of the speed of light is this? About how many electrons are used to light
up one pixel during one scan?
B.3  Calculate the resistance of the network in Figure XB.3.
Figure XB.3
2 kΩ
10 kΩ  2 kΩ 750 kΩ  1.5 kΩ
B.4  What is the resistance of the resistor cube in Figure XB.4? You could put a 1-volt
source across it, name the currents and voltage drops in every branch, use KCL
to write equations for every node, use KVL to write equations for every loop, and
solve them all to find the total current through the network. (Hint:  There’s also a
sneaky but easier way.)
R = ?
(12) 1 kΩ resistors
Figure XB.4
B.5  The circuit in Figure XB.5 is a good current source, in that its output current is
nearly independent of its output voltage. When its output voltage is 0 V, it supplies

--- Page Break ---

B–18  ELECTRICAL CIRCUITS REVIEW  APP. B
1 mA of current, and at 3 V, it supplies 0.97 mA. Draw the Th´evenin equivalent
current mirror of this circuit (called a  current mirror). (You don’t have to understand transistor
circuits to do this—you already have all the information you need.) Where does
high-voltage source come from? (You  do  need to understand transistor circuits for
this part.)
V = 5 V
Figure XB.5 CC 
RTh
IOUT
VTh
RSET VOUT
B.6  Th´evenin equivalents are most natural for networks that we think of as almost ideal
voltage sources. As Exercise B.5 showed, the Th´evenin equivalent of a circuit that
is close to an ideal current source can seem pretty strange.
The symbol for an ideal current source (current independent of voltage) is
shown in Figure XB.6(a). Real current sources, of course, do not meet this ideal,
Norton equivalent although we can often model them with a  Norton equivalent  (named after E. L.
Norton, 1898– ), an ideal current source (INort ) in parallel with a resistance (RNort ),
as in (b). The Norton resistance makes the current vary somewhat with voltage.
Mathematically, Th´evenin and Norton equivalents are equally applicable; either
can replace any network of resistors, voltage sources, and current sources.
Write  INor  and  RNor  in terms of  VTh  and  RTh . Draw the Norton equivalent of
the current source in Exercise B.5.
IOUT
Figure XB.6 (a)  (b)
+
I INort RNort VOUT
–
B.7  Show that the units of an  RC  product are time.
B.8  In the circuit of Figure B–18, assume that  RTh  = 1 kΩ  and  C  = 1πF, and that  VTh  is
instantaneously changed from 0 V to 5 V. How long does it take for  Vcap  to reach
2.0 V?
B.9  In the circuit of Figure B–18, assume that  RTh  = 50 kΩ  and  C  = 1πF, and that
VTh  is instantaneously changed from 5 V to 0 V. How long does it take for  Vcap  to
reach 0.8 V?

--- Page Break ---

SEC. 10.5  COUNTER DESIGN WITH PLDS  681
* 10.5  COUNTER DESIGN WITH PLDS
Binary counters are good candidates for PLD-based design, for many reasons:
•  A large state machine can often be decomposed into two or more smaller
state machines where one of the smaller machines is a binary counter that
keeps track of how long the other machine should stay in a particular state.
This may simplify both the conceptual design and the circuit design of the
machine.
•  Many applications require almost-binary-modulus counters with special re-
quirements for initialization, state detection, or state skipping. For example,
a counter in an elevator controller may skip state 13. Instead of using an
off-the-shelf binary counter and extra logic for the special requirements, a
designer can put precisely the required functions in a PLD.
•  Most standard MSI counters have only 4 bits, while a single 24-pin PLD
can be used to create a binary counter with up to 10 bits.
*
Throughtout this book, optional sections are marked with an asterisk.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

682  SEQUENTIAL LOGIC DESIGN WITH PLDS  CH. 10
In the preceding section we showed how ABEL provides an easy way
to specify counter behavior. However, this section describes counter excitation
equations in more depth. Understanding this material is necessary if you want
to design large counters using X-series PLDs, described later in this section.
* 10.5.1  Counter Behavior
Like most MSI counters, a PLD-based counter is a  synchronous  counter, that
is, all of its output bits change at the rising edge of the clock. The basic logic
function for one output bit of a synchronous binary up counter is, in words,
“Change state if counting is enabled and all the lower-order bits are 1.” (To get
a binary  down  counter, just change 1 to 0 in this statement.) A corresponding
ABEL equation is written below for bit 4 of a synchronous binary up counter:
Q4 := /Q4 * (CNTEN * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0)  " Complement
+  Q4 * /(CNTEN * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0); " Preserve
The first line complements  Q4  if all of the conditions for changing state are true.
Otherwise, the second line preserves the state of  Q4. This equation requires six
product terms to realize in any of the sequential PLDs that we’ve studied so far,
assuming that /Q4  is assigned to a registered output pin.  Using ABEL’s  XOR
operator,  :+:, we can write the equation in just one line:
Q4 := Q4 :+: (CNTEN * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0); " Toggle if enabled
However, after expansion, the equation still requires a total of six product terms.
Other counter features, like synchronous loading and clearing, can be added
quite easily to the preceding equation:
Q4 := /CLR * /LD * (Q4 :+: (CNTEN * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0)) "Toggle
+ /CLR * LD * D4; " Load
The expanded and reduced equation has eight product terms, which just fits on a
registered output of a 16V8R or 16Rx. Higher-order counter bits (Q5,  Q6, . . . )
require even more product terms, and therefore do not fit in the PLDs that we’ve
discussed so far. So, before we look at other modifications to the basic counter
equations, we’ll introduce a series of PLDs that were specifically designed to
reduce the product-term requirements of counter logic.
* 10.5.2  X-Series PLDs
The “X series” of PLDs uses  XOR  gates to facilitate the design of binary counters.
PAL20X8 This series includes the  PAL20X8, whose logic diagram is shown in Figure 10–13,
PAL20X4 and three similar devices. The other devices have a different allocation of reg-
PAL20X10 istered and combinational outputs, as shown in Table 10–10 and Figure 10–14.
PAL20L10 The  PAL20L10  has  no  registered outputs or  XOR  gates, but is included in the se-
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. 10.5  COUNTER DESIGN WITH PLDS  683
(1)
CLK
0 1 2 3  4 5 6 7  8 9 10 11  12 13 14 15  16 17 18 19  20 21 22 23  24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 3233 34 35  36 37 38 39 Figure 10–13
PAL20X8 logic diagram.
0
1 (23)
2 IO1
3
(2)
I1
8
9 (22)
D  Q O2
10
11
Q
(3)
I2
16
17 (21)
D  Q O3
18
19
Q
(4)
I3
24
25 (20)
D  Q  O4
26
27
(5)
I4
32
33 (19)
D  Q  O5
34
35
(6)
I5
40
41 (18)
D  Q  O6
42
43
(7)
I6
48
49 (17)
D  Q  O7
50
51
(8)
I7
56
57 (16)
D  Q  O8
58
59
(9)
I8
64
65 (15)
D  Q  O9
66
67
(10)
I9
72
73 (14)
74 IO10
75
(11)
I10 (13)
/OE
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

684  SEQUENTIAL LOGIC DESIGN WITH PLDS  CH. 10
Table 10–10  Characteristics of “X-series” PLDs.
Inputs to  AND  array
Package  AND-gate  Primary  Bidirectional  Registered  Combinational
Part number  pins  inputs  inputs  comb. outputs  outputs  outputs
PAL20L10  24  20  12  8  0  2
PAL20X4  24  20  10  6  4  0
PAL20X8  24  20  10  2  8  0
PAL20X10  24  20  10  0  10  0
ries because it has the same  AND-OR  array as the other devices. Lattice Semicon-
GAL20XV10 ductor also manufactures a GAL device, the  GAL20XV10, that can be configured
to emulate any device in the table, and more; each output can be individually
configured to be combinational or registered, as in the 16V8 and 20V8.
Each X-series output has only four product terms available, which often
leaves designers starving for more.  The combinational outputs use one of the
four terms to control the three-state enable, while the registered outputs perform
the  XOR  of two  ORed pairs of product terms. In ABEL, the generic equation for
a registered output is
OUT := (P1 + P2) :+: (P3 + P4);
where  P1–P4  are the four product terms.
PAL20L10 PAL20X4 PAL20X8 PAL20X10
1 1  1  1 
I1 CLK CLK CLK
2 23 2 23 2 23 2 23
I2 O1 I1  IO1 I1  IO1 I1  O1
3 22 3 22 3 22 3 22
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I2 O2 I2 O2
4 21 4 21 4 21 4 21
I4  IO3 I3 IO3 I3 O3 I3 O3
5 20 5 20 5 20 5 20
I5 IO4 I4  O4 I4  O4 I4  O4
6 19 6 19 6 19 6 19
I6 IO5 I5 O5 I5 O5 I5 O5
7 18 7 18 7 18 7 18
I7 IO6 I6 O6 I6 O6 I6 O6
8 17 8 17 8 17 8 17
I8 IO7 I7 O7 I7 O7 I7 O7
9 16 9 16 9 16 9 16
I9 IO8 I8 IO8 I8 O8 I8 O8
10 15 10 15 10 15 10 15
I10 IO9 I9 IO9 I9 O9 I9 O9
11 14 11 14 11 14 11 14
I11 O10  I10 IO10  I10 IO10  I10 O10 
13 13  13  13 
I12 OE OE OE
Figure 10–14  Traditional logic symbols for X-series PLDs.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. 10.5  COUNTER DESIGN WITH PLDS  685
* 10.5.3  Counter Design with X-Series PLDs
With a little factoring, the equation for output  Qi  of a binary synchronous up
counter maps nicely into the structure of X-series PLDs:
Qi := (  (/CLR * /LD * Qi)  " Hold
+  0 )  :+:  " Unused
(  (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * Qi-1 * ... * Q0)  " Toggle
+ (/CLR *  LD * Di) );  " Load
The same basic equation works for high-order bits as well as low-order ones,
with no increase in the number of product terms.  In fact, one product term is
not even needed (the explicit 0 on the second line).
The  Qi  signal in the preceding equation is active high at the flip-flop input
and output, and therefore active low at the device pin. To obtain an active-high
pin output, the flip-flop output must be active-low, /Qi, so the equations must be
modified:
/Qi := (  (/PR * /LD * /Qi)  " Hold
+  0 )  :+:  " Unused
(  (/PR * /LD * CNTEN * Qi-1 * ... * Q0)  " Toggle
+ (/PR *  LD * /Di) );  " Load
Note that the functionality of what was the  CLR  input is now different, since
clearing the flip-flop  presets  the active-high output pin to 1. The unused product
term can be employed to obtain a true  CLR  function (see Exercise 10.22). The
equations for down counters are identical, except that the toggle term must detect
the state  /Qi-1*...*/Q0.
If we try to add more features, such as multiple load and clear inputs and
nonbinary modulus counting, we quickly run out of product terms in an X-
series PLD. Also, PLD compilers aren’t smart enough to rearrange an arbitrary
expression into the form required by the X-series structure. Let’s look at some
modifications that  are  possible using at most one extra product term.
In order to obtain a counter that counts from 0 to state  N  and then returns
to state 0 and repeats, we must detect state  N  and force the counter to return to
state 0 on the next count. Suppose that  STATEN  is a product term that detects
state  N. Then the expression  STATEN⋅CNTEN  is 1 when the counter should be
forced into state 0 (unless the /LD  input overrides). We can use a combinational
output of the PLD to realize this expression:
FORCE0 = STATEN * CNTEN;
Using  FORCE0  as a “helper” term, we can now easily obtain the desired behavior:
Qi := (  (/CLR * /LD * Qi * /FORCE0 )  " Hold
+  0 )  :+:  " Unused
(  (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * Qi-1 *...* Q0 * /FORCE0)" Toggle
+ (/CLR *  LD * Di) );  " Load
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

686  SEQUENTIAL LOGIC DESIGN WITH PLDS  CH. 10
If we modified the equation above to use  STATEN⋅CNTEN  directly instead of
FORCE0, we would run out of product terms—STATEN, a product term, blows
up into a sum of many terms when complemented.
Another approach to forcing state 0 does not use a combinational “helper”
output, but instead uses at most one extra product term for each  Qi  output,
depending on  i  and  N:
(1) If  Qi  would be 0 in state  N + 1, do not modify the equation for  Qi.
(2) If  Qi  would normally change from 0 to 1 between states  N  and  N + 1, add
a product term to cancel this change:
Qi := (  (/CLR * /LD * Qi)  " Hold
+ (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * STATEN) )  :+:  " Cancel
(  (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * Qi-1 * ... * Q0) " Toggle
+ (/CLR *  LD * Di) );  " Load
(3) If  Qi  would be 1 in both states  N and  N+ 1, add a product term to toggle it
to 0:
Qi := (  (/CLR * /LD * Qi)  " Hold
+ (/CLR *  LD * Di) )  :+:  " Load
(  (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * Qi-1 * ... * Q0) " Toggle
+ (/CLR * /LD * CNTEN * STATEN) );  " Extra
These rules can be extended to force the counter to any desired starting state,
M. If  Qi  has the same value in states  M  and  N + 1, do nothing. If the values are
different, add a “cancel” term if  Qi  has different values in states  N and  N+ 1, and
an “extra” toggle term otherwise.
In general, if you get stuck with an equation that has more than two product
terms on either side of the  XOR, you can’t perform it in a X-series PLD, unless
you use an extra combinational output and two-pass logic. However, sometimes
our simple rule of thumb about  XOR  gates can help:
•  Any two signals (inputs or output) of an  XOR  or  XNOR  gate may be com-
plemented without changing the resulting logic function.
That is, you can complement both inputs or the output and one input without
changing the result. For example, suppose an equation has the form
OUT := S1 :+: ((P1) + (P2));
where  S1  is a sum term and  P1  and  P2  are product terms. If  S1  has more than
two variables, the equation can’t be realized in one level. However, if you can
live with a complemented output signal, you can write
/OUT := /S1 :+: ((P1) + (P2));
Under DeMorgan’s theorem,  /S1  is a single product term, so there’s no problem.
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

SEC. 10.6  COUNTER DESIGN WITH PLDS  687
Another trick is to remember that the  XOR  gate is equivalent to an  OR  gate
if  the logic functions on the two inputs are never both 1 simultaneously. So, if
you need to perform a logic function that is a sum of four product terms, having
nothing to do with  XOR, you can still use the X-series output structure, if you
can just split the terms into two nonoverlapping pairs.
* 10.5.4  Cascading and Carry Outputs
PLDs can be cascaded to obtain wider counters, by providing each counter stage
with a carry output that indicates when it is about to roll over.  There are two
ways to obtain the carry output:
•  Combinational. The carry equation indicates that the counter is enabled and  combinational carry
is currently in its last state before rollover. For a 5-bit binary up counter, output
we have
COUT = CNTEN * Q4 * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0;
Since  CNTEN  is included, this approach allows carries to be rippled through
cascaded counters by connecting each  COUT  to the next  CNTEN.
•  Registered. The carry equation indicates that the counter is about to enter  registered carry
its last state before rollover. Thus, at the next clock tick, the counter enters output
this last state and the carry output is asserted. For a 5-bit binary up counter
with load and clear inputs, we have
COUT := /CLR * /LD * CNTEN
* Q4 * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * /Q0
+ /CLR * /LD * /CNTEN
* Q4 * Q3 * Q2 * Q1 * Q0
+ /CLR * LD
* D4 * D3 * D2 * D1 * D0;
This approach has the advantage of producing  COUT  with less delay than
the combinational approach.  However, external gates are now required
between stages, since the  CNTEN  signal for each stage should be the logical
AND  of the master count-enable signal and the  COUT  outputs of all lower-
order counters.  (These external gates can be avoided if the higher-order
counters have multiple enable inputs.)
Copyright    1994 by John F. Wakerly  Draft of July 6, 1999

--- Page Break ---

1
INTRODUCTION
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
1.2  Three definitions of “bit”:
(1)  A binary digit (p. 1).
(2)  Past tense of “bite” (p. 1).
(3)  A small amount (pp. 6, 10).
1.3
ASIC  Application-Specific Integrated Circuit
CAD  Computer-Aided Design
CD  Compact Disc
CO  Central Office
CPLD  Complex Programmable Logic Device
DAT  Digital Audio Tape
DIP  Dual In-line Pin
DVD  Digital Versatile Disc
FPGA  Field-Programmable Gate Array
HDL  Hardware Description Language
IC  Integrated Circuit
IP  Internet Protocol
LSI  Large-Scale Integration
MCM  Multichip Module
1–1

--- Page Break ---

2  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
MSI  Medium-Scale Integration
NRE  Nonrecurring Engineering
OK  Although we use this word hundreds of times a week whether things are OK or not, we have probably
rarely wondered about its history. That history is in fact a brief one, the word being first recorded in
1839, though it was no doubt in circulation before then. Much scholarship has been expended on the
origins of OK, but Allen Walker Read has conclusively proved that OK is based on a sort of joke.
Someone pronounced the phrase “all correct” as “oll (or orl) correct,” and the same person or someone
else spelled it “oll korrect,” which abbreviated gives us OK. This term gained wide currency by being
used as a political slogan by the 1840 Democratic candidate Martin Van Buren, who was nicknamed
Old Kinderhook because he was born in Kinderhook, New York. An editorial of the same year, refer-
ring to the receipt of a pin with the slogan O.K., had this comment: “frightful letters . . . significant of
the birth-place of Martin Van Buren, old Kinderhook, as also the rallying word of the Democracy of the
late election, ‘all correct’ .... Those who wear them should bear in mind that it will require their most
strenuous exertions ... to make all things O.K.” [From the  American Heritage Electronic Dictionary
(AHED), copyright 1992 by Houghton Mifflin Company]
PBX  Private Branch Exchange
PCB  Printed-Circuit Board
PLD  Programmable Logic Device
PWB  Printed-Wiring Board
SMT  Surface-Mount Technology
SSI  Small-Scale Integration
VHDL  VHSIC Hardware Description Language
VLSI  Very Large-Scale Integration
1.4
ABEL  Advanced Boolean Equation Language
CMOS  Complementary Metal-Oxide Semiconductor
JPEG  Joint Photographic Experts Group
MPEG  Moving Picture Experts Group
OK  (see above)
PERL  According to some, it’s “Practical Extraction and Report Language.” But the relevant Perl FAQ entry,
in perlfaq1.pod, says “never write ‘PERL’, because perl isn't really an acronym, apocryphal folklore
and post-facto expansions notwithstanding.” (Thanks to Anno Siegel for enlightening me on this.)
VHDL  VHSIC Hardware Description Language
1.8  In my book, “dice” is the plural of “die.”

--- Page Break ---

2
NUMBER SYSTEMS
AND CODES
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
2.1  (a) 1101011  = 6B  (b) 174003  = 1111100000000011 
2  16 8  2
(c) 10110111  = B7  (d) 67.24  = 110111.0101 
2  16 8  2
(e) 10100.1101  = 14.D  (f) F3A5  = 1111001110100101 
2  16 16  2
(g) 11011001  = 331  (h) AB3D  = 1010101100111101 
2  8 16  2
(i) 101111.0111  = 57.34  (j) 15C.38  = 101011100.00111 
2  8 16  2
2.3  (a) 1023  = 1000000100011  = 10043 
16  2  8
(b) 7E6A  = 111111001101010  = 77152 
16  2  8
(c) ABCD  = 1010101111001101  = 125715 
16  2  8
(d) C350  = 1100001101010000  = 141520 
16  2  8
(e) 9E36.7A  = 1001111000110110.0111101  = 117066.364 
16  2  8
(f) DEAD.BEEF  = 1101111010101101.1011111011101111  = 157255.575674 
16  2  8
2.5  (a) 1101011  = 107  (b) 174003  = 63491 
2  10 8  10
(c) 10110111  = 183  (d) 67.24  = 55.3125 
2  10 8  10
(e) 10100.1101  = 20.8125  (f) F3A5  = 62373 
2  10 16  10
(g) 12010  = 138  (h) AB3D  = 43837 
3  10 16  10
(i)  7156  = 3694  (j) 15C.38  = 348.21875 
8  10 16  10
2–1

--- Page Break ---

2–2  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
2.6  (a) 125  = 1111101  (b) 3489  = 6641 
10  2 10  8
(c) 209  = 11010001  (d) 9714  = 22762 
10  2 10  8
(e) 132  = 1000100  (f) 23851  = 5D2B 
10  2 10  16
(g) 727  = 10402  (h) 57190  = DF66 
10  5 10  16
(i) 1435  = 2633  (j) 65113  = FE59 
10  8 10  16
2.7  (a)  1100010 (b)  1011000 (c)  111111110 (d) 11000000
110101 101110 11011101 1110010
+ 11001 +  100101 +  1100011 +  1101101
-------------------------- -------------------------- ----------------------------------- -----------------------------
1001110 1010011 101000000 11011111
2.10  (a)  1372 (b)  4F1A5 (c)  F35B (d) 1B90F
+  4631 +  B8D5 +  27E6 +  C44E
-------------------- ---------------------- --------------------- ----------------------
59A3 5AA7A 11B41 27D5D
2.11
decimal  + 18  + 115  +79  –49  –3  –100
signed-magnitude  00010010  01110011  01001111  10110001  10000011  11100100
two’s-magnitude  00010010  01110011  01001111  11001111  11111101  10011100
one’s-complement  00010010  01110011  01001111  11001110  11111100  10011011
2.18
3
j
h  = b ⋅ 2
j  ∑ 4j + i
i = 0
Therefore,
4n – 1 n – 1
i i
B =  b  ⋅ 2 = h  ⋅ 16
∑  i  ∑ i 
i – 0 i = 0
4n – 1 n – 1
4 n  i n  i
– B = 2  –  b  ⋅ 2 = 16 – h  ⋅ 16
∑  i ∑ i 
i = 0 i = 0
Suppose a 3n-bit number  B  is represented by an  n-digit octal number  Q. Then the two’s-complement of  B  is
represented by the 8’s-complement of  Q.
2.22  Starting with the arrow pointing at any number, adding a positive number causes overflow if the arrow is
advanced through the +7 to – 8 transition. Adding a negative number to any number causes overflow if the
arrow is not advanced through the +7 to –8 transition.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  2–3
2.24  Let the binary representation of  X  be x  x  …x x . Then we can write the binary representation of  Y as
n – 1 n – 2 1 0 
x  x  …x , where m  = n – d . Note that x  is the sign bit of  Y . The value of  Y is
m  m – 1 1 x0  m – 1
n – 2
m – 1 i
Y  = – 2 ⋅ x  + x  ⋅ 2
m – 1 ∑ i 
i = 0
The value of  X  is
n – 2
n – 1 i
X  = – 2 ⋅ x  + x  ⋅ 2
n – 1 ∑ i 
i = 0
n – 2
n – 1 m – 1 i
= – 2 ⋅ x  + Y + 2 ⋅ x  + x  ⋅ 2
n – 1 m – 1 ∑ i 
i = m – 1
n – 2
n – 1 m –1 i
= – 2 ⋅ x  + Y + 2 ⋅ 2 + x  ⋅ 2
n – 1 ∑ i 
i = m
n –1 n – 2 i
Case 1 ( x  = 0) In this case, X  = Y if and only if – 2 ⋅ x  +  x  ⋅ 2 = 0, which is true if and
m – 1 n – 1 ∑i = m i 
only if all of the discarded bits ( x  …x  ) are 0, the same as x  .
m n – 1 m – 1
n – 1 m – 1 n – 2 i
Case 2 ( x  = 1) In this case, X  = Y if and only if – 2 ⋅ x  + 2 ⋅ 2 +  x  ⋅ 2 = 0 , which
m – 1 n – 1 ∑i = m i 
is true if and only if all of the discarded bits ( x  …x  ) are 1, the same as x  .
m n – 1 m – 1
2.25  If the radix point is considered to be just to the right of the leftmost bit, then the largest number is 1.11…1 and
the 2’s complement of  D is obtained by subtracting it from 2 (singular possessive). Regardless of the position
of the radix point, the 1s’ complement is obtained by subtracting  D from the largest number, which has all 1s
(plural).
2.28
n –2
n – 1 i
B  = – b  ⋅ 2 + b  ⋅ 2
n – 1 ∑ i 
i = 0
n – 2
n  i + 1
2B  = – b  ⋅ 2 + b  ⋅ 2
n – 1 ∑ i 
i = 0
Case 1 ( b  = 0) First term is 0, summation terms have shifted coefficients as specified. Overflow if
n – 1
b  = 1 .
n – 2
n – 1
Case 2 ( b  = 1) Split first term into two halves; one half is cancelled by summation term b  ⋅ 2 if
n – 1 n – 2
b  = 1 . Remaining half and remaining summation terms have shifted coefficients as specified. Overflow if
n – 2
b  = 0 .
n – 2
2.32  001–010, 011–100, 101–110, 111–000.
2.34  Perhaps the designers were worried about what would happen if the aircraft changed altitude in the middle of a
transmission. With the Gray code, the codings of “adjacent” alitudes (at 50-foot increments) differ in only one
bit. An altitude change during transmission affects only one bit, and whether the changed bit or the original is
transmitted, the resulting code represents an altitude within one step (50 feet) of the original. With a binary
code, larger altitude errors could result, say if a plane changed from 12,800 feet (000100000000 2 ) to 12,750
feet  (000011111111 2 )  in  the  middle  of  a  transmission,  possibly  yielding  a  result  of  25,500  feet
(000111111111 2).

--- Page Break ---

2–4  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
2.37
010  011
110 111
100  101
000  001

--- Page Break ---

3
DIGITAL CIRCUITS
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
3.1  The “probably” cases may cause damage to the gate if sustained.
(a) 0  (b) 1  (c) 0  (d) undefined
(e) 1  (f) probably 1  (g) probably 0  (h) probably 0
3.3  A logic buffer is a non-linear amplifier that maps the entire set of possible analog input voltages into just two
output votages,  HIGH  and  LOW. An audio amplifier has a linear response over its specified operating range,
mapping each input voltage into an output voltage that is directly proprtional to the input voltage.
3.6  From the  American Heritage Electronic Dictionary (AHED), copyright 1992 by Houghton Mifflin Company:
(1)  A structure that can be swung, drawn, or lowered to block an entrance or a passageway.
(2)  a. An opening in a wall or fence for entrance or exit. b. The structure surrounding such an opening, such as
the monumental or fortified entrance to a palace or walled city.
(3)  a. A means of access: the gate to riches. b. A passageway, as in an airport terminal, through which passen-
gers proceed for embarkation.
(4)  A mountain pass.
(5)  The total paid attendance or admission receipts at a public event: a good gate at the football game.
(6)  A device for controlling the passage of water or gas through a dam or conduit.
(7)  The channel through which molten metal flows into a shaped cavity of a mold.
(8)  Sports. A passage between two upright poles through which a skier must go in a slalom race.
(9)  Electronics. A circuit with multiple inputs and one output that is energized only when a designated set of
input pulses is received.
3–1

--- Page Break ---

3–2  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
Well, definition (9) is closest to one of the answers that I had in mind. The other answer I was looking for is the
gate of a MOS transistor.
3.14  A CMOS inverting gate has fewer transistors than a noninverting one, since an inversion comes “for free.”
3.15  Simple, inverting CMOS gates generally have two transistors per input. Four examples that meet the require-
ments of the problem are 4-input  NAND  , 4-input  NOR  , 2-in, 2-wide  AND–OR–INVERT  , and 2-in, 2-wide  OR–
AND–INVERT.
3.18  One way is that a romance could be sparked, and the designers could end up with a lot less time to do their
work. Another way is that the stray perfume in the IC production line could have contaminated the circuits used
by the designers, leading to marginal operation, more debugging time by the deidicated designers, and less time
for romance. By the way, the whole perfume story may be apocryphal.
3.20  Using the maximum output current ratings in both states, the  HIGH-state margin is 0.69V and the  LOW-state
margin is 1.02V. With CMOS loads (output currents less than 20  μA), the margins improve to 1.349V and
1.25V, respectively.
3.21  The first answer for each parameter below assumes commercial operation and that the device is used with the
maximum allowable (TTL) load. The number in parentheses, if any, indicates the value obtained under a lesser
but specified (CMOS) load.
VOHmin  3.84V (4.4V )
VIHmin  3.15V
VILmax  1.35V
VOLmax  0.33V (0.1V)
IImax  1μA
IOLmax  4 mA (20  μA)
IOHmax  -4 mA (-20  μA)
3.22  Current is positive if it flows  into  a node. Therefore, an output with negative current is  sourcing  current.
3.23  The 74HC00 output drive is so weak, it’s not good for driving much:
(a)  Assume that in the  LOW  state the output pulls down to 0.33V (the maximum V spec). Then the output
OL
current is ( 5.0V) ⁄ 120Ω = 41.7mA , which is way more than the 4-mA commercial spec.
(b)  For this problem, you first have to find the Thévenin equivalent of the load, or 148.5Ω in series with
2.25V . In the  HIGH  state, the gate must pull the output up to 3.84V, a difference of 1.59V across 148.5Ω,
requiring 10.7 mA, which is out of spec. In the  LOW  state, we have a voltage drop of 2.25V – 0.33V across
148.5Ω , so the output must sink 12.9 mA, again out of spec.
3.24  (In the first printing, change “74FCT257T” to “74HC00.”) The specification for the 74HC00 shows a maxi-
mum power-supply current of 10  μA when the inputs aree at 0 or 5V, but based on the discussion in
Section 3.5.3 we would expect the current to be more when the inputs are at their worst-case values (1.35 or
3.15V). If we consider “nonlogic” input values, the maximum current will flow if the inputs are held right at
the switching threshold, approximately  VCC/2.
3.26  (In the first printing, change “74FCT257T” to “74HC00.”) Using the formulas on page 119, we can estimate
that R = ( 5.0 – 3.84) ⁄ 0.004 = 290Ω or,  using  the  higher  value  of  V in  the  spec,  that
p(on)  OHmin
R = ( 5.0 – 4.4) ⁄ 0.00002 = 30KΩ . (The discrepancy shows that the output characteristic of this device
p(on) 
is somewhat nonlinear.) We can also estimate R = 0.33 ⁄ 0.004 = 82.5Ω .
n(on) 
3.29  The purpose of decoupling capacitors is to provide the instantaneous power-supply current that is required dur-
ing output transitions. Printed-circuit board traces have inductance, which acts as a barrier to current flow at
high frequencies (fast transition rates). The farther the capacitor is from the device that needs decoupling, the
larger is the instantaneous voltage drop across the connecting signal path, resulting in larger spike (up or down)
in the device’s power-supply voltage.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  3–3
3.32  (a) 5 ns.
3.38  Smaller resistors result in shorter rise times for  LOW-to-HIGH  transitions but higher power consumption in the
LOW  state. Stated another way, larger resistors result in lower power consumption in the  LOW  state but longer
rise times (more ooze) for  LOW  -to-HIGH  transitions.
3.39  The  resistor  must  drop 5.0 – 2.0 – 0.37 = 2.63V with  5mA  of  current  through  it.  Therefore
r  = 2.63  ⁄ 0.005 = 526Ω ; a good standard value would be 510Ω .
3.41  (The Secret of the Ooze.) The wired output has only passive pull-up to the  HIGH  state. Therefore, the time for
LOW-to-HIGH  transitions, an important component of total delay, depends on the amount of capacitive loading
and the size of the pull-up resistor. A moderate capacitive load (say, 100 pF) and even a very strong pull-up
resistor (say, 150Ω ) can still lead to time constants and transition times (15 ns in this example) that are longer
than the delay of an additional gate with active pull-up.
3.42  The winner is 74FCT-T—48 mA in the  LOW  state and 15 mA in the  HIGH  state (see Table 3–8). TTL families
don’t come close.
3.46  n  diodes are required.
3.49  For each interfacing situation, we compute the fanout in the  LOW  state by dividing I of the driving gate
OLmax
by I of the driven gate. Similarly, the fanout in the  HIGH  state is computed by dividing I of the
ILmax  OLmax
driving gate by I of the driven gate. The overall fanout is the lower of these two results.
IHmax
Low-state  High-state  Overall  Excess
Case  Ratio  Fanout  Ratio  Fanout  Fanout  State  Drive
74LS driving 74LS  8mA 20  400μA 20  20  none
----------------  -----------------
0.4mA 20μA
74LS driving 74S  8mA 4  400μA 8  4  HIGH 200μA
------------  ----------------- 
2mA 50μA
3.50  For the pull-down, we must have at most a 0.5-V drop in order to create a V that is no worse than a standard
IL
LS-TTL  output  driving  the  input.  Since I = 0.4mA,  we  get R = 0.5 ⁄ 0.004 = 1250Ω and
ILmax  pd 
2  2 
P  = V ⁄ R = ( 0.5) ⁄ 1250 = 0.2mW. (Alternatively, P = V I = 0.5 ⋅ 0.0004 = 0.2mW)
pd  IL pd pd  IL IL 
For the pull-up, we must have at most a 2.3-V drop in order to create a V that is no worse than a standard
IH
LS-TTL  output  driving the  input.  Since I = 20μA ,  we  get R = 2.3 ⁄ 0.00002 = 115kΩ and
IHmax  pu 
2  2 
P = V ⁄ R = ( 2.3) ⁄ 115000 = 0.046mW . (Alternatively, we could have calculated the result as
pu  IH pu
P = V I = 2.3 ⋅ 0.00002 = 0.046mW .) The pull-up dissipates less power.
pu  IH IH 
3.52  The main benefit of Schottky diodes is to prevent transistors from saturating, which allows them to switch more
quickly. The main drawback is that they raise the collector-to-emitter drop across an almost-saturated transis-
tor, which decreases  LOW  -state noise margin.
3.55
LOW-state  HIGH-state
R R V R V – V I V – V I
VCC GND Thev Thev Thev  OL OL OH  Thev OH
( Ω) ( Ω) ( V) ( Ω) ( V) ( mA) OK?  ( V) ( μA) OK?
470  —  5.0  470  4.5  9.57  no  <0  —  yes
330  470  2.9375  193.875  2.4375  12.57  no  <0  —  yes

--- Page Break ---

3–4  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
3.56
LOW-state  HIGH-state
Case  V V Margin  V V Margin
ILmax  OLmax(T)  IHmin  OHmin(T)
74HCT driving 74LS  0.8V  0.33V  0.47V  2.0 V  3.84V  1.84V
3.57  For each interfacing situation, we compute the fanout in the  LOW  state by dividing I of the driving gate
OLmax
by I of the driven gate. Similarly, the fanout in the  HIGH  state is computed by dividing I of the
ILmax  OHmax
driving gate by I of the driven gate. The overall fanout is the lower of these two results.
ILmax
LOW-state  HIGH-state  Overall  Excess
Case  Ratio  Fanout  Ratio  Fanout  Fanout  State  Drive
74HCT driving 74LS  4mA 10  4000  μA 200  10  HIGH 3800  μA
----------------  -------------------- 
0.4mA 20  μA
3.64  TTL-compatible inputs have V = 2.0V, and typical TTL outputs have V = 2.7V. CMOS output
IHmin  OHmin 
levels are already high compared to these levels, so there’s no point in wasting silicon to make them any higher
by lowering the voltage drop in the  HIGH state.
3.68  Including the DC load, a CMOS output’s rise and fall V = +5.0 V Equivalent load for
DD 
times  can  be  analyzed  using  the  equivalent  circuit transition-time analysis
shown to the right. This problem analyzes the fall time. CMOS
inverter
Part (a) of the figure below shows the electrical condi-
Rp
tions in the circuit when the output is in a steady  HIGH
1 kΩ
state. Note that two resistors form a voltage divider, so VOUT
V
the  HIGH  output is 4.583V, not quite 5.0 V as it was in IN
+
Section 3.6.1. At time t  = 0 the CMOS output changes Rn 100 pF
2.5 V
to the  LOW  state, resulting in the situation depicted
–
in (b). The output will eventually reach a steady  LOW
voltage  of  0.227 V,  again  determined  by  a  voltage
divider.
VDD = +5.0 V VDD = +5.0 V
(a)  (b)
200 Ω > 1 MΩ
AC load AC load
VOUT = 4.583V VOUT
VIN VIN
I = 0 
OUT  1 kΩ + I 1 kΩ +
> 1 MΩ 100 pF 100 Ω OUT 100 pF
2.5 V 2.5 V
– –
At time t  =  0 , V is still 4.583 V, but the Thévenin equivalent of the voltage source and the two resistors in
OUT
the  LOW  state is 90.9Ω in series with a 0.227-V voltage source. At time t  = ∞ , the capacitor will be dis-
charged to the Thévenin-equivalent voltage and V will be 0.227V. In between, the value of V is gov-
OUT  OUT

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  3–5
erned by an exponential law:
–t ⁄ ( R  C  )
V = 0.227V + ( 4.583 – 0.227V) ⋅ e  n  L
OUT 
– t ⁄ ( 90.9 ⋅ 100 ⋅ 10 –12)
= 4.356 ⋅ e  V
( –t) ⁄ ( 90.9 ⋅ 10 –9)
= 4.356 ⋅ e  V
Because of the DC load resistance, the time constant is a little shorter than it was in Section 3.6.1, at 9.09 ns.
To obtain the fall time, we must solve the preceding equation for  VOUT  = 3.5 and  VOUT  = 1.5, yielding
V
– 9 OUT
t  = – 9.09 ⋅ 10  ⋅ ln-------------
4.356
t = 1.99 ns
3.5 
t = 9.69 ns
1.5 
The fall time  t  is the difference between these two numbers, or 7.7 ns. This is slightly shorter than the 8.5 ns
f
result in Section 3.6.1 because of the slightly shorter time constant.
3.70  The time constant is 1kΩ ⋅ 50 pF = 50 ns. We solve the rise-time equation for the point at which  VOUT  is
1.5 V, as on p. 118 of the text:
– 9 5.0 – 1.5
t = – 50 ⋅ 10  ⋅ ln---------------------
1.5 
5.0
t = 17.83 ns
1.5 
3.77  The LSB toggles at a rate of 16 MHz. It takes two clock ticks for the LSB to complete one cycle, so the transi-
7 
tion frequency is 8 MHz. The MSB’s frequency is 2 times slower, or 62.5 KHz. The LSB’s dynamic power is
the most significant, but the sum of the transitions on the higher order bits, a binary series, is equivalent to
almost another 8 MHz worth of transitions on a single output bit. Including the LSB, we have almost 16 MHz,
but applied to the load capacitance on just a single output. If the different ouputs actually have different load
capacitances, then a weighted average would have to be used.
3.81
VCC
(a)  (b)
EN A B C D Q1 Q2 OUT
EN B  C L L H H H on off L
Q2 L H H L L off on H
H L L H L off off Hi-Z
OUT H H L H L off off Hi-Z
A D
Q1 (c) EN
A  OUT
3.84  In the situations shown in the figure, the diode with the lowest cathode voltage is forward biased, and the anode
(signal  C) is 0.6V higher. However, under the conditions specified in the exercise, neither diode is forward
biased, no current flows through R , and V is 5.0 V.
2  C

--- Page Break ---

3–6  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
3.85
/* Transistor parameters */
#define DIODEDROP 0.6  /* volts */
#define BETA 10;
#define VCE_SAT 0.2  /* volts */
#define RCE_SAT 50  /* ohms  */
#define MAX_LEAK 0.00001 /* amperes */
main()
{
float Vcc, Vin, R1, R2;  /* circuit parameters */
float Ib, Ic, Vce;  /* circuit conditions */
if (Vin < DIODEDROP) {  /* cut off */
Ib  =  0.0;
Ic  =  Vcc/R2;  /* Tentative leakage current, limited by large R2 */
if (Ic > MAX_LEAK) Ic = MAX_LEAK;  /* Limited by transistor */
Vce  =  Vcc - (Ic * R2);
}
else {  /* active or saturated */
Ib  =  (Vin - DIODEDROP) / R1;
if ((Vcc - ((BETA * Ib) * R2)) >=  VCE_SAT) {  /* active */
Ic  =  BETA * Ib;
Vce  =  Vcc - (Ic * R2);
}
else {  /* saturated */
Vce  =  VCE_SAT;
Ic  =  (Vcc - Vce) / (R2 + RCE_SAT);
}
}
}
3.86  In order to turn on  Q2  fully,  VA  must be 1.2V , corresponding to the sum of the base-to-emitter drops of  Q2  and
Q5. This could happen if both  X  and  Y  are 0.95V or higher. In reality, a somewhat higher voltage is required,
because the voltage divider consisting of  R1,  R3, and other components diverts current from the base of  Q2
from turning on fully until  X  and  Y are about 1.1V or higher (at 25°C , according to the typical characteristics
graphed in the TI TTL Data Book).
3.90  When the output is  HIGH, the relay coil will try to pull it to 12 volts. The high voltage will typically cause high
current to flow through the output structure back into the 5-V supply and will typically blow up the output.
Open-collector TTL outputs theoretically should not have this problem, but most are not designed to withstand
the 12-V potential and transistor breakdown will occur. A few TTL open-collector devices are designed with
“high-voltage outputs” to solve this problem.
3.92  F  =  W  ⋅  X  +  Y  ⋅  Z
W  X  Y  Z  G  F  W  X  Y  Z  G  F
0  0  0  0  1  0  1  0  0  0  1  0
0  0  0  1  1  0  1  0  0  1  1  0
0  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  0
0  0  1  1  0  1  1  0  1  1  0  1
0  1  0  0  1  0  1  1  0  0  0  1
0  1  0  1  1  0  1  1  0  1  0  1

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  3–7
W  X  Y  Z  G  F  W  X  Y  Z  G  F
0  1  1  0  1  0  1  1  1  0  0  1
0  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  1  0  1
3.96  When one module is driving  HIGH  and the other n – 1 modules are output-disabled, each disabled module has
a 74LS125 output sinking 20  μA of leakage current. In addition, each of the  n  modules has a 74LS04 input
sinking 20  μA of leakage current. Thus, the total sink current is ( n – 1 + n) ⋅ 20  μA . The 74LS125 can source
2.6 mA in the  HIGH  state, so we find
( n – 1 + n) ⋅ 20  μA ≤ 2.6mA
n ≤ 65
When one module is driving  LOW  and the other n – 1 modules are output-disabled, each disabled module has a
74LS125 output sourcing 20  μA of leakage current. In addition, each of the  n  modules has a 74LS04 input
sourcing 0.4 mA. Thus, the total source current is ( n – 1 )) ⋅ 20  μA + n ⋅ 0.4  μA . The 74LS125 can sink 24 mA
in the  LOW  state, so we find
( n – 1) ⋅ 20μA + n ⋅ 0.4mA ≤ 24mA
n ≤ 57
Overall, we require n ≤ 57.

--- Page Break ---

4
COMBINATIONAL
LOGIC DESIGN
PRINCIPLES
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
4.2
T2: T3:
X  X + 1 =  1 X  X + X = X
0  1  =  1 0  0  =  0
1  1  =  1 1  1  =  1
4.3
T3′
X  X X⋅  = X
0  0  =  0
1  1  =  1
4.4
T6
X  Y  X + Y = Y + X
0  0  0  =  0
0  1  1  =  1
1  0  1  =  1
1  1  1  =  1
4–1

--- Page Break ---

4–2  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
4.5  The original expression assumes precedence of  ⋅ over  + , that is, the expression is X + ( Y Z⋅ ) . The paren-
thesization must be retained for the correct result, X′ ⋅( Y′ + Z′), or the precedence must be swapped.
4.6  The answers for parts (a), (b), (c) are as follows.
W X Y Z⋅  ⋅  ⋅   ⋅ (W ⋅ X Y Z⋅  ⋅  ′ + W⋅ X′ ⋅ Y Z⋅   + W′⋅ X Y Z⋅  ⋅   + W⋅ X Y⋅  ′ ⋅Z)
= W X Y Z W X Y Z⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅ ′ + W X Y Z W X⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ′ ⋅Y⋅Z + W X Y Z W⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ′ ⋅ X Y Z⋅  ⋅  + W X Y Z W X Y⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ⋅  ′ ⋅Z (T8)
= 0 + 0 + 0 + 0 ( T6′ , T5′ , T2′)
= 0 ( A4′)
4.7  (a)  X  Y  Z  F (b) W X  Y  Z  F
0  0  0  0 0  0  0  0  1
0  0  1  1 0  0  0  1  1
0  1  0  1 0  0  1  0  0
0  1  1  1 0  0  1  1  1
1  0  0  0 0  1  0  0  1
1  0  1  0 0  1  0  1  1
1  1  0  0 0  1  1  0  1
1  1  1  0 0  1  1  1  1
1  0  0  0  1
1  0  0  1  1
1  0  1  0  0
1  0  1  1  1
1  1  0  0  1
1  1  0  1  0
1  1  1  0  0
1  1  1  1  0
4.9
(a) F  = X′ ⋅ Y + Y′ ⋅X = ( X + Y ) ⋅( X′ + Y′)
(b) F  =  A B⋅  = ( A + B) ⋅( A + B′) ⋅( A′ + B)
4.12  (1) Including inverters makes the problem too difficult. (2) In modern PLD-based designs, inverters do cost
nothing and really can be ignored.
4.13
X W
X Y W X
00  01  11  10 X ⋅ Y 00  01  11  10 W′ ⋅ X
Z Y Z
0 1 00 1 X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
W′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
1 1  1  1 1 Z 01 1  1 1
Z
Y Z 11 1 1
Y
10 1 1
F = X ⋅ Y + Z
X ⋅ Y
(a) (b) X
F = W′ ⋅ X + X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z + X ⋅ Y

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  4–3
4.14
W ⋅ X ⋅ Y′
X′ ⋅ Z′ X W
(a) X Y (b) W X
Z 00  01  11  10 Y′ ⋅ Z′ Y Z 00 01  11 10 W ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
0 1  1 1 00 1  1 1
X′ ⋅ Z′
1 Z 01 1
Z
11 1 1
Y Y
10 1  1
F′ = X′ ⋅ Z′ + Y′ ⋅ Z′
F = (X + Z) ⋅ (Y + Z)
X′ ⋅ Y
X
F′ = X′ ⋅ Z′ + X ⋅ Y′ + W ⋅ X ⋅ Y′
F = (X + Z) ⋅ (X′ + Y) ⋅ (W′ + X′ + Y)
4.15  (a) Cost is less —one less gate input.
X
Z′ X + Y′ +  Z′
X
X Y
00  01  11  10
Z X′
X′ + Z X′ +  Z F
0 0 0  0
Z
1 0 Z Y′
Y + Z
X + Y′ + Z′  Y + Z Y
Y
4.19
W′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
W W
(a) W X (b) W X
X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′ X′ ⋅ Y′
Y Z 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ 00 1 d 00 1 1 X′ ⋅ Z
W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Z 01 1  1 01 1 d
Z Z
11 1 d 11 d  d  1
Y Y
10 1 10 1
W ⋅ X ⋅ Y
W′ ⋅ X′ W ⋅ Y ⋅ Z
X X
F = W′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z + W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Z + W ⋅ X ⋅ Y F = W′ ⋅ X′ + X′ ⋅ Y′ + X′ ⋅ Z
+ W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ or X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
4.20
X′ + Y + Z
W W
(a) W X (b) W X
W′ + Y X′
Y Z 00  01 11  10 Y Z 00  01  11  10
W + X′ + Z
00 0  0 d W′ + X 00 0 0 W′ + Y + Z′
X′ + Y′ + Z′ W + Y′ + Z′
01 0  0 01 0  0 d
W + X′ + Y′ Z Z
11 0  d 0 11 d  0 d
Y Y
10 0 0 0 10 0  0  0
X + Y′ + Z
W + Y′ + Z W′ + Y′ + Z
X W′ + Z X
F = (W + X′ + Y′) ⋅ (X′ + Y + Z) ⋅ (W′ + Z′) ⋅ (X + Y′ + Z) F = X′ ⋅ (W′ + Y′ + Z)
4.21  For the minimal sum-of-products expression to equal the minimal product-of-sums expression, the correspond-
ing maps must have the opposite don’t-cares covered, so that the expressions yield the same value for the don’t-
care input combinations.
(a)  Both mininal sum-of-products expressions cover cell 15; they are equal. The minimal product-of-sums
expression also covers cell 15, so the expressions are not equal. The s-of-p and p-of-s expressions require the
same number of gates, but the p-of-s requires one fewer input.
(b)  Both mininal sum-of-products expressions cover cell 3 and 9 and not 15; they are equal. The minimal
product-of-sums expression covers cell 15, and not 3 or 9, so the expressions are equal. The p-of-s expression
requires fewer gates and inputs.

--- Page Break ---

4–4  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
4.22  Consensus terms that must be added to cover the hazards are “circled” with rectangles.
(a) W′ ⋅ Y′ (b) X ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
W W
W X W X W ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′
Y 00  01  11  10 Y Z 00 01 11  10
W ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
0 1 1 1 X ⋅ Y′ 00 1
1 1 Y 01 1 1 1
Z
11 1 1
W ⋅ X
X Y
10 1 1
X ⋅ Z
X ⋅ Y
X
4.28
X Analyzing this circuit with the standard
method for feedback sequential circuits
Y
Q (Section  5.5),  we  get  the  following
excitation equation:
Q∗  = X′ ⋅( ( Y Q⋅ )′ + Q)
= X′ ⋅( Y′ + Q′ + Q)
= X′ ⋅1 = X′
Thus, Q∗ is a function of  X  alone, and
is independent of the circuit’s previous
“state.”
4.29
X ⋅ 1 = X  (T1′)
X ⋅ ( Y + Y′) = X  (T5)
X Y⋅  + X Y⋅ ′ = X  (T8)
4.31
( X + Y′) ⋅ Y = X Y⋅  + Y′ ⋅Y  (T8)
= X Y⋅  + Y Y⋅ ′  (T6′)
= X Y⋅  + 0 (T5′)
= X Y⋅   (T1)
4.35
X ⋅ X ⋅ … ⋅ X ⋅ X = X ⋅ X ⋅ … ⋅( X ⋅X )  (T6′, T7′  as required)
1  2  n  n 1  2  n  n
= X ⋅ X ⋅ … ⋅X (T3′)
1  2  n 
X + X + … + X + X = X + X + … + ( X + X )  (T6, T7 as required)
1  2  n  n 1  2  n  n
= ( X + X + … + X )  (T3)
1  2  n
4.37  Figure 3–4(d) is more appropriate, since electrically a TTL  NOR  gate is just the wired-AND  of inverters.
4.39
(a) True. If A B⋅  = 0 then either A  =  0 or B  =  0 . If A + B = 1 then either A  =  1 or B  = 1 . Therefore,
A B,  = 0 1 or 1,0, , and A  = B′ .

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  4–5
4.41
F X( , … , X ,X , … , X )  = X ′ …,   , X ′ ⋅F ( 0 , … , 0 , X , … , X )
1  i i + 1 n 1 i i + 1 n
+ X ′ …,  ,  X ′ ⋅F ( 0 , …,  1 , X , … , X )
1  i i + 1 n
…
+ X ′ …,   , X ′ ⋅F ( 1 , … , 1, X , … , X )
1 i    i + 1 n
    
i  i 
2 minterms  2 combs
A dual theorem may be written based on maxterms.
4.46  Yes, 2-input  NAND  gates form a complete
set of logic gates. We prove the result in
the figure on the right by showing that
these gates can be used to make 2-input
AND  gates, 2-input  OR  gates, and inverters,
which form a complete set.
4.52  Take the dual, “multiply out,” and take the
dual again. The result is the same as “add-
ing out.”
4.58  (a) 16 ns. (c) 18 ns. (d) 10 ns.
4.61  To make it easier to follow, we’ll take the
dual, multiply out, and then take the dual
again. Also, we’ll simplify using theorems T3′  and T6′ , otherwise we’ll get a nonminimal result for sure. For
Figure 4–27:
F  = X Z⋅  + Y′ ⋅ Z + X′ ⋅ Y Z⋅ ′
F D  = ( X + Z) ⋅( Y′ + Z) ⋅( X′ + Y + Z′)
= X Y⋅  ′ ⋅Z′ + X Z Y⋅  ⋅  + Z Y⋅   ′ ⋅X′ + Z Y⋅  ′ ⋅X′ + Z Z X⋅  ⋅ ′ + Z Z Y⋅  ⋅ (T8, T5′, T2′)
= X Y⋅  ′ ⋅ Z′ + X Y Z⋅  ⋅  + X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′ + X′ ⋅ Z + Y Z⋅   (T3′, T6′)
F  = ( X + Y′ + Z′) ⋅ ( X + Y + Z) ⋅ ( X′ + Y′ + Z) ⋅ ( X′ + Z) ⋅( Y + Z)  (not minimal)
For Figure 4-29:
F  = X Z⋅  ′ + Y′
F D  = ( X + Z′) ⋅Y′
= X Y⋅  ′ + Z′ ⋅ Y′ (T8)
= X Y⋅   ′ + Y′ ⋅ Z′ (T6′)
F  = ( X + Y′) ⋅( Y′ + Z′)  (minimal)
4.63
W
W X
Y Z 00  01  11  10
W ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
00
W′ ⋅ X ⋅ Y 01 1 1
Z
11 1 1
Y
10 1 1
W ⋅ X ⋅ Z
W′ ⋅ Y ⋅ Z′
XX
F = W′ ⋅ X ⋅ Y + W′ ⋅ Y ⋅ Z′ + W ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z + W ⋅ X ⋅ Z

--- Page Break ---

4–6  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
4.69  For part (d), note that it is easiest to work with the product-of-sums directly; rather than multiplying out, one
simply enters the 0s on the map.
X A
(a) X Y (b) A B
00  01  11  10 X 00  01  11  10
Z C D
0 1 00
1 1  1  1 1 Z 01 1 1 1 1
D
Y Z 11 1  1 1 1
C
10 D
F = X ⋅ Y + Z
B
F = D
4.70  Note that in these maps are drawn for the “true” function and we’ve written sum terms for the prime implicates
(the dual of prime implicants) directly, instead of using the complement method suggested in Section 4.3.6.
X + Z X A
(a) X Y (b) A B
Z 00  01  11  10 Y + Z C D 00  01  11  10
0 1 00
D
1 1  1  1  1 Z 01 1 1  1  1
D
11 1 1  1  1
Y C
10
B
F = D
4.72
(a)  V ⋅ W′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00 01  11 10 Y Z 00 01  11 10
V′ ⋅ X ⋅ Z W ⋅ X ⋅ Z
00 00 1  1
01 1 1 01 1 1
Z Z
11 1  1 11 1 1
Y Y
10 10
V ⋅ W ⋅ Z
XX XX
V = 0 V = 1
F = V′ ⋅ X ⋅ Z + V ⋅ W ⋅ Z + V ⋅ W′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
(b)  V′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′ W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00 01  11 10 Y Z 00 01  11 10
00 1 1 1 00 1
01 1 1 01
Z Z
11 1  11 11 1 1
Y Y
10 10 1 1
V′ ⋅ W ⋅ Y′
X ⋅ Y ⋅ Z  V ⋅ X ⋅ Y
XX XX
V = 0 V = 1
F = V′ ⋅ W ⋅ Y′ + X ⋅ Y ⋅ Z + W′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z′ + V ⋅ X ⋅ Y

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  4–7
4.73  Note that in these maps are drawn for the “true” function and we’ve written sum terms for the prime implicates
(the dual of prime implicants) directly, instead of using the complement method suggested in Section 4.3.6.
(a) V + Z W′ + Z
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00 01 11 10 Y Z 00 01  11 10
W + X + Z′ 00 0  0 0 0 00 0 0
W + X + Y′ 01 0 0 01 0 0
Z Z
11 0 0 11 0 0
Y Y
10 0 0 0 0 10 0 0  0 0 V′ + W + Z′
Y′ + Z
X V + X X
V + W + Y′
V = 0 V = 1
F = (V + Z) ⋅ (V + X) ⋅ (W′ + Z) ⋅ (V′ + W + Z′) ⋅ (Y′ + Z)
(b) V + W + X′ + Z W + X′ + Y V′ + X′ + Y
W W V′ + W′ + Y
W X W X
Y Z 00 01  11 10 Y Z 00 01 11 10
00 0 00 0  0  0
W + Y + Z′ V′ + X + Z′ V′ + Y + Z
01 0 0 01 0 0  0 0
W + X + Z′
Z Z
11 0 0 11 0 0
Y Y
10 0  0 0 0 10 0 0
V′ + W′ + X
V + Y′ + Z XX  X + Y′ XX
V = 0 V = 1
F = (X + Y′) ⋅ (V + Y′ + Z) ⋅ (V′ + W′ + Y′) ⋅ (W + X′ + Y′) ⋅ (W + Y + Z′) or (W + X + Z′)
4.74
W W
(a) W X W X
Y Z 00 01  11 10 Y Z 00 01  11 10
00 00
01 1 1 1 1 01 1 1
Z Z
11 11 1 1
Y Y
10 10
U′ ⋅ V′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z U′ ⋅ V ⋅ X ⋅ Z
XX  XX
F = U′ ⋅ V′ ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z + U′ ⋅ V ⋅ X ⋅ Z
U,V = 0,0 U,V = 0,1 + X ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z
W W
W X W X
Y Z 00 01  11 10 Y Z 00 01  11 10
00 00
01 1 1 01 1 1
Z Z
11 11
Y Y
10 10
X  ⋅ Y′ ⋅ Z XX XX
U,V = 1,0 U,V = 1,1
4.83  The name of the circuit comes from its output equation,
2B
F  =  2B  OR  NOT  2B.
F
tOR 3 t 
INV

--- Page Break ---

74LS138
15
Y0
6 5
G1 14
4 Y1
G2A 13
5 Y2
G2B 12
Y3
11
1 Y4
A 10
2 Y5 COMBINATIONAL
B 9
3 Y6
C 7
Y7
LOGIC DESIGN
PRINCIPLES
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
5.4  READY′  is an expression, with  ′  being a unary operator. Use a name like  READY_L  or  /READY  instead.
5.8  Both  LOW-to-HIGH  and HIGH-to-LOW  transitions cause positive transitions on the outputs of three gates (every
second gate), and negative transitions on the other three. Thus, the total delay in either case is
t  = 3t + 3t
p  pLH(LS00)  pHL(LS00)
= 3 15⋅  + 3 15⋅
= 90 ns
Since t and t for a 74LS00 are identical, the same result is obtained using a single worst-case delay of
pLH  pHL
15 ns.
5.12  The smallest typical delay through one ’LS86 for any set of conditions is 10 ns. Use the rule of thumb, “mini-
mum equals one-fourth to one-third of typical,” we estimate 3 ns as the minimum delay through one gate.
Therefore, the minimum delay through the four gates is estimated at 12 ns.
The above estimate is conservative, as it does not take into account the actual transitions in the conditions
shown. For a  LOW-to-HIGH  input transition, the four gates have typical delays of 13, 10, 10, and 20 ns, a total
of 53 ns, so the minimum is estimated at one-fourth of this or 13 ns. For a  HIGH-to-LOW  input transition, the
four gates have typical delays of 20, 12, 12, and 13 ns, a total of 57 ns, so the minimum is estimated at 14 ns.
5.15  A decoder with active-low outputs ought to be faster, considering that this decoder structure can be imple-
mented directly with inverting gates (which are faster than noninverting) as shown in Figures 5–35 and 5–37.
5.16  The worst-case ’138 output will have a transition in the same direction as the worst-case ’139 output, so we use
t pHL  numbers for both, which is the worst combination. The delay through the ’139 is 38 ns, and from the
5–1

--- Page Break ---

5–2  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
active-low enable input of the ’138 is 32 ns, for a total delay of 70 ns. Using “worst-case” numbers for the parts
and ignoring the structure of the circuit, an overly pessimistic result of 79 ns is obtained.
We can also work the problem with 74HCT parts. Worst-case delay through the ’139 is 43 ns, and from the
active-low enable input of the ’138 is 42 ns, for a total delay of 85 ns. Ignoring the structure of the circuit, an
overly pessimistic result of 88 ns is obtained.
We can also work the problem with 74FCT parts. Worst-case delay through the ’139 is 9 ns, and from the
active-low enable input of the ’138 is 8 ns, for a total delay of 17 ns. Ignoring the structure of the circuit, a
slightly pessimistic result of 18 ns is obtained.
Finally, we can work the problem with 74AHCT parts. Worst-case delay through the ’139 is 10.5 ns, and from
the active-low enable input of the ’138 is 12 ns, for a total delay of 22.5 ns. Ignoring the structure of the circuit,
a slightly pessimistic result of 23.5 ns is obtained.
5.19
(a)  74LS138 (b) 74LS138
+5 V +5 V
74LS10
R 15 R 15 1
6 Y0 6 Y0
G1 14 G1 14 2 12 
4 Y1 4 Y1 F
G2A 13 1 74LS10 G2A 13 13
5 G2B Y2 2 5 G2B Y2 U2
12 
Y3 12 13 F Y3 12
11 11
1 Y4 1 Y4
Z A 10 U2 C A 10
2 Y5 2 Y5
Y B 9 B B 9
3 Y6 3 Y6
X C 7 A C 7
Y7 Y7
U1 U1
5.21  Both halves of the ’139 are enabled simultaneously when  EN_L  is asserted. Therefore, two three-state drivers
will be enabled to drive  SDATA  at the same time. Perhaps the designer forgot to put an extra inverter on the
signal going to  1G  or  2G, which would ensure that exactly one source drives SDATA  at all times.
5.22  The total delay is the sum of the decoding delay through the 74LS139, enabling delay of a 74LS151, and delay
through a 74LS20: 38 + 30 + 15 = 83 ns.
5.25  The worst-case delay is the sum of the delays through an ’LS280, select-to-output through an ’LS138, and
through an ’LS86: 50 + 41 + 30 = 121 ns .
5.30  The worst-case delay is the sum of four numbers:
• In  U1, the worst-case delay from any input to  C4  (22 ns).
• In  U2, the worst-case delay from  C0  to  C4  (22 ns).
• In  U3, the worst-case delay from  C0  to  C4  (22 ns).
• In  U4, the worst-case delay from  C0  to any sum output (24 ns).
Thus, the total worst-case delay is 90 ns.
5.35  With the stated input combination, Y5_L  is  LOW  and the other outputs are  HIGH  . We have the following cases:
(a)  Negating  G2A_L  or  G2B_L  causes  Y5_L  to go  HIGH  within 18 ns.
(b)  Negating  G1  causes  Y5_L  to go  HIGH  within 26 ns.
(c)  Changing  A  or  C  causes  Y5_L  to go  HIGH  within 27 ns (the change propagates through 3 levels of logic
internally), and causes  Y4_L  or  Y1_L  respectively to go  LOW  within 41 ns (2 levels).
(d)  Changing  B  causes  Y5_L  to go  HIGH  within 20 ns (2 levels), and causes  Y7_L  to go  LOW  within 39 ns (3
levels). The delays in the ’LS138 are very strange—the worst-case t for 3 levels is shorter than for 2 levels!
pHL

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  5–3
5.39
a D b D
D C D C
A + C′
B A 00  01  11 10 B A 00  01  11 10
00 1 d 1 00 1  1 d 1
A′ + B + C + D A′ + B + C′
01 1 d 1 01 1 d 1
A A
11 1  1 d d 11 1  1 d d
B B
10 1 d  d 10 1 d  d
B B′ + D′
C A + B′ + C′ C
not minimal not minimal
c D
D C
B A 00  01  11 10
C′ + D′
00 1  1 d 1
01 1 1 d 1
A
11 1  1 d d
B
10 1 d  d
A + B′ + C C
not minimal
5.46  The inputs are active low and the outputs are active high in this design.
I0_L
I1_L
Y0
I2_L
I3_L
Y1
I4_L
I5_L
I6_L
I7_L
Y2
I8_L
I9_L
I10_L
I11_L
Y3
I12_L
I13_L
I14_L
I15_L

--- Page Break ---

5–4  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
5.47
74x04
1 2
I7
U2
3 4
I6
74x04
U2
5 6 A2
5 6 74x148
I5
U3
5 EI
U2 I7_L
4 I7 9 8 A1
9 8 I6_L 3 6
I4 I6 A2 U3
I5_L 2 7
I5 A1
U2 I4_L
1 I4 A0 9 11 10 A0
I3_L
I3 11 10 13 I3
I2_L U3
12 I2 GS 14
U2 I1_L
11 I1 EO 15 13 12 IDLE
I0_L
I2 13 12 10 I0
U3
U2
U1
1 2
I1
U3
3 4
I0
U3

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  5–5
5.54  An internal logic diagram for the multiplexer is shown below.
(23)
1D0 
(1)
1D1 (2)
1Y
(2)
1D2
(3)
2D0 
(4)
2D1 (21)
2Y
(5)
2D2
(6)
3D0 
(7)
3D1 (20)
3Y
(8)
3D2
(9)
4D0 
(10)
4D1 (19)
4Y
(11)
4D2
(18)
5D0
(17)
5D1 (15)
5Y
(16)
5D2
(13)
S0
(14)
S1 

--- Page Break ---

5–6  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
A truth table and pin assignment for the mux are shown below.
74LS998
Inputs  Outputs
13
S0
S1  S0  1Y  2Y  3Y  4Y  5Y 14
S1
23
0  0  1D0  2D0  3D0  4D0  5D0 1D0
1
1D1
0  1  1D1  2D1  3D1  4D1  5D1 2 22
1D2 1Y
3
1  0  1D2  2D2  3D2  4D2  5D2 2D0
4 21
2D1 2Y
1  1  0  0  0  0  0 5
2D2
6 20
3D0 3Y
7
3D1
8 19
3D2 4Y
9
4D0
10  15
4D1 5Y
11 
4D2
18 
5D0
17 
5D1
16 
5D2
The mux can be built using a single PLD, a PAL20L8 or GAL20V8; the pin assignment shown above is based
on the PLD. The corresponding ABEL program,  MUX3BY5.ABL, is shown below.
module Mux_3x5
title '5-Bit, 3-Input Multiplexer
J. Wakerly, Marquette University'
MUX3BY5  device 'P20L8';
"  Input pins
I1D0, I1D1, I1D2  pin 23, 1, 2;
I2D0, I2D1, I2D2  pin 3, 4, 5;
I3D0, I3D1, I3D2  pin 6, 7, 8;
I4D0, I4D1, I4D2  pin 9, 10, 11;
I5D0, I5D1, I5D2  pin 18, 17, 16;
S0,  S1  pin 13, 14;
"  Output pins
Y1,  Y2, Y3, Y4, Y5  pin 22, 21, 20, 19, 15;
"  Set definitions
BUS0  = [I1D0,I2D0,I3D0,I4D0,I5D0];
BUS1  = [I1D1,I2D1,I3D1,I4D1,I5D1];
BUS2  = [I1D2,I2D2,I3D2,I4D2,I5D2];
OUT  = [Y1,  Y2,  Y3,  Y4,  Y5  ];
"  Constants
SEL0  = ([S1,S0]==[0,0]);
SEL1  = ([S1,S0]==[0,1]);
SEL2  = ([S1,S0]==[1,0]);
IDLE  = ([S1,S0]==[1,1]);
equations
OUT  = SEL0 & BUS0 # SEL1 & BUS1 # SEL2 & BUS2 # IDLE & 0;
end  Mux_3x5

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  5–7
5.55  This is the actual circuit of a MUX21H 2-input multiplexer cell in LSI Logic’s LCA 10000 series of CMOS
gate arrays. When  S  is 0, the output equals  A; when  S  is 1, the output equals B.
5.60
74x151
7
EN
11
S0 A
10
S1 B
9
S2 C
4 5
Ai  D0 Y Fi
3 6
Bi D1 Y
2
D2
1
Ci D3
15
D4
14
Di D5
13
D6
12
D7
U1 – U18
5.67  The ’08 has the same pinout as the ’00, but its outputs are the opposite polarity. The change in level at pin 3 of
U1 is equivalent to a change at pin 4 of U2 (the input of an XOR  tree), which is equivalent in turn to a change at
pin 6 of U2 (the parity-generator output). Thus, the circuit simply generated and checked odd parity instead of
even.
The change in level at pin 6 of U1 changed the active level of the ERROR  signal.
5.69  This problem is answered in Section 5.9.3 of the text, which makes it a silly question.

--- Page Break ---

5–8  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
5.75
P
Q
74x682 74x682
P0 2 P16 2
P0 P0
Q0 3 Q16 3
Q0 Q0
P1 4 P17 4
P1 P1
Q1 5 Q17 5
Q1 Q1
P2 6 P18 6
P2 P2
Q2 7 Q18 7
Q2 19 EQ0_L Q2 19 /EQ2
P3 8 P EQ Q P19 8 P EQ Q
P3 P3
Q3 9 Q19 9
Q3 Q3
P4 11 P20 11
P4 P4
Q4 12 Q20 12
Q4 1 GT0_L Q4 1 /GT2
P5 13 P GT Q P21 13 P GT Q
P5 P5
Q5 14 Q21 14
Q5 Q5
P6 15 P22 15
P6 P6
Q6 16 Q22 16
Q6 Q6
P7 17 P23 17
P7 P7
Q7 18 Q23 18
Q7 Q7
U1 U3
1 74x27
74x682
2  12
PEQQ
P8 2
P0 13
Q8 3 U4
Q0
P9 4
P1 3 74x27
Q9 5
Q1 4  6
P10 6
P2 5
Q10 7 U4
Q2 19 EQ1_L 74x02
P11 8 P EQ Q 74x02 74x27
P3 11 8
Q11 9 2 10
Q3 1 10  8 9  PGTQ
P12 11 3 
P4 9 U5
Q12 12 U5 U4
Q4 1 GT1_L
P13 13 P GT Q 74x02
P5
Q13 14 5
Q5 4
P14 15 6 
P6
Q14 16 U5
Q6
P15 17
P7
Q15 18
Q7
U2
65 –1
5.79  The function has 65 inputs, and the worst 65-input function (a 65-input parity circuit) has 2  terms in the
minimal sum-of-products expression. Our answer can’t be any worse than this, but we can do better.
The expression for c has 3 product terms: c = c ⋅ x + c ⋅ y + x ⋅y
1  1  0  0 0  0 0  0
The expression for c is c = c ⋅ x + c ⋅ y + x ⋅y
2  2  1  1 1  1 1  1
If we substitute our previous expression for c1 in the equation above and “multiply out,” we get a result with
3 + 3 + 1 = 7 product terms. Let us assume that no further reduction is possible.
Continuing in this way, we would find that the expression for  c has 7 + 7 + 1 = 15 product terms and, in
3 
i + 1
general, the expression for c has 2 – 1 product terms.
i 
33 
Thus, the number of terms in a sum-of-products expression for c is no more than 2  – 1 , fewer if minimiza-
32 
tion is possible.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  5–9
5.80
16-bit group  74S182
MSBs
G3
P3
C3
16-bit group
G2
P2
C2
16-bit group
G1
P1
C1
16-bit group
74LS181 74S182
G G3
CIN 
P P3 G GOUT
P POUT
C3
74LS181
G G2
CIN 
P P2
C2
74LS181 G G0
P P0
G G1
CIN 
P P1
C1
74LS181
G G0
C0 CIN 
P P0 C0
LSBs
C0

--- Page Break ---

5–10  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
5.82
74LS00
1
3
74LS138 2  F1
+5V
R  15 U2
6 Y0 74LS00
G1 14 4 
4 Y1 6
G2A 13 5 F2
5 Y2
G2B 12 U2
Y3 74LS00
11 12
1 Y4 11
Z A 10 13  F3
2 Y5
Y B 9 U2
3 Y6 74LS00
X C 7 9
Y7 8
10  F4
U1
U2
5.91
S0
74x153
14
S1 A
2
S2 B
1
B[0:3] 1G
B0 6
C[0:3] 1C0
C0 5
D[0:3] 1C1 7 BCDE0
D0 4 1Y
E[0:3] 1C2
E0 3
1C3
15
2G
74x157
B1 10
2C0
C1 11 15
2C1 9 BCDE1 G
D1 12 2Y 1
2C2 S T[0:3]
E1 13 A0 2 
2C3 1A 4 T0
U1 3 1Y
1B
A1 5
2A 7 T1
74x153 6 2Y
2B
14 A2 11
A 3A 9 T2
2 10 3Y
B 3B
1 A3 14
1G 4A 12 T3
B2 6 13 4Y
1C0 4B
C2 5
1C1 7 BCDE2
D2 4 1Y
1C2 U3
E2 3
1C3
15
2G
B3 10
2C0
C3 11
2C1 9 BCDE3
D3 12 2Y
2C2
E3 13
2C3
U2
A[0:3]
5.93  The obvious solution is to use a 74FCT682, which has a maximum delay of 11 ns to its  PEQQ  output. How-
ever, there are faster parts in Table 5–3. In particular, the 74FCT151 has a delay of only 9 ns from any select
input to  Y  or  Y. To take advantage of this, we use a ’138 to decode the  SLOT  inputs statically and apply the
resulting eight signals to the data inputs of the ’151. By applying  GRANT[2–0]  to the select inputs of the ’151,
we obtain the  MATCH_L  output (as well as an active-high  MATCH, if we need it) in only 9 ns!

--- Page Break ---

7
Sequential
Logic Design Principles
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
7.2
S
R
Q
QN
7.3  The latch oscillates if  S  and  R  are negated simultaneously. Many simulator programs will exhibit this same
behavior when confronted with such input waveforms.
S
R
Q
QN
119

--- Page Break ---

120  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
7.5
J
EN Q Q
K
T Q QN
CLK
7.8  Just tie the  J  and  K  inputs together and use as the  D  input.
7.9  Excitation and output equations:
D1  = Q1′ + Q2
D2  = Q2′ ⋅X
Z  = Q1 + Q2′
Excitation/transition table; state/output table:
EN EN
Q1 Q2  0  1 S  0  1  Z
00  10  11 A  C  D  1
01  10  10 B  C  C  0
10  00  01 C  A  B  1
11  10  10 D  C  C  1
Q1* Q2* S*
7.15  Excitation equations:
D2  = ( Q1 ⊕ Q0 ) ⊕ ( Q1′ ⋅Q2′)
D1  = Q2
D0  = Q1
Excitation/transition table; state table:
Q2 Q1 Q0  Q2* Q1* Q0* S  S*
000  100 A  E
001  000 B  A
C  F
010  101
D  B
011  001
E  C
100  010
F  G
101  110
G  H
110  111
H  D
111  011
7.18  Excitation and output equations:
J0  =  K0  = EN
J1  =  K1  = Q0 EN⋅
MAX  = EN Q1 Q0⋅ ⋅

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  121
Note that the characteristic equation for a  J-K  flip-flop is Q∗  = J Q⋅  ′ + K′ ⋅Q. Thus, we obtain the following
transition equations:
Q0∗  = EN′ ⋅ Q0 + EN Q0⋅ ′
Q1∗  = EN′ ⋅ Q1 + EN Q0⋅  ⋅ Q1′ + EN Q0⋅ ′ ⋅Q1
Transition/output table; state/output table:
EN EN
Q1 Q2  0  1 S  0  1
00  00,0  01,0 A  A,0  B,0
01  01,0  10,0 B  B,0  C,0
10  10,0  11,0 C  C,0  D,0
11  11,0  00,1 D  D,0  A,1
Q1* Q2*, MAX S*, MAX
State diagram:
EN′ EN′
A B
EN
EN EN
EN
D C
EN′ EN′
Timing diagram:
CLK
EN
Q0
Q1
MAX
7.20  This can be done algebraically. If all of the input combinations are covered, the logical sum of the expressions
on all the transitions leaving a state must be 1. If the sum is not 1, it is 0 for all input combinations that are
uncovered. For double-covered input combinations, we look at all possible pairs of transitions leaving a state.
The product of a pair of transition equations is 1 for any double-covered input combinations.
(a) State  D,  Y  = 0 is uncovered.
(b) State  A, (X+Z′) = 0 is uncovered. State  B,  W  = 1 is double-covered; (W+X) = 0 is uncovered. State  C,
(W+X+Y+Z) = 0 is uncovered; (W⋅X  +  W⋅Y  +  Z⋅Y  +  Z⋅X) = 1 is double covered. State  D, (X⋅Y  +  ⋅X′⋅Z  +  W⋅Z) = 0
is uncovered; (W⋅X′⋅Z  +  W⋅X⋅Y⋅Z) = 1 is double-covered;

--- Page Break ---

122  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
7.21  Table 9–4 on page 804 shows an output-coded state assignment. Here is a corresponding transition list:
S  L3Z  L2Z  L1Z  R1Z  R2Z  R3Z  Transition expression  S*  L3Z*  L2Z*  L1Z*  R1Z*  R2Z*  R3Z*
IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0  (LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)′  IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0
IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0  LEFT  ⋅  HAZ′ ⋅  RIGHT′  L1  0  0  1  0  0  0
IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0  HAZ + LEFT  ⋅  RIGHT  LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1
IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0  RIGHT  ⋅  HAZ′ ⋅  LEFT′  R1  0  0  0  1  0  0
L1  0  0  1  0  0  0  HAZ′  L2  0  1  1  0  0  0
L1  0  0  1  0  0  0  HAZ  LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1
L2  0  1  1  0  0  0  HAZ′  L3  1  1  1  0  0  0
L2  0  1  1  0  0  0  HAZ  LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1
L3  1  1  1  0  0  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0
R1  0  0  0  1  0  0  HAZ′  R2  0  0  0  1  1  0
R1  0  0  0  1  0  0  HAZ  LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1
R2  0  0  0  1  1  0  HAZ′  R3  0  0  0  1  1  1
R2  0  0  0  1  1  0  HAZ  LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1
R3  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0
LR3  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0
The excitation equations and circuit diagram follow directly from this transition list.
7.25  The minimum setup time is the clock period times the duty cycle. That is, the minimum setup time is the time
that the clock is 1.
7.27  As shown in Section 7.9.1, the excitation equation for the latch of Figure 7–72 is Y∗  = C D⋅  + C′ ⋅ Y + D Y⋅
Below, we analyze Figure X7.27 in the same way:
D (C ⋅ D)′
C ⋅ D + (((C ⋅ D)′ ⋅ C) + Y′)′
C Q
Y∗
Y
((C ⋅ D)′ ⋅ C)′ QN
((C ⋅ D)′ ⋅ C) + Y′
The feedback equation is
Y∗  = C D⋅  + ( ( ( C D⋅ )′ ⋅C) + Y′)′
= ( C D⋅ ) + ( ( C D⋅ )′ ⋅C)′ ⋅Y
= C D⋅  + ( ( C D⋅ ) + C′ ) ⋅Y
= C D⋅  + ( D + C′) ⋅Y
= C D⋅  + D Y⋅  + C′ ⋅Y
The feedback equations are the same, and so the circuits have identical steady-state behavior.
The circuit in Figure X7.27 is better in two ways. It uses one less gate, and it has one less load on the  D  input.
7.29  The  AND  gate in the original circuit is replaced with a  NAND  gate. As a result, the second flip-flop stores the
opposite of the value stored in the original circuit; to compensate, swap connections to its  Q  and  QN  outputs.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  123
The  OR  gates in the original circuit are also replaced with  NAND  gates. As a result, each input must be con-
nected to a signal of the opposite polarity as before, that is, to the complementary flip-flop output. In the case of
connections to the second flip-flop, we swapped outputs twice, so the connections remain the same.
The final circuit below uses three 2-input NAND  gates.
X
Z
D  Q D  Q
CLK Q CLK Q
CLK
7.45  A transition table corresponding to the state table is shown below:
A B
Q2 Q1 Q0  00  01  11  10  Z
000  001  001  010  010  0
001  011  011  010  010  0
010  001  001  100  100  0
011  011  011  110  010  1
100  001  101  100  100  1
101  011  011  110  010  1
110  001  101  100  100  1
Q2*  Q1*  Q0*
This table leads to the following Karnaugh maps for the excitation logic, assuming a “minimal cost” treatment
of unused states.
D0 A A
A B A B 
Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10 Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10
00 1  1  0  0 00 1  1  0  0
A′
01 1  1  0  0 01 1  1 0  0
Q2 Q2
11 1  1  0  0 11 d  d  d  d
Q1 Q1 Q0′ ⋅ Q2 ⋅ A
10 1  1  0  0 10 1  1 0  0 D2 A B  A A B  A
Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10 Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10
Q0=0 B Q0=1 B
00 0 0  0  0 Q2 ⋅ A ⋅ B 00 0  0 0 0
01 0  0  1  1 01 0  0 1 0
Q2 Q2
Q1′ ⋅ Q2′ ⋅ A 11 0  1  1  1 11 d  d  d  d
D1 A A
A B  A B  Q1 Q1
10 0  1  1  1 10 0  0  1 0
Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10 Q1 Q2 00  01 11 10
Q0′ ⋅ Q1 ⋅ A
00 0  0  1  1 00 1  1 1  1 Q0=0 B Q0=1 B
01 0  0  0  0 01 1  1 1  1 Q1 ⋅ A ⋅ B
Q2 Q2 Q0′ ⋅ Q1 ⋅ B
11 0  0  0  0 11 d  d  d  d
Q1 Q1
10 0  0  0  0 10 1  1  1  1 Q0
Q0=0 B Q0=1 B

--- Page Break ---

124  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
The resulting excitation equations are
D0  = A′
D1  = Q1′ ⋅ Q2′⋅ A + Q0
D2  = Q2 A⋅  ⋅ B + Q0′ ⋅ Q2⋅ A + Q0′ ⋅ Q1⋅ A + Q1 A⋅  ⋅ B + Q0′ ⋅ Q1⋅B
Ignoring inverters, a circuit realization with the new equations requires one 2-input gate, six 3-input gates, and
one 5-input gate. This is more expensive than Figure 7–54, by four gates.
7.49  The new state assignment yields the following
X Y
transition/excitation table and Karnaugh maps:
Q1 Q0  00  01  11  10  Z
00  00  01  11  01  1
01  01  11  10  11  0
11  11  10  00  10  0
10  10  00  01  00  0
Q2*  Q1* or  D1 D2
Q1′ ⋅ Q2 ⋅ X
Q1′ ⋅ Q2 ⋅ Y  Q1′ ⋅ X ⋅ Y Q2′ ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y  Q2′ ⋅ X ⋅ Y′
D1  X D2 X
X Y X Y
Q1 Q2 00  01  11  10 Q1 Q2 00  01  11 10
00 0 0 1  0 00 0  1  0  1
Q1 ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′ 01 0  1 1 1 01 1  0  1  0
Q2 Q2
11 1 0 0 0 11 1  0  1  0
Q1 Q1
10 1 1 0 1 10 0  1  0  1
Y Y
Q1 ⋅ Q2′ ⋅ X′  Q1 ⋅ Q2′ ⋅ Y′ Q2 ⋅ X′ ⋅ Y′  Q2 ⋅ X ⋅ Y
This yields the following excitation equations:
D1  = Q1′ ⋅ Q2 X⋅  + Q1′ ⋅ Q2 Y⋅  + Q1′ ⋅ X Y⋅  + Q1 Q2⋅  ′ ⋅ X′ + Q1 Q2⋅  ′ ⋅ Y′ + Q1 X⋅  ′ ⋅Y′
D2  = Q2 X Y⋅  ⋅  + Q2′ ⋅ X Y⋅  ′ + Q2′ ⋅ X′ ⋅Y + Q2 X⋅  ′ ⋅Y′
Compared with the results of original state assigment, these equations require two more 3-input  AND  gates,
plus a 6-input  OR  gate inplace of a 4-input one. However, if we are not restricted to a sum-of-products realiza-
tion, using the fact that D2  = Q2 ⊕ X ⊕ Y might make this realization less expensive when discrete gates are
used.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  125
7.57  Here is the transition list:
S  Q2  Q1  Q0  Transition expression  S*  Q2*  Q1*  Q0*
IDLE  0  0  0  (LEFT+RIGHT+HAZ)′  IDLE  0  0  0
IDLE  0  0  0  LEFT  L1  0  0  1
IDLE  0  0  0  HAZ  LR3  1  0  0
IDLE  0  0  0  RIGHT  R1  1  0  1
L1  0  0  1  1  L2  0  1  1
L2  0  1  1  1  L3  0  1  0
L3  0  1  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
R1  1  0  1  1  R2  1  1  1
R2  1  1  1  1  R3  1  1  0
R3  1  1  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
LR3  1  0  0  1  IDLE  0  0  0
The transition/excitation and output equations below follow directly from the transition list.
D2  =  Q2∗  = Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅HAZ
+ Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅RIGHT
+ Q2 Q1⋅  ′ ⋅Q0
+ Q2 Q1 Q0⋅  ⋅
= Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅ ( HAZ + RIGHT) + Q2 Q0⋅
D1  =  Q1∗  = Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅Q0
+ Q2′ ⋅ Q1 Q0⋅
+ Q2 Q1⋅  ′ ⋅Q0
+ Q2 Q1 Q0⋅  ⋅
= Q0
D0  =  Q0∗  = Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅LEFT
+ Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅RIGHT
+ Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅Q0
+ Q2 Q1⋅  ′ ⋅Q0
= Q2′ ⋅ Q1′ ⋅ Q0′ ⋅ ( LEFT + RIGHT) + Q1′ ⋅Q0
Starting from the  IDLE  state, the following transitions may be observed:
S  Q2  Q1  Q0  LEFT  RIGHT  HAZ  Q2*  Q1*  Q0*  S*
IDLE  0  0  0  1  0  1  1  0  1  R1
IDLE  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  0  1  R1
IDLE  0  0  0  1  1  0  1  0  1  R1
IDLE  0  0  0  1  1  1  1  0  1  R1
For each input combination, the machine goes to the  R1  state, because  R1’s encoding is the logical  OR  of the
encodings of the two or three next states that are specified by the ambiguous state diagram.

--- Page Break ---

126  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
The behavior aboveis not so good and is a result of synthesis choices—state encoding and logic synthesis
method. If a different state encoding were used for  R1, or if a different synthesis method were used (e.g., prod-
uct-of-s-terms), then the results could be different. For example, starting with the transition list given earlier,
we can obtain the following set of transition equations using the product-of-s-terms method:
D2  =  Q2∗  = ( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + LEFT′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1′ + Q0′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1 + Q0)
= ( Q2 + Q1 + RIGHT + HAZ) ⋅ ( Q2 + Q1 + LEFT′) ⋅ ( Q2 + Q0′) ⋅ ( Q1′ + Q0) ⋅( Q2′ + Q0)
D1  =  Q1∗  = ( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + LEFT′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + HAZ′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + RIGHT′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1 + Q0)
= ( Q2 + Q1 + Q0) ⋅ ( Q1′ + Q0) ⋅( Q2′ + Q0)
D0  =  Q0∗  = ( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + LEFT + RIGHT + HAZ)
⋅( Q2 + Q1 + Q0 + HAZ′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1′ + Q0′)
⋅( Q2 + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1′ + Q0′)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1′ + Q0)
⋅( Q2′ + Q1 + Q0)
= ( Q2 + Q0 + LEFT + RIGHT) ⋅ ( Q2 + Q0 + HAZ′) ⋅ ( Q1′) ⋅( Q2′ + Q0)
These equations yield the following transitions:
S  Q2  Q1  Q0  LEFT  RIGHT  HAZ  Q2*  Q1*  Q0*  S*
IDLE  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  IDLE
IDLE  0  0  0  0  1  1  1  0  0  LR3
IDLE  0  0  0  1  1  0  0  0  1  L1
IDLE  0  0  0  1  1  1  0  0  0  IDLE
This is obviously different and still not particularly good behavior.
7.58  Let  E(SB),  E(SC), and  E(SD)  be  the  binary encodings of states  SB,  SC, and  SD  respectively. Then
E SD(  )  = E SB(  ) + E SC(  ) , the bit-by-bit logical  OR  of  E(SB)  and  E(SC). This is true because the synthesis
method uses the logical  OR  of the next values for each state variable and, by extension, the logical  OR  of the
encoded states.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  127
7.68  As far as I know, I was the first person to propose BUT-flops, and Glenn Trewitt was the first person to analyze
them, in 1982. To analyze, we break the feedback loops as shown in the figure to the right.
Y1∗ Y1
Q1
X1 
X2 Y2∗ Y2
Q2
The excitation and output equations are
Y1  = [ ( X1 Y1⋅ ) ⋅( X2 Y2⋅ )′]′
= X1′ + Y1′ + X2 Y2⋅
Y2  = [ ( X2 Y2⋅ ) ⋅( X1 Y1⋅ )′]′
= X2′ + Y2′ + X1 Y1⋅
Q1  = Y1
Q2  = Y2
The corresponding transition/state table is
X1 X2
Y1 Y2  00  01  11  10
00  11  11  11  11
01  11  10  10  11
11  11  10  11  01
10  11  11  01  01
Y1*  Y2*
The two stable total states are circled. Notice that state 00 is unreachable.
When  X1 X2  = 00 or 11, the circuit generally goes to stable state 11, with  Q1 Q2  = 11. The apparent oscillation
between states 01 and 10 when  X1 X2  = 11 may not occur in practice, because it contains a critical race that
tends to force the circuit into stable state 11.
When  X1 X2  = 01 or 10, the  Q  output corresponding to the  HIGH  input will oscillate, while the other output
remains  HIGH  .
Whether this circuit is useful is a matter of opinion.
7.71  When  X=1, the circuit was supposed to “count” through its eight states in Gray-code order. When  X=0, it
remains in the current state. If this were the case, I suppose it could be used as a 3-bit random number genera-
tor. However, I messed up on the logic diagram and the circuit actually does something quite different and
completely useless, compared to what I intended when I wrote the problem. Someday I’ll fix this problem.
Also, metastability may occur when  X  is changed from 1 to 0.
7.79  Figure X5.59 requires two “hops” for each input change. Figure 7–66 is faster, requiring only one hop for each
input change. On the other hand, Figure 7–66 cannot be generalized for  n>2.
7.90  Either this exercise is a joke, or a correct answer is much too dangerous to publish. Nevertheless, Earl Levine
offers two possible answers:
(Stable output)  Was the last answer to this question “yes”?
(Oscillating output)  Was the last answer to this question “no”?

--- Page Break ---

74x163
2
CLK
1 8
CLR
9
LD
7
ENP
10
ENT
3 14
A QA
4 13
B QB
Sequential
5 12
C QC
6  11
D QD 
15
RCO Logic Design Practices
E X E R C I S E  S O L U T I O N S
8.1  In the first three printings, change “RAMBANK0” to “RAMBANK1” in the third line of the exercise. The results are
the same. The new expression describes exactly the input combinations in which the 8 high-order bits of  ABUS
are 00000001 2, the same as the original expression using don’t-cares.
8.2  The 16-series devices have 64 × 32 or 2048 fuses (see Figure 10–2). The 20-series devices have 64 × 40 or
2560 fuses.
8.3  There are 64 × 32 = 2048 fuses in the  AND array (see Figure 10–4). Each of the eight macrocells has one fuse
to control the output polarity and one fuse to select registered vs. combinational configuration in the 16V8R, or
to assert the output-enable in the 16V8S. There are also two global fuses to select the overall configuration
(16V8C, 16V8R, or 16V8S). The total number of fuses is therefore 2048 + 16 + 2 = 2066 .
A real 16V8 (depending on the manufacturer) has at least 64 additional fuses to disable individual product
terms, 64 user-programmable fuses that do nothing but store a user code, and a security fuse. (Once the security
fuse is programmed, the rest of the fuse pattern can no longer be read.)
8.5  The f column below gives the answers in MHz.
maxE
Part numbers  Suffix t t t t t f f 
PD  CO  CF  SU  H  maxE  maxI
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -5  5  4  –  4.5  0  117.7  117.7
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -7  7.5  6.5  –  7  0  74.1  74.1
PAL16L8, PAL16Rx, PAL20L8, PAL20Rx  -10  10  8  –  10  0  55.6  55.6
GAL22V10  -25  25  15  13  15  0  33.3  35.7
145

--- Page Break ---

146  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.6  The f column above gives the answers in MHz.
maxI
8.7
module Eight_Bit_Reg
title ’8-bit Edge-Triggered Register’
Z74X374 device ’P16V8R’;
" Input pins
CLK, !OE  pin 1, 11;
D1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, D8  pin 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9;
" Output pins
Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4, Q5, Q6, Q7, Q8  pin 19, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12;
" Set definitions
D = [D1,D2,D3,D4,D5,D6,D7,D8];
Q = [Q1,Q2,Q3,Q4,Q5,Q6,Q7,Q8];
equations
Q := D;
end Eight_Bit_Reg
8.10  If  EN  or  CLK  is 0, the output will be stable. If both are 1, the results are unpredictable, since they depend on
circuit timing. It is certain that the circuit’s output will be unstable as long as this condition is true.
8.11  The counter is modified to return to a count of 0 when count 9 is reached.
module Z74x162
title '4-bit Decade Counter'
"Z74X162 device 'P16V8R';
" Input pins
CLK, !OE  pin 1, 11;
A, B, C, D  pin 2, 3, 4, 5;
!LD, !CLR, ENP, ENT  pin 6, 7, 8, 9;
" Output pins
QA, QB, QC, QD  pin 19, 18, 17, 16 istype 'reg';
RCO  pin 15;
" Set definitions
INPUT = [ D,  C,  B,  A ];
COUNT = [QD, QC, QB, QA ];
equations
COUNT.CLK = CLK;
COUNT := !CLR & (  LD & INPUT
# !LD &  (ENT & ENP) & (COUNT < 9) & (COUNT + 1)
# !LD &  (ENT & ENP) & (COUNT == 9) & 0
# !LD & !(ENT & ENP) &  COUNT);
RCO = (COUNT == 9) & ENT;
end Z74x162
8.13  The counting direction is controlled by  QD: count up when  QD=1, count down when  QD=0. A load occurs
when the counter is in the terminal state, 1111 when counting up, 0000 when counting down. The MSB is com-
plemented during a load and the other bits are unchanged.
Let us assume that the counter is initially in one of the states 0000–0111. Then the counter counts down
(QD=0). Upon reaching state 0000, it loads 1000 and subsequently counts up (QD=1). Upon reaching state
1111, the counter loads 0111, and subsequently counts down, repeating the cycle.

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  147
If the counter is initially in one of the states 1000–1111, the same cyclic behavior is observed. The counting
sequence has a period of 16 and is, in decimal,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 8, 9, ...
If only the three LSBs are observed, the sequence is
0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, 0, 0, 1, ...
8.14  The only difference between a ’163 and a ’161 is that the  CLR_L  input of ’161 is asynchronous. Thus, the
counter will go from state 1010 to state 0000 immediately, before the next clock tick, and go from state 0000 to
state 0001 at the clock tick. Observing the state just before each clock tick, it is therefore a modulo-10 counter,
with the counting sequence 0, 1, ..., 9, 0, 1, ....
Note that this type of operation is not recommended, because the width of the  CLR_L  pulse is not well con-
trolled. That is, the  NAND  gate will negate the  CLR_L pulse as soon as either one of its inputs goes to 0. If, say,
the counter’s  QB  output clears quickly, and its  QD  output clears slowly, it is possible for  CLR_L  to be asserted
long enough to clear  QB  but not  QD, resulting in an unexpected next state of 1000, or possibly metastability of
the  QD  output.
8.17  The path from the  Q1  counter output (B  decoder input) to the Y2_L output has 10 ns more delay than the  Q2  and
Q0  (C  and  A) paths. Let us examine the possible  Y2_L  glitches in Figure 8–43 with this in mind:
3→4 (011→100) Because of the delay in the  Q1  path, this transition will actually look like 011→110→100.
The  Y6_L  output will have a 10-ns glitch, but  Y2_L  will not.
7→0 (111→000) Because of the delay in the  Q1  path, this transition will actually look like 111→010→000.
The  Y2_L  output will have a 10-ns glitch, but the others will not.
8.19  The delay calculation is different, depending on the starting state.
In the  INIT  state,  U7  and  U8  take 21 ns to propagate the  CLEAR  signal to the outputs. Then  U6  requires 20 ns
setup time on its  D  inputs while  U3  requires 20 ns setup time on its  RIN  input. This implies a minimum clock
period of 41 ns, assuming zero delay from the control unit.
In states  M1–M8, the minimum clock period depends on the delay of the combinational logic in the control unit
that asserts  SELSUM  when  MPY0  is asserted. However, the most obvious way to do this is to connect  MPY0
directly to  SELSUM, creating a delay of 0 ns. This assumption is made below. Also, it is assumed that  MPY0  is
1 to find the worst case. The figure on the next page shows the worst-case path, in heavy lines, to be 106 ns.
Since we would like to use the same clock for all states, the minimum clock period is 106 ns.

--- Page Break ---

148  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
Clock
edge
39ns
27ns
U2, U3 U6 Q
outputs outputs
valid valid
16ns
24ns 16ns
U4 S U4 C4
outputs output
valid 24ns valid
24ns
14ns 21ns
16ns
U5 S U5 C4
outputs output
valid valid
14ns
27ns
U7 & U8
outputs
valid
27ns
U9 gate
output
valid
20ns 20ns
20ns
U6 D U3 RIN
inputs input set
set up up
Ready
for next
clock

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  149
8.20  The synchronizer fails if  META  has not settled by the beginning of the setup-time window for  FF2, which is
5 ns before the clock edge. Since the clock period is 40 ns, the available metastability resolution time is 35 ns.
The MTBF formula is
exp( t  ⁄ τ)
r 
MTBF ( t  ) = ------------------------
r
T ⋅ f⋅a
0 
Substituting the proper values of  τ and T for the ’F74, and of  f  and  a for the problem, we calculate
0 
exp( 35  ⁄ 0.4) 28 
MTBF 35ns(  ) = ------------------------------------------- ≈ 2 10⋅   s
– 4 6  6
2.0 10⋅    ⋅ 10  ⋅10 
8.22  Refer to the sample data sheet on page 169 of the text: “Not more than one output should be shorted at a time;
duration of short-circuit should not exceed one second.” In the switch debounce circuit, the short lasts only for
a few tens of  nanoseconds, so it’s OK.
8.23  CMOS outputs can “latch up” under certain conditions. According to the Motorola  High-Speed CMOS Logic
Data  book  (1988  edition,  pp.  4–10),  a  74HCT  output  can  latch  up  if  a  voltage  outside  the  range
– 0.5 ≤ V ≤ V + 0.5V is forced on the output by an external source. In a switch debounce circuit using
out  CC 
74HCT04s, the switch connection to ground is an external source, but the voltage (0 V) is within the acceptable
range and should not be a problem.
Another potential problem is excessive short-circuit current, but again the data book indicates that shorting the
output briefly is not a problem, as long as “the maximum package power dissipation is not violated” (i.e., the
short is not maintained for a long time).
Similar considerations apply to 74AC and 74ACT devices, but in the balance, such devices are  not  recom-
mended in the switch-debounce application, as we’ll explain. On one hand, typical 74AC/74ACT devices are
even less susceptible to latch-up than 74HCT devices. (For example, see the Motorola  FACT Data  book, 1988
edition, pp. 2–9.) On the other hand, 74AC/74ACT’s high performance may create noise problems for  other
devices in a system. In particular, when the 74AC/74ACT  HIGH  output is shorted to ground, it may momen-
tarily drag the local 5 V power-supply rail down with it, especially if the decoupling capacitors are small, far
away, or missing. This will in turn cause incorrect operation of the other, nearby logic devices.
8.25  TTL inputs require significant current, especially in the  LOW  state. The bus holder cannot supply enough
current unless the series resistor is made much smaller, which then creates a significant load on the bus.

--- Page Break ---

150  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.26  .
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
--
-- Exercise 8-26
-- This code combines the address latch and
-- and the decoder and its latch
entity latch_decode is
port (
abus : in std_logic_vector ( 31 downto 0);
avalid : in std_logic;
la : out std_logic_vector ( 19 downto 0);
romcs, ramcs0, ramcs1, ramcs2 : out std_logic
);
end entity latch_decode;
architecture behave of latch_decode is
begin
process (avalid, abus)
begin
if (avalid = '1') then
la <= abus (19 downto 0);
end if;
end process;
process (abus, avalid)
variable rom, ram1, ram2, ram0 : std_logic_vector (11 downto 0);
begin
rom  := "111111111111";
ram0 := "000000000000";
ram1 := "000000010000";
ram2 := "000000100000";
If (avalid= '1') then
if (abus (31 downto 20) = rom ) then romcs  <= '1'; else romcs  <= '0'; end if;
if (abus (31 downto 20) = ram0) then ramcs0 <= '1'; else ramcs0 <= '0'; end if;
if (abus (31 downto 20) = ram1) then ramcs1 <= '1'; else ramcs1 <= '0'; end if;
if (abus (31 downto 20) = ram2) then ramcs2 <= '1'; else ramcs2 <= '0'; end if;
end if;
end process;
end behave;
8.28  The maximum delay from clock to output of a 74HCT74 flip-flop is 44 ns. For a 4-bit ripple counter, the delay
ripples through four such stages for a total maximum delay of 176 ns. Similarly, the maximum delays using
74AHCT and 74LS74 flip-flops are 40 ns and 160 ns, respectively.
8.32
t = t + 3t + t
period(min)  pTQ  AND  setup
f = 1  ⁄ t
max  period(min)

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  151
8.37
Inputs  Current state  Next state
CLR_L  LD_L  ENT  ENP  QD  QC  QB  QA  QD∗  QC∗  QB∗  QA∗
0  x  x  x  x  x  x  x  0  0  0  0
1  0  x  x  x  x  x  x  D  C  B  A
1  1  0  x  x  x  x  x  QD  QC  QB  QA
1  1  x  0  x  x  x  x  QD  QC  QB  QA
1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0  0  0  0  1
1  1  1  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  1  0
1  1  1  1  0  0  1  0  0  0  1  1
1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  1  0  0
1  1  1  1  0  1  0  0  0  1  0  1
1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  1  0
1  1  1  1  0  1  1  0  0  1  1  1
1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1  0  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  1  0  0  1
1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1  0  0  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1  0  1  1
1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  0  1  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  1  1  0  1
1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  0  1  0  0
1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  1  1  1  1
1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  0  0  0  0

--- Page Break ---

152  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.38
74LS163
2
CLOCK CLK
1
CLR
9
LD
7
ENP
10
+5 V  ENT
R 3 14
A QA Q0
4 13
B QB Q1
5 12
C QC Q2
6 11
D QD Q3
15
RCO
U1
74LS163
2
CLK
CLR
LD
ENP
10
ENT
3 14
A QA Q4
4 13
B QB Q5
5 12
C QC Q6
6 11
D QD Q7
15
RCO
U2
74LS163
2
CLK
CLR
74LS00 74LS04
1 LD
3  1 2
2  ENP
10
ENT
U10 U11 3 14
A QA Q8
4 13
B QB Q9
5 12
C QC Q10
6 11
D QD  Q11
15
RCO
U3
Note: This design assumes that
largest available "AND" function
is an 8-input NAND gate. Thus,
cascading counters greater than
74LS163
36 bits may require additional
1
levels of delay. 2
2 CLK
3 CLR
74LS30  74LS04
4 LD
12  3 4
5 ENP
10
6 ENT
U18  U19 3 14
11 A QA Q32
4 13
12 (Actually, we could make an B QB Q33
equally fast counter with up to 5 12
100 bits by combining the C QC Q34
outputs of three 74LS30s with 6 11
D QD Q35
a 74LS27, a 3-input NOR.) 15
RCO
U9

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  153
The minimum clock period is the sum of:
(a)  The delay from the clock edge to any  RCO  output (35 ns).
(b)  The delay from any  RCO  output to any  ENP  input, that is, two gate delays ( 2 15⋅  = 30 ns ).
(c)  The setup time to the next clock edge required by the  ENP  inputs (20 ns).
Thus, the minimum clock period is 85 ns, and the corresponding maximum clock frequency is 11.76 MHz.
8.41  To get even spacing, the strategy is for the MSB (N3) to select half the states, the ones where  QA  is 0. The next
bit down (N2) selects one-fourth of the states, the ones where  QB  is 0 and the less significant counter bits (i.e.,
QA) are all 1. Likewise,  N1  selects the one-eighth of the states where  QC  is 0 and  QB  and  QA  are 1, and  N0
selects the state where  QD  is 0 and  QC,  QB, and  QA  are all 1.  In this way, each non-1111 counter state is
assigned to one input bit.
+5 V
74LS04
1  2 1 74LS10
R 74LS163 U5 2  12
2 13 
CLOCK CLK
U2
1 74LS04
CLR
9 3  4 3 74LS10
LD
7 U5 4  6
ENP 74LS20
10 5  1
ENT
U2
3 14 2
A QA 6
4 13 74LS04 9 4 Z
B QB 74LS20
5 12 5  6 10  5 U3
C QC 8
6 11 U5 12
D QD
15 13  U3
RCO
74LS04
U1
1
N3
U5 2
N2
3
N1 74LS30
4
N0 12
5
6
U4
11
12

--- Page Break ---

154  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.53
--Chris Dunlap
--Xilinx Applications
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
entity v74x163s is
generic(size : integer := 8);  --added generic
port  (clk,clr_l,ld_l,enp,ent : in std_logic;
d : in std_logic_vector (size-1 downto 0); --changes range of input
q : out std_logic_vector (size-1 downto 0); --changes range of output
rco : out std_logic);
end v74x163s;
architecture v74x163_arch of v74x163s is
component synsercell is
port (clk, ldnoclr, di, coclrorld,cntenp,cnteni : in std_logic;
qi,cnteni1 : out std_logic);
end component;
signal ldnoclr,noclrorld : std_logic;
signal scnten : std_logic_vector (size downto 0); --creates a ranged temp with overflow room
begin
ldnoclr <= (not ld_l) and clr_l;
noclrorld <= ld_l and clr_l;
scnten(0) <= ent;
rco <= scnten(size);
gi: for i in 0 to size-1 generate --counts for size of counter
U1: synsercell port map (clk, ldnoclr, noclrorld, enp, d(i), scnten(i), scnten(i+1), q(i));
end generate;
end v74x163_arch;

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  155
8.54
--**********************************
-- PROBLEM : WAKERLY - 8.54
-- FILES :
--  8_54_top.vhd : top level file
--  8_54_par2ser.vhd : parallel to serial converter
--  8_54_control.vhd : control module
--  8_54_shift_synch.vhd : 8 bit shift register
--
-- DESCRIPTION :
--  Creates a parallel to serial converter.
--  Data in is described as 8 x 8bit modules,
--  with a single 8 bit data bus that carries
--  data of the format given in Figure 8-55.
--  Each serial link has its own SYNCH(i) line;
--  the pulses should be staggered so SYNCH(i+1)
--  occurs 1 clock cycle after SYNCH(i).
--
--  Because of this, the load_synch line should
--  also be staggered so the data transmitted
--  over the serial link will correspond to its
--  associated SYNCH line.
--**********************************
-- library declarations
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
-- top level entity declaration
entity wak_8_54_top is
port (
data: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (63 downto 0);
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
synch: buffer STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
sdata: out STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0)
);
end wak_8_54_top;
architecture wak_8_54_arch of wak_8_54_top is
signal load_shift_master: std_logic;
signal synch_master: std_logic;
signal load_shift: std_logic_vector (7 downto 0);
--component declarations
component par2ser is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
data: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
load_shift: in STD_LOGIC;
sdata: out STD_LOGIC
);
end component;

--- Page Break ---

156  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
component control is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
load_shift: out STD_LOGIC;
synch: out STD_LOGIC
);
end component;
component shift_synch is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
synch_in: in STD_LOGIC;
synch: buffer STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0)
);
end component;
begin
--component instantiations
S1: shift_synch port map (clock=>clock, synch_in=>synch_master, synch=>synch);
S2: shift_synch port map (clock=>clock, synch_in=>load_shift_master,
synch=>load_shift);
U1: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(7 downto 0), load_shift=>load_shift(0),
sdata=>sdata(0));
U2: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(15 downto 8),
load_shift=>load_shift(1), sdata=>sdata(1));
U3: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(23 downto 16),
load_shift=>load_shift(2), sdata=>sdata(2));
U4: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(31 downto 24),
load_shift=>load_shift(3), sdata=>sdata(3));
U5: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(39 downto 32),
load_shift=>load_shift(4), sdata=>sdata(4));
U6: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(47 downto 40),
load_shift=>load_shift(5), sdata=>sdata(5));
U7: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(55 downto 48),
load_shift=>load_shift(6), sdata=>sdata(6));
U8: par2ser port map (clock=>clock, data=>data(63 downto 56),
load_shift=>load_shift(7), sdata=>sdata(7));
U9: control port map (clock=>clock, load_shift=>load_shift_master,
synch=>synch_master);
end wak_8_54_arch;

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  157
--*************************************
-- Basically an 8-bit shift register
--  takes the synch_in signal as an
--  input, and outputs an 8 bit signal,
--  each consecutive bit delayed by one
--  from the previous bit.
-- library declaration
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
-- top level entity declaration
entity shift_synch is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
synch_in: in STD_LOGIC;
synch: buffer STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0)
);
end shift_synch;
architecture shift_synch_arch of shift_synch is
begin
-- low order synch signal is simply passed through
-- to output.  all others are delayed.
synch(0) <= synch_in;
process(clock)
begin
if clock'event and clock='1' then
for I in 0 to 6 loop
synch(I+1) <= synch(I);
end loop;
end if;
end process;
end shift_synch_arch;

--- Page Break ---

158  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
--***************************************
-- Parallel to serial converter
--  Data is entered through 8 bit DATA bus
--  It is loaded into the register when
--  load_shift is low.  If load_shift is
--  high, shift data serially out through sdata
-- library declarations
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
-- top level entity declaration
entity par2ser is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
data: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (7 downto 0);
load_shift: in STD_LOGIC;
sdata: out STD_LOGIC
);
end par2ser;
architecture par2ser_arch of par2ser is
-- internal signal declaration
signal REG: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(7 downto 0);
signal DIN: std_logic;
begin
-- DIN <= 0 will set the high order bit to be
-- zero once data is loaded in.
DIN <= '0';
-- process to create shift register
--accomplished by simply taking the DIN signal
--and concatenating on the end the previous
--6 high order bits.
process (clock)
begin
if clock'event and clock='1' then
if load_shift = '0' then
REG <= data;
else
REG <= DIN & REG(7 downto 1);
end if;
end if;
sdata <= REG(0);
end process;
end par2ser_arch;

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  159
--******************************
-- Control logic
--  controls the loading of the
--  parallel to serial shift register
--  through the load_shift signal.
--  also, controls the synch word.
--  this occurs every 256 clock cycles.
--library declaration
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_arith.all;
use IEEE.std_logic_unsigned.all;
--top level entity declaration
entity control is
port (
clock: in STD_LOGIC;
load_shift: out STD_LOGIC;
synch: out STD_LOGIC
);
end control;
architecture control_arch of control is
--internal signal declaration
signal COUNT: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR(7 downto 0);
signal load: STD_LOGIC;
begin
load <= '0';  --define constant
process (clock)
begin
if clock'event and clock='1' then
count <= count + 1;
if count(2 downto 0) = "110" then
load_shift <= load;
else
load_shift <= not load;
end if;
if count = 254 then
synch <= '1';
else
synch <= '0';
end if;
end if;
end process;
end control_arch;
8.55  This is really the second paragraph of Exercise 8.54.

--- Page Break ---

160  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.62  Regardless of the number of shift-register outputs connected to the odd-parity circuit, its output in state 00...00
is 0, and the 00...00 state persists forever. However, suppose that an odd number of shift-register outputs are
connected. Then the output of the odd-parity circuit in state 11...11 is 1, and the 11...11 state also persists for-
n 
ever. In this case, the number of states in the “maximum-length” sequence can be no more than 2 – 2, since
n 
two of the states persist forever. Therefore, if an LFSR counter generates a sequence of length 2 – 1 , it must
have an even number of shift-register outputs connected to the odd-parity circuit.
8.64  The figure below shows the effect of physically changing the odd-parity circuit to an even-parity circuit (i.e.,
inverting its output).
N-bit
parallel-out
shift register connect to
selected outputs
CLOCK CLK (see table)
RESET_L PR
even-parity circuit
SERIN
XN–1
QA
XN–2
QB
XN–3
QC
XN_L
X2
QX
X1
QY
X0
QZ
From Exercise 9.32, we know that an even number of shift-register outputs are connected to the parity circuit,
and we also know that complementing two inputs of an  XOR  gate does not change its output. Therefore, we can
redraw the logic diagram as shown below.
N-bit
parallel-out
shift register connect to
selected outputs
CLOCK CLK (see table)
RESET_L PR
even-parity circuit
SERIN
XN–1
QA
XN–2
QB
XN–3
QC
XN_L
X2
QX
X1
QY
X0
QZ

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  161
Finally, we can move the inversion bubbles as shown below.
N-bit
parallel-out
shift register connect to
selected outputs
CLOCK CLK (see table)
RESET_L CLR
odd-parity circuit
SERIN
XN–1
QA
XN–2
QB
XN–3
QC
XN
X2
QX
X1
QY
X0
QZ
This circuit has exactly the same structure as Figure 8–68, except that the shift register stores complemented
data. When we look at the external pins of the shift register in the first figure in this solution, we are looking at
that complemented data. Therefore, each state in the counting sequence of the even-parity version (our first
figure) is the complement of the corresponding state in the odd-parity version (Figure 8–68). The odd-parity
version visits all states except 00...00, so the even-parity version visits all states except 11...11.

--- Page Break ---

162  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
8.68
--Johnny West
--Xilinx Applications
--8.68 : Design an iterative circuit for checking the parity of a 16-bit data
--  word with a single even-parity bit.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
--This portion of the code constructs the iterative module that will cascaded 16
--times in order to check the parity of a 16 bit word.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
--Generic Iterative Module
entity Iterative_Module is
port (
carry_in, primary_in: in STD_LOGIC;
carry_out: out STD_LOGIC
);
end Iterative_Module;
--An XOR is performed on the current parity of a word (carry_in) and the
--next bit in the word (boundary_in)
--Even parity produces a 0 and odd parity produces a 1
architecture Parity_Check of Iterative_Module is
begin
carry_out <= carry_in xor primary_in;
end Parity_Check;

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  163
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--This portion of the code cascades the interative module 16 times and connects the
--modules together.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
library IEEE;
use IEEE.std_logic_1164.all;
--Top level entity for checking the parity of a 16bit word
entity Parity_16bit is
port (data_word: in STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (15 downto 0);
parity: out STD_LOGIC  );
end Parity_16bit;
--Architecture consists of 16 cascaded iterative modules
architecture Parity_16bit_arch of parity_16bit is
component Iterative_Module
port (carry_in, primary_in: in STD_LOGIC;
carry_out: out STD_LOGIC  );
end component;
signal carry: STD_LOGIC_VECTOR (15 downto 0);
signal cin0: STD_LOGIC;
begin
cin0 <= '0';
P0: Iterative_Module port map (cin0, data_word(0), carry(0));
P1: Iterative_Module port map (carry(0), data_word(1), carry(1));
P2: Iterative_Module port map (carry(1), data_word(2), carry(2));
P3: Iterative_Module port map (carry(2), data_word(3), carry(3));
P4: Iterative_Module port map (carry(3), data_word(4), carry(4));
P5: Iterative_Module port map (carry(4), data_word(5), carry(5));
P6: Iterative_Module port map (carry(5), data_word(6), carry(6));
P7: Iterative_Module port map (carry(6), data_word(7), carry(7));
P8: Iterative_Module port map (carry(7), data_word(8), carry(8));
P9: Iterative_Module port map (carry(8), data_word(9), carry(9));
P10: Iterative_Module port map (carry(9), data_word(10), carry(10));
P11: Iterative_Module port map (carry(10), data_word(11), carry(11));
P12: Iterative_Module port map (carry(11), data_word(12), carry(12));
P13: Iterative_Module port map (carry(12), data_word(13), carry(13));
P14: Iterative_Module port map (carry(13), data_word(14), carry(14));
P15: Iterative_Module port map (carry(14), data_word(15), carry(15));
parity <= carry(15); --parity = 0 is even parity and 1 if odd parity
end parity_16bit_arch;
8.75  In the following design,  RESET  is not recognized until the end of phase 6.  RESTART  is still recognized at the
end of any phase; otherwise it would have no real use (i.e., only going back to phase 1 after the end of phase 6,

--- Page Break ---

164  DIGITAL CIRCUITS
which happens anyway.) Presumably,  RESTART  would be used only with great care or in unusual circum-
stances (e.g., during debugging).
module TIMEGEN6
title 'Six-phase Master Timing Generator'
" Input and Output pins
MCLK, RESET, RUN, RESTART  pin;
T1, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L  pin istype 'reg';
" State definitions
PHASES = [P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L, P6_L];
NEXTPH = [P6_L, P1_L, P2_L, P3_L, P4_L, P5_L];
SRESET = [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P1 =  [0, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1];
P6 =  [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0];
equations
T1.CLK = MCLK; PHASES.CLK = MCLK;
WHEN (RESET & PHASES==P6 & !T1) THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := SRESET;}
ELSE WHEN (PHASES==SRESET) # RESTART THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := P1;}
ELSE WHEN RUN & T1 THEN {T1 := 0; PHASES := PHASES;}
ELSE WHEN RUN & !T1 THEN {T1 := 1; PHASES := NEXTPH;}
ELSE {T1 := T1; PHASES := PHASES;}
end TIMEGEN6
8.81  This problem can be a bit confusing since the states in Table 7–14 have the same names as the ’163 data inputs.
Therefore, we shall use the names  SA,  SB, and so on for the states.
The idea is to normally allow the counter to count to the next state, but to force it to go to  SA  or  SB  when the
wrong input is received. The  CLR_L  input is used to go to  SA  (0000), and the  LD_L  input is used to go to  SB
(0001; the counter’s  A–D  data inputs are tied  LOW  and  HIGH  accordingly).
Inspecting the state table on page 582 of the text, we see that state  A  should be loaded when  X=1 and the
machine is in state  SA,  SD, or  SH. Thus,
CLR_L  = [ X ⋅ ( QC′ ⋅ QB′ ⋅ QA′ + QC′ ⋅ QB QA⋅  + QC QB QA⋅  ⋅  )] ′
= [ X ⋅ ( QC′ ⋅ QB′ ⋅ QA + QB QA⋅  )] ′
All of the other next-states when  X=1 are the natural successors obtained by counting.
Similarly, state  SB  should be loaded when  X=0 and the machine is in state  SB,  SC,  SE,  SF, or  SH. In addition,
notice that in state  SG, the next state  SE  is required when  X=0; the load input must be used in this case too, but
a different value must be loaded. Thus,  LD_L  will be asserted in six of the eight states when  X=0.
Optionally,  LD_L could be easily asserted in the remaining two states as well, since the required next states (SB
and  SE) are ones that we must generate in other six cases anyway. Thus, we can connect X  to the  LD_L input, so
we always load when  X=0. Then, we load either  SB  (0010) or  SE  (0100) depending on the current state. There-
fore, we can write the following equations for data inputs  A–D:
A  = 0
B  = SA + SB + SC + SE + SF + SH
= QB′ + QC′ ⋅ QA′ + QC QA⋅
C  = B′
D  = 0
Alternatively, we could realize  C  as an  AND-OR  circuit and complement to get  B:
C  = QC′ ⋅ QB QA⋅  + QC QB QA⋅  ⋅ ′
B  = C′

--- Page Break ---

EXERCISE SOLUTIONS  165
The logic diagram follows directly from these equations. The output logic can be realized using the equations
on page 584 of the text.
8.90  Transitions on  SYNCIN  occur a maximum of 20 ns after the rising edge of  CLOCK. Given a 40-ns clock period
and a 10-ns setup-time requirement for the other ’ALS74s, 10 ns is the maximum propagation delay of the
combinational logic.

--- Page Break ---

Combinational SSI Devices
74x00 74x02 74x03 74x04 74x08
1 2 1 1 2 1
3 1 3 3
2 3 2 2
3 4
4 5 4 4
6 4 6 6
5 6 5 5 6 5
9 8 9 9 8 9
8 10 8 8
10 9 10 10
11 10
12 11 12 12
11 13 11 11
13  12  13  13 12 13 
74x10 74x11 74x14 74x20 74x21
1 2
1 1
1 1
2 12 2 12
3 4 2 2
13 13 6 6
4 4
5 6
3 3 5 5
4 6 4 6
5 5 9 8 9 9
10 10
8 8
9 9
11 10 12 12
10 8 10 8
13 13
11 11
13 12
74x27 74x30 74x32 74x86 74x266
1 1 1
3 3 3
1
2 2 2
2 12 1
13 2
4 4 5
3 6 6 4
3 5 5 6
4
4 6 8
5
5 9 9 8
6 8 8 10
10 10 9
9 11
10 8 12
12 12 12
11 11 11 11
13  13  13 

--- Page Break ---

Combinational MSI Devices
74x49 74x85 74x138 74x139 74x148 74x151
3 11 2 7 15 1 4 5 7
BI a A<B A<B 6 Y0 1G 1Y0 EI EN
10 3 6 G1 14 5 4 11
b A=B A=B 4 Y1 1Y1 I7 A
5 9 4 5 G2A 13 2 6 3 6 10
A c  A>B A>B 5 Y2 1A 1Y2 I6 A2 B
1 8 10 G2B 12 3 7 2 7 9
B d  A0 Y3 1B 1Y3 I5 A1 C
2 6 9 11 1 9 4 5
C e  B0 1 Y4 I4 A0 D0 Y
4 13 12 A 10 15 12 13 3 6
D f  A1 2 Y5 2G 2Y0 I3 D1 Y
12 11 B 9 11 12 14 2
g  B1 3 Y6 2Y1 I2 GS D2
13 C 7 14 10 11 15 1
A2 Y7 2A 2Y2 I1 EO D3
14 13 9 10 15
B2 2B 2Y3 I0 D4
15 14
A3 D5
1 13
B3 D6
74x181 12
D7
6
S0
5 17
S1 G
74x153 74x155 74x157 4 15 74x182 74x240
S2 P
14 2 7 15 3 13 1
A 1G 1Y0  G S3 C0 1G
2 1 6 1 8 14 3 2 18
B 1C 1Y1  S M A=B G0 1A1 1Y1
1 5 2  7 4 12 4 16
1G 1Y2  1A 4 CIN P0 C1 1A2 1Y2
6 4 3 1Y 2 9 1 6 14
1C0 13 1Y3 1B A0 F0 G1 1A3 1Y3
5 A 5 1 2 11 8 12
1C1 7 3 2A 7 B0 P1 C2 1A4 1Y4
4 1Y B 9 6 2Y 23 10 14
1C2 2Y0  2B A1 F1 G2 19
3 10 11 22 15 9 2G
1C3 2Y1  3A 9 B1 P2 C3  11 9
15 14 11 10 3Y 21 11 5 10 2A1 2Y1
2G 2G 2Y2  3B A2 F2 G3 G 13 7
10 15 12 14 20 6 7 2A2 2Y2
2C0 2C 2Y3 4A 12 B2 P3 P  15 5
11 13 4Y 19 13 2A3 2Y3
2C1 9 4B A3 F3 17 3
12 2Y 18 2A4 2Y4
2C2 B3 16
13 COUT
2C3
74x241 74x245 74x251 74x253 74x257 74x280
1 19 7 14 15 8
1G G EN A EN A
2 18 1 11 2 1 9
1A1 1Y1 DIR A B S B
4 16 10 1 2  10
1A2 1Y2 2 18 B 1EN 1A 4 C
6 14 A1 B1 9 6 3 1Y 11 5
1A3 1Y3 3 17 C 1C0 1B D EVEN
8 12 A2 B2 4 5 5 5 12
1A4 1Y4 4 16 D0 Y 1C1 7 2A 7 E
A3 B3 3 6 4 1Y 6 2Y 13 6
19 5 15 D1 Y 1C2 2B F ODD
2G A4 B4 2 3 11 1
11 9 6 14 D2 1C3 3A 9 G
2A1 2Y1 A5 B5 1 15 10 3Y 2
13 7 7 13 D3 2EN 3B H
2A2 2Y2 A6 B6 15 10 14 4
15 5 8 12 D4 2C0 4A 12 I
2A3 2Y3 A7 B7 14 11 13 4Y
17 3 9 11 D5 2C1 9 4B
2A4 2Y4 A8 B8 13 12 2Y
D6 2C2
12 13 74x682
D7 2C3
2
P0
3
Q0
74x283 74x381 74x382 74x540 74x541 4
P1
5 5 1 1 5
7 S0 S0 G1 G1 Q1
C0 6 6 19 19 6
5 4 S1 13 S1 G2 G2 P2
A0 S0 7 G 7 7
6 S2 14 S2 2 18 2 18 Q2 19
B0 15 P 15 A1 Y1 A1 Y1 8 P=Q
3 1 CIN CIN 3 17 3 17 P3
A1 S1 3 8 3 8 A2 Y2 A2 Y2 9
2 A0 F0 A0 F0 4 16 4 16 Q3
B1 4 4 A3 Y3 A3 Y3 11
14 13 B0 B0 5 15 5 15 P4
A2 S2 1 9 1 9 A4 Y4 A4 Y4 12
15 A1 F1 A1 F1 6 14 6 14 Q4 1
B2 2 2 A5 Y5 A5 Y5 13 P>Q
12 10 B1 B1 7 13 7 13 P5
A3 S3 19 11 19 11 A6 Y6 A6 Y6 14
11 A2 F2 A2 F2 8 12 8 12 Q5
B3 9 18 18 A7 Y7 A7 Y7 15
C4 B2 B2 9 11 9 11 P6
17 12 17 12 A8 Y8 A8 Y8 16
A3 F3 A3 F3 Q6
16  16  13 17
B3 B3 OVR P7
14 18
COUT Q7

--- Page Break ---

16R-Series 20-pin Bipolar PLDs 20R-Series
PAL16L8 PAL16R4 PAL16R6 PAL16R8 24-pin Bipolar PLDs
1 1  1  1 
I1 CLK CLK CLK PAL20L8 PAL20R4
2 19 2 19 2 19 2 19
I2 O1 I1 IO1 I1 IO1 I1 O1 1 1 
3 18 3 18 3 18 3 18 I1 CLK
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I2 O2 I2 O2 2 2
4 17 4 17 4 17 4 17 I2 I1
I4 IO3 I3 O3 I3 O3 I3 O3 3 3
5 16 5 16 5 16 5 16 I3 I2
I5 IO4 I4 O4 I4 O4 I4 O4 4 22 4 22
6 15 6 15 6 15 6 15 I4 O1 I3 IO1
I6 IO5 I5 O5 I5 O5 I5 O5 5 21 5 21
7 14 7 14 7 14 7 14 I5 IO2 I4 IO2
I7 IO6 I6 O6 I6 O6 I6 O6 6 20 6 20
8 13 8 13 8 13 8 13 I6 IO3 I5 O3
I8 IO7 I7 IO7 I7 O7 I7 O7 7 19 7 19
9 12 9 12 9 12 9 12 I7 IO4 I6 O4
I9 O8 I8 IO8 I8 IO8 I8 O8 8 18 8 18
11 11 11 11 I8 IO5 I7 O5
I10 OE OE OE 9 17 9 17
I9 IO6 I8 O6
10 16 10 16
I10 IO7 I9 IO7
11 15 11 15
I11 O8 I10 IO8
20X-Series 24-pin Bipolar PLDs 13 14
I12 I11
PAL20L10 PAL20X4 PAL20X8 PAL20X10 14 23
I13 I12
1 1  1  1  23 13 
I1 CLK CLK CLK I14 OE
2 23 2 23 2 23 2 23
I2 O1 I1 IO1 I1 IO1 I1 O1
3 22 3 22 3 22 3 22
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I2 O2 I2 O2
4 21 4 21 4 21 4 21 PAL20R6 PAL20R8
I4 IO3 I3 IO3 I3 O3 I3 O3
5 20 5 20 5 20 5 20 1  1 
I5 IO4 I4 O4 I4 O4 I4 O4 CLK CLK
6 19 6 19 6 19 6 19 2 2
I6 IO5 I5 O5 I5 O5 I5 O5 I1 I1
7 18 7 18 7 18 7 18 3 3
I7 IO6 I6 O6 I6 O6 I6 O6 I2 I2
8 17 8 17 8 17 8 17 4 22 4 22
I8 IO7 I7 O7 I7 O7 I7 O7 I3 IO1 I3 O1
9 16 9 16 9 16 9 16 5 21 5 21
I9 IO8 I8 IO8 I8 O8 I8 O8 I4 O2 I4 O2
10 15 10 15 10 15 10 15 6 20 6 20
I10 IO9 I9 IO9 I9 O9 I9 O9 I5 O3 I5 O3
11 14 11 14 11 14 11 14 7 19 7 19
I11 O10  I10 IO10  I10 IO10  I10 O10  I6 O4 I6 O4
13 13  13  13  8 18 8 18
I12 OE OE OE I7 O5 I7 O5
9 17 9 17
I8 O6 I8 O6
10 16 10 16
I9 O7 I9 O7
11 15 11 15
CMOS GAL Devices I10 IO8 I10 O8
14 14
GAL16V8C GAL16V8R GAL20V8C GAL20V8R GAL22V10 I11 I11
23 23
1  1  1  1  1  I12 I12
I1 CLK I1 CLK CLK/I1 13  13
2 19 2 19 2 2 2 23 OE OE
I2 O1 I1 IO1 I2 I1 I2 IO1
3 18 3 18 3 3 3 22
I3 IO2 I2 IO2 I3 I2 I3 IO2
4 17 4 17 4 22 4 22 4 21
I4 IO3 I3 IO3 I4 O1 I3 IO1 I4 IO3
5 16 5 16 5 21 5 21 5 20
I5 IO4 I4 IO4 I5 IO2 I4 IO2 I5 IO4
6 15 6 15 6 20 6 20 6 19
I6 IO5 I5 IO5 I6 IO3 I5 IO3 I6 IO5
7 14 7 14 7 19 7 19 7 18
I7 IO6 I6 IO6 I7 IO4 I6 IO4 I7 IO6 Static RAMs
8 13 8 13 8 18 8 18 8 17
I8 IO7 I7 IO7 I8 IO5 I7 IO5 I8 IO7
9 12 9 12 9 17 9 17 9 16 HM6264 HM62256
I9 O8 I8 IO8 I9 IO6 I8 IO6 I9 IO8
11 11 10 16 10 16 10 15 10 10
I10 OE I10 IO7 I9 IO7 I10 IO9 A0 A0
11 15 11 15 11  14 9 9
I11 O8 I10 IO8 I11 IO10 A1 A1
13 14 13  8 8
I12 I11 I12 A2 A2
14 23 7 7
I13 I12 A3 A3
23 13  6 6
I14 OE A4 11 A4 11
5 IO0 5 IO0
A5 12 A5 12
4 IO1 4 IO1
A6 13 A6 13
3 IO2 3 IO2
Dynamic RAMs A7 15 A7 15
25 IO3 25 IO3
4164 4256 4464 41000 44256 A8 16 A8 16
24 IO4 24 IO4
5 5 14 5 6 A9 17 A9 17
A0 A0 A0 A0 A0 21 IO5 21 IO5
7 7 13 6 7 A10 18 A10 18
A1 A1 A1 A1 A1 23 IO6 23  IO6
6 6 12 7 8 A11 19 A11 19
A2 A2 A2 A2 A2 2 IO7 2  IO7
12 12 11 8 9 A12 A12
A3 A3 A3 A3 A3 27 26
11 11 8 2 10 11 WE A13
A4 A4 A4 DIO1 A4 A4 20 1
10 10 7 3 11 12 1 CS1 A14
A5 A5 A5 DIO2 A5 A5 DIO1 26 27
13 13 6 15 12 13 2 CS2 WE
A6 A6 A6 DIO3 A6 A6 DIO2 22 20
9 9 10 17 13 14 18 OE CS
A7 A7 A7 DIO4 A7 A7 DIO3 22
2 14 1 5 14 15 19 OE
DIN DOUT A8 RAS A8 A8 DIO4
4 2 14 16 15 4
RAS DIN DOUT CAS A9 RAS
15 4 4 1 17 17
CAS RAS WE DIN DOUT CAS
3 15 1 3 3
WE  CAS OE RAS WE
3 16 16
WE CAS OE
2
WE