D I G I T A L I N T E G R A T E D C I R C U I T S
A D E S I G N P E R S P E C T I V E
2 N D E D I T I O N
Jan M. Rabaey, Anantha Chandrakasan, and Borivoje Nikolic
C O N T E N T S
PART I: THE FABRICS
Chapter 1: Introduction (32 pages)
1.1 A Historical Perspective
1.2 Issues in Digiital Integrated Circuit Design
1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design
1.3.1 Cost of an Integrated Circuit
1.3.2 Functionality and Robustness
1.3.3 Performance
1.3.4 Power and Energy Consumption
1.4 Summary
1

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 43 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
C H A P T E R
3
T H E D E V I C E S
Qualitative understanding of MOS devices
n
Simple component models for manual analysis
n
Detailed component models for SPICE
n
Impact of process variations
3.1 Introduction 3.3.3 Dynamic Behavior
3.2 The Diode 3.3.4 The Actual MOS Transistor— Some
Secondary Effects
3.2.1 A First Glance at the Diode — The
3.3.5 SPICE Models for the MOS Transistor
Depletion Region
3.4 A Word on Process Variations
3.2.2 Static Behavior
3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling
3.2.3 Dynamic, or Transient, Behavior
3.2.4 The Actual Diode— Secondary Effects
3.2.5 The SPICE Diode Model
3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor
3.3.1 A First Glance at the Device
3.3.2 The MOS Transistor under Static
Conditions
43

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 44 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
44 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
3.1 Introduction
It is a well-known premise in engineering that the conception of a complex construction
without a prior understanding of the underlying building blocks is a sure road to failure.
This surely holds for digital circuit design as well. The basic building blocks in today’s
digital circuits are the silicon semiconductor devices, more specifically the MOS transis-
tors and to a lesser degree the parasitic diodes, and the interconnect wires. The role of the
semiconductor devices has been appreciated for a long time in the world of digital inte-
grated circuits. On the other hand, interconnect wires have only recently started to play a
dominant role as a result of the advanced scaling of the semiconductor technology.
Giving the reader the necessary knowledge and understanding of these components
is the prime motivation for the next two chapters. It is not our intention to present an in-
depth treatment of the physics of semiconductor devices and interconnect wires. We refer
the reader to the many excellent textbooks on semiconductor devices for that purpose,
some of which are referenced in the To Probe Further section at the end of the chapters.
The goal is rather to describe the functional operation of the devices, to highlight the prop-
erties and parameters that are particularly important in the design of digital gates, and to
introduce notational conventions.
Another important function of this chapter is the introduction ofmodels. Taking all
the physical aspects of each component into account when designing complex digital cir-
cuits leads to an unnecessary complexity that quickly becomes intractable. Such an
approach is similar to considering the molecular structure of concrete when constructing a
bridge. To deal with this issue, an abstraction of the component behavior called amodel is
typically employed. A range of models can be conceived for each component presenting a
trade-off between accuracy and complexity. A simple first-order model is useful for man-
ual analysis. It has limited accuracy but helps us to understand the operation of the circuit
and its dominant parameters. When more accurate results are needed, complex, second- or
higher-order models are employed in conjunction with computer-aided simulation. In this
chapter, we present both first-order models for manual analysis as well as higher-order
models for simulation for each component of interest.
Designers tend to take the component parameters offered in the models for granted.
They should be aware, however, that these are only nominal values, and that the actual
parameter values vary with operating temperature, over manufacturing runs, or even over
a single wafer. To highlight this issue, a short discussion onprocess variations and their
impact is included in the chapter.
3.2 The Diode
Although diodes rarely occur directly in the schematic diagrams of present-day digital
gates, they are still omnipresent. Each MOS transistor implicitly contains a number of
reverse-biased diodes that directly influence the behavior of the device. Especially, the
voltage-dependent capacitances contributed by these parasitic elements play an important
role in the switching behavior of the MOS digital gate. Diodes are also used to protect the
input devices of an IC against static charges. Therefore, a brief review of the basic proper-
ties and device equations of the diode is appropriate. Rather than being comprehensive,

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 45 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 45
we choose to focus on those aspects that prove to be influential in the design of digital
1
MOS circuits, this is the operation in reverse-biased mode.
3.2.1 A First Glance at the Diode — The Depletion Region
The pn-junction diode is the simplest of the semiconductor devices. Figure 3.1a shows a
cross-section of a typical pn-junction. It consists of two homogeneous regions ofp- and n-
type material, separated by a region of transition from one type of doping to another,
which is assumed thin. Such a device is called astep or abrupt junction. The p-type mate-
rial is doped with acceptor impurities (such as boron), which results in the presence of
holes as the dominant or majority carriers. Similarly, the doping of silicon withdonor
impurities (such as phosphorus or arsenic) creates an n-type material, where electrons are
the majority carriers. Aluminum contacts provide access to thep- and n-terminals of the
device. The circuit symbol of the diode, as used in schematic diagrams, is introduced in
Figure 3.1c.
To understand the behavior of thepn-junction diode, we often resort to a one-dimen-
sional simplification of the device (Figure 3.1b). Bringing thep- and n-type materials
together causes a large concentration gradient at the boundary. The electron concentration
changes from a high value in the n-type material to a very small value in the p-type
material. The reverse is true for the hole concentration. This gradient causes electrons to
B Al A 
SiO2
p
n
(a) Cross-section of pn-junction in an IC process
A
Al 
A
p
n
B
B Figure 3.1 Abrupt pn-junction diode
(b) One-dimensional and its schematic symbol.
(c) Diode symbol
representation
1 
We refer the interested reader to the web-site of the textbook for a comprehensive description of the
diode operation.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 46 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
46 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
diffuse from n to p and holes to diffuse fromp to n. When the holes leave the p-type mate-
rial, they leave behind immobile acceptor ions, which are negatively charged. Conse-
quently, the p-type material is negatively charged in the vicinity of thepn-boundary.
Similarly, a positive charge builds up on then-side of the boundary as the diffusing elec-
trons leave behind the positively charged donor ions. The region at the junction, where the
majority carriers have been removed, leaving the fixed acceptor and donor ions, is called
the depletion or space-charge region. The charges create an electric field across the
boundary, directed from then to the p-region. This field counteracts the diffusion of holes
and electrons, as it causes electrons to drift from p to n and holes to drift from n to p.
Under equilibrium, the depletion charge sets up an electric field such that the drift currents
are equal and opposite to the diffusion currents, resulting in a zero net flow.
The above analysis is summarized in Figure 3.2 that plots the current directions, the
charge density, the electrical field, and the electrostatic field of the abruptpn-junction
under zero-bias conditions. In the device shown, thep material is more heavily doped than
Hole diffusion
Electron diffusion
(a) Current flow
p n
Hole drift
Electron drift
ρ
Charge
density
+ x
(b) Charge density
Distance
-
Electrical E
field
x
(c) Electric field
Potential V
x (d) Electrostatic
potential
-W1 W2 φ0
Figure 3.2 The abrupt pn-junction under equilibrium bias.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 47 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 47
the n, or NA > ND, with NA and ND the acceptor and donor concentrations, respectively.
Hence, the charge concentration in the depletion region is higher on thep-side of the junc-
tion. Figure 3.2 also shows that under zero bias, there exists a voltageφ0 across the junc-
tion, called the built-in potential. This potential has the value
NA ND
φ0 = φTln -------------- (3.1)
ni2
where φT is the thermal voltage
kT
φT = ------ = 26mV at 300 K (3.2)
q
The quantity ni is the intrinsic carrier concentration in a pure sample of the semiconductor
10  -3 
and equals approximately 1.5 × 10 cm at 300 K for silicon.
Example 3.1 Built-in Voltage of pn-junction
15  3 16  3
An abrupt junction has doping densities of NA = 10 atoms/cm , and ND = 10 atoms/cm .
Calculate the built-in potential at 300 K.
From Eq. (3.1),
1015 × 1016
φ0 = 26 ln --------------------------- mV = 638 mV
2.25 × 1020
3.2.2 Static Behavior
The Ideal Diode Equation
Assume now that a forward voltage VD is applied to the junction or, in other words, that
the potential of the p-region is raised with respect to then-zone. The applied potential low-
ers the potential barrier. Consequently, the flow of mobile carriers across the junction
increases as the diffusion current dominates the drift component. These carriers traverse
Minority carrier concentration
-region Excess carriers -region
 p  n
pn0
Depletion region
Excess carriers
n p0
Metal contact to Metal contact to
–W p –W 1 0 W 2 n-region W  x
p -region  n
Figure 3.3 Minority carrier concentrations in the neutral region near an abruptpn-junction under forward-bias
conditions.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 48 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
48 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
the depletion region and are injected into the neutraln- and p-regions, where they become
minority carriers, as is illustrated in Figure 3.3. Under the assumption that no voltage gra-
dient exists over the neutral regions, which is approximately the case for most modern
devices, these minority carriers will diffuse through the region as a result of the concentra-
tion gradient until they get recombined with a majority carrier. The net result is a current
flowing through the diode from thep-region to the n-region, and the diode is said to be in
the forward-bias mode.
On the other hand, when a reverse voltage VD is applied to the junction or when the
potential of the p-region is lowered with respect to the n-region, the potential barrier is
raised. This results in a reduction in the diffusion current, and the drift current becomes
dominant. A current flows from then-region to the p-region. Since the number of minority
carriers in the neutral regions (electrons in thep-zone, holes in the n-region) is very small,
this drift current component is virtually ignorable (Figure 3.4). It is fair to state that in the
reverse-bias mode the diode operates as a nonconducting, or blocking, device. The diode
thus acts as a one-way conductor.
Minority carrier concentration
pn0
-region -region
 p  n
n p0 Depletion region pn(x)
Metal contact to Metal contact to
np(x)
–W p –W 1 0 W 2 n-region W  x
p -region  n
Figure 3.4 Minority carrier concentration in the neutral regions near the pn-junction under reverse-bias
conditions.
The most important property of the diode current is itsexponential dependence upon
the applied bias voltage. This is illustrated in Figure 3.5, which plots the diode currentID
as a function of the bias voltageVD. The exponential behavior for positive-bias voltages is
even more apparent in Figure 3.5b, where the current is plotted on a logarithmic scale. The
current increases by a factor of 10 for every extra 60 mV (= 2.3φT) of forward bias. At
small voltage levels (VD < 0.15 V), a deviation from the exponential dependence can be
observed, which is due to the recombination of holes and electrons in the depletion region.
The behavior of the diode for both forward- and reverse bias conditions is best
described by the well-known ideal diode equation, which relates the current through the
diode ID to the diode bias voltage VD
V ⁄ φ
ID = IS ( e D  T – 1) (3.3)
Observe how Eq. (3.3) corresponds to the exponential behavior plotted in Figure 3.5.φT is
the thermal voltage of Eq. (3.2) and is equal to 26 mV at room temperature.
IS represents a constant value, called thesaturation current of the diode. It is propor-
tional to the area of the diode, and a function of the doping levels and widths of the neutral

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 49 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 49
0
2.5 10
–5
) 1.5 10
Deviation due to
A
(m  (A)  recombination
ID ID
–10
0.5 10 2.3 φT V / decade
current
–15
–0.5 10
–1.0 –0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
VD (V) VD (V)
(a) On a linear scale (b) On a logarithmic scale (forward bias only)
Figure 3.5 Diode current as a function of the bias voltageVD.
regions. Most often, IS is determined empirically.It is worth mentioning that in actual
devices, the reverse currents are substantially larger than the saturation currentIS. This is
due to the thermal generation of hole and electron pairs in the depletion region. The elec-
tric field present sweeps these carriers out of the region, causing an additional current
component. For typical silicon junctions, the saturation current is nominally in the range
−17  2
of 10 A/μm , while the actual reverse currents are approximately three orders of magni-
tude higher. Actual device measurements are, therefore, necessary to determine realistic
values for the reverse diode leakage currents.
Models for Manual Analysis
The derived current-voltage equations can be summarized in a set of simple models that
are useful in the manual analysis of diode circuits. A first model, shown in Figure 3.6a, is
based on the ideal diode equation Eq. (3.3). While this model yields accurate results, it has
the disadvantage of being strongly nonlinear. This prohibits a fast, first-order analysis of
the dc-operation conditions of a network. An often-used, simplified model is derived by
inspecting the diode current plot of Figure 3.5. For a “fully conducting” diode, the voltage
drop over the diode VD lies in a narrow range, approximately between 0.6 and 0.8 V. To a
V /φ
ID = IS(e D T – 1) ID
+ +
+
VD VD VDon
–
– –
(a) Ideal diode model (b) First-order diode model
Figure 3.6 Diode models.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 50 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
50 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
first degree, it is reasonable to assume that a conducting diode has a fixed voltage drop
VDon over it. Although the value of VDon depends upon IS, a value of 0.7 V is typically
assumed. This gives rise to the model of Figure 3.6b, where a conducting diode is replaced
by a fixed voltage source.
Example 3.2 Analysis of Diode Network
Consider the simple network of Figure 3.7 and assume thatVS = 3 V, RS = 10 kΩ and IS = 0.5
–16 
× 10 A. The diode current and voltage are related by the following network equation
VS − RSID = VD
Inserting the ideal diode equation and (painfully) solving the nonlinear equation using either
numerical or iterative techniques yields the following solution:ID = 0.224 mA, and VD =
0.757 V. The simplified model with VDon = 0.7 V produces similar results (VD = 0.7 V, ID =
0.23 A) with far less effort. It hence makes considerable sense to use this model when deter-
mining a first-order solution of a diode network.
RS
ID
VS VD
+
–
Figure 3.7 A simple diode circuit.
3.2.3 Dynamic, or Transient, Behavior
So far, we have mostly been concerned with the static, or steady-state, characteristics of
the diode. Just as important in the design of digital circuits is the response of the device to
changes in its bias conditions. The transient, or dynamic, response determines the maxi-
mum speed at which the device can be operated. Because the operation mode of the diode
is a function of the amount of charge present in both the neutral and the space-charge
regions, its dynamic behavior is strongly determined by how fast charge can be moved
around.
While we could embark at this point onto an in-depth analysis of the switching
behavior of the diode in the forward-biasing mode, it is our conviction that this would be
besides the point and unnecessarily complicate the discussion. In fact, all diodes in an
operational MOS digital integrated circuit are reverse-biased and are supposed to remain
so under all circumstances. Only under exceptional conditions may forward-biasing occur.
A signal over(under) shooting the supply rail is an example of such. Due to its detrimental
impact on the overall circuit operation, this should be avoided under all circumstances.
Hence, we will devote our attention solely to what governs the dynamic response of
the diode under reverse-biasing conditions, the depletion-region charge.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 51 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 51
Depletion-Region Capacitance
In the ideal model, the depletion region is void of mobile carriers, and its charge is deter-
mined by the immobile donor and acceptor ions. The corresponding charge distribution
under zero-bias conditions was plotted in Figure 3.2. This picture can be easily extended
to incorporate the effects of biasing. At an intuitive level the following observations can
be easily verified— under forward-bias conditions, the potential barrier is reduced, which
means that less space charge is needed to produce the potential difference. This corre-
sponds to a reduced depletion-region width. On the other hand, under reverse conditions,
the potential barrier is increased corresponding to an increased space charge and a wider
depletion region. These observations are confirmed by the well- known depletion-region
expressions given below (a derivation of these expressions, which are valid for abrupt
junctions, is either simple or can be found in any textbook on devices such as [Howe97]).
One observation is crucial — due to the global charge neutrality requirement of the diode,
the total acceptor and donor charges must be numerically equal.
1. Depletion-region charge (VD is positive for forward bias).
NAND
  
Qj = AD 2εsi q -------------------- ( φ0 – VD) (3.4)
 NA + ND
2. Depletion-region width.
2εsiNA + ND
  
Wj = W2 – W1 = --------- -------------------- ( φ0 – VD) (3.5)
 q NAND 
3. Maximum electric field.
 2q NA ND  
Ej = ------ -------------------- ( φ0 – VD) (3.6)
 εsiNA + ND
In the preceding equations εsi stands for the electrical permittivity of silicon and equals 11.7
−10 
times the permittivity of a vacuum, or 1.053× 10 F/m. The ratio of the n- versus p-side
of the depletion-region width is determined by the doping-level ratios:W2/(−W1) = NA/ND.
From an abstract point of view, it is possible to visualize the depletion region as a
capacitance, albeit one with very special characteristics. Because the space-charge region
contains few mobile carriers, it acts as an insulator with a dielectric constantεsi of the
semiconductor material. The n- and p-regions act as the capacitor plates. A small change
in the voltage applied to the junctiondVD causes a change in the space charge dQj. Hence,
a depletion-layer capacitance can bedefined
dQj  εsi q NA ND
  
Cj = = AD --------- -------------------- ( φ0 – VD) –1
dVD  2 NA + ND
(3.7)
Cj0
= -----------------------------
1 – VD ⁄ φ0
where Cj0 is the capacitance under zero-bias conditions and is only a function of the phys-
ical parameters of the device.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 52 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
52 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
2.0
Abrupt junction
1.5 m = 0.5
)
F
(f 1.0
j 
C
Linear junction
m = 0.33
0.5 C
j0
0.0
-4.0 -2.0 0.0
VD (V)
2
Figure 3.8 Junction capacitance (in fF/μm ) as a function of the applied bias voltage.
εsi q NA ND
  
Cj0 = AD --------- -------------------- φ0 –1 (3.8)
 2 NA + ND
Notice that the same capacitance value is obtained when using the standard parallel-plate
capacitor equation Cj = εsi AD/Wj (with Wj given in Eq. (3.5)). Typically, the AD factor is
omitted, and Cj and Cj0 are expressed as a capacitance/unit area.
The resulting junction capacitance is plotted in the function of the bias voltage in
Figure 3.8 for a typical silicon diode found in MOS circuits. A strongnonlinear depen-
dence can be observed. Note also that the capacitance decreases with an increasing reverse
bias: a reverse bias of 5 V reduces the capacitance by more than a factor of two.
Example 3.3 Junction Capacitance
-3  2 2
Consider the following silicon junction diode:Cj0 = 2 × 10 F/m , AD = 0.5 μm , and φ0 =
-3  2 
0.64 V. A reverse bias of −2.5 V results in a junction capacitance of 0.9 × 10 F/m (0.9
2)
fF/μm , or, for the total diode, a capacitance of 0.45 fF.
Equation (3.7) is only valid under the condition that thepn-junction is an abrupt
junction, where the transition from n to p material is instantaneous. This is often not the
case in actual integrated-circuit pn-junctions, where the transition fromn to p material can
be gradual. In those cases, a linear distribution of the impurities across the junction is a
better approximation than the step function of the abrupt junction. An analysis of the
linearly-graded junction shows that the junction capacitance equation of Eq. (3.7) still
holds, but with a variation in order of the denominator. A more generic expression for the
junction capacitance can be provided,

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 53 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 53
Cj0
Cj = --------------------------------- (3.9)
( 1 – VD ⁄ φ0)m
where m is called the grading coefficient and equals 1/2 for the abrupt junction and 1/3 for
the linear or graded junction. Both cases are illustrated in Figure 3.8.
Large-Signal Depletion-Region Capacitance
Figure 3.8 raises awareness to the fact that the junction capacitance is a voltage-dependent
parameter whose value varies widely between bias points. In digital circuits, operating
voltages tend to move rapidly over a wide range. Under those circumstances, it is more
attractive to replace the voltage-dependent, nonlinear capacitanceCj by an equivalent, lin-
ear capacitance Ceq. Ceq is defined such that, for a given voltage swing from voltagesVhigh
to Vlow, the same amount of charge is transferred as would be predicted by the nonlinear
model
∆Qj Qj ( Vhigh) – Qj ( Vlow)
Ceq = ---------- = -------------------------------------------------- = Keq Cj0 (3.10)
∆VD Vhigh – Vlow
Combining Eq. (3.4) (extended to accommodate the grading coefficientm) and Eq.
(3.10) yields the value of Keq.
–φ0m
Keq = ---------------------------------------------------- [ ( φ0 – Vhigh)1 – m – ( φ0 – Vlow)1 –m] (3.11)
( Vhigh – Vlow) ( 1 – m)
Example 3.4 Average Junction Capacitance
The diode of Example 3.3 is switched between 0 and−2.5 V. Compute the average junction
capacitance (m = 0.5).
For the defined voltage range and forφ0 = 0.64 V, Keq evaluates to 0.622. The average
2
capacitance hence equals 1.24 fF/μm .
3.2.4 The Actual Diode— Secondary Effects
In practice, the diode current is less than what is predicted by the ideal diode equation. Not
all applied bias voltage appears directly across the junction, as there is always some volt-
age drop over the neutral regions. Fortunately, the resistivity of the neutral zones is gener-
ally small (between 1 and 100 Ω , depending upon the doping levels) and the voltage drop
only becomes significant for large currents (>1 mA). This effect can be modeled by add-
ing a resistor in series with the n- and p-region diode contacts.
In the discussion above, it was further assumed that under sufficient reverse bias, the
reverse current reaches a constant value, which is essentially zero. When the reverse bias
exceeds a certain level, called the breakdown voltage, the reverse current shows a dra-
matic increase as shown in Figure 3.9. In the diodes found in typical CMOS processes,
this increase is caused by the avalanche breakdown. The increasing reverse bias heightens
the magnitude of the electrical field across the junction. Consequently, carriers crossing
the depletion region are accelerated to high velocity. At a critical fieldEcrit, the carriers

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 54 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
54 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
0.1
)
A
(  0
ID
Figure 3.9 I-V characteristic of junction
–0.1 diode, showing breakdown under reverse-
–25.0 –15.0 –5.0 0 5.0 bias conditions (Breakdown voltage = 20 V).
VD (V)
reach a high -enough energy level that electron-hole pairs are created on collision with
immobile silicon atoms. These carriers create, in turn, more carriers before leaving the
5 
depletion region. The value ofEcrit is approximately 2 ×10  V/cm for impurity concentra-
16  −3
tions of the order of 10 cm . While avalanche breakdown in itself is not destructive and
its effects disappear after the reverse bias is removed, maintaining a diode for a long time
in avalanche conditions is not recommended as the high current levels and the associated
heat dissipation might cause permanent damage to the structure. Observe thatavalanche
breakdown is not the only breakdown mechanism encountered in diodes. For highly doped
diodes, another mechanism, called Zener breakdown, can occur. Discussion of this phe-
nomenon is beyond the scope of this text.
Finally, it is worth mentioning that the diode current is affected by the operating
temperature in a dual way:
1. The thermal voltage φT, which appears in the exponent of the current equation, is
linearly dependent upon the temperature. An increase inφT causes the current to
drop.
2. The saturation current IS is also temperature-dependent, as the thermal equilibrium
carrier concentrations increase with increasing temperature. Theoretically, the satu-
ration current approximately doubles every 5 °C. Experimentally, the reverse cur-
rent has been measured to double every 8 °C.
This dual dependence has a significant impact on the operation of a digital circuit. First of
all, current levels (and hence power consumption) can increase substantially. For instance,
for a forward bias of 0.7 V at 300 K, the current increases approximately 6%/°C, and dou-
bles every 12 °C. Secondly, integrated circuits rely heavily on reverse-biased diodes as
isolators. Increasing the temperature causes the leakage current to increase and decreases
the isolation quality.
3.2.5 The SPICE Diode Model
In the preceding sections, we have presented a model for manual analysis of a diode cir-
cuit. For more complex circuits, or when a more accurate modeling of the diode that takes

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 55 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.2 The Diode 55
RS
+
VD ID C
D
–
Figure 3.10 SPICE diode model.
into account second-order effects is required, manual circuit evaluation becomes intracta-
ble, and computer-aided simulation is necessary. While different circuit simulators have
been developed over the last decades, the SPICE program, developed at the University of
California at Berkeley, is definitely the most successful [Nagel75]. Simulating an inte-
grated circuit containing active devices requires a mathematical model for those devices
(which is called the SPICE model in the rest of the text). The accuracy of the simulation
depends directly upon the quality of this model. For instance, one cannot expect to see the
result of a second-order effect in the simulation if this effect is not present in the device
model. Creating accurate and computation-efficient SPICE models has been a long pro-
cess and is by no means finished. Every major semiconductor company has developed
their own proprietary models, which it claims have either better accuracy or computational
efficiency and robustness.
The standard SPICE model for a diode is simple, as shown in Figure 3.10. The
steady-state characteristic of the diode is modeled by the nonlinear current sourceID,
which is a modified version of the ideal diode equation
V ⁄ nφ
ID = IS ( e D  T – 1) (3.12)
The extra parameter n is called the emission coefficient. It equals 1 for most com-
mon diodes but can be somewhat higher than 1 for others. The resistorRs models the
series resistance contributed by the neutral regions on both sides of the junction. For
higher current levels, this resistance causes the internal diodeVD to differ from the exter-
nally applied voltage, hence causing the current to be lower than what would be expected
from the ideal diode equation.
The dynamic behavior of the diode is modeled by the nonlinear capacitanceCD,
which combines the two different charge-storage effects in the diode: the space (or deple-
tion-region) charge, and the excess minority carrier charge. Only the former was discussed
in this chapter, as the latter is only an issue under forward-biasing conditions.
Cj0 τTIS V ⁄nφ
CD = --------------------------------- + --------- e D  T (3.13)
( 1 – VD ⁄ φ0)m φT
A listing of the parameters used in the diode model is given in Table 3.1. Besides the
parameter name, symbol, and SPICE name, the table contains also the default value used
by SPICE in case the parameter is left undefined. Observe that this table is by no means
complete. Other parameters are available to govern second-order effects such as break-

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 56 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
56 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
down, high-level injection, and noise. To be concise, we chose to limit the listing to the
parameters of direct interest to this text. For a complete description of the device models
(as well as the usage of SPICE), we refer to the numerous textbooks devoted to SPICE
(e.g., [Banhzaf92], [Thorpe92]).
Table 3.1 First-order SPICE diode model parameters.
Parameter Name Symbol SPICE Name Units Default Value
Saturation current IS IS A 1.0 E−14
Emission coefficient n N – 1
Series resistance RS RS Ω 0
Transit time τT TT s 0
Zero-bias junction Cj0 CJ0 F 0
capacitance
Grading coefficient m M – 0.5
Junction potential φ0 VJ V 1
3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor
The metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET or MOS, for short) is
certainly the workhorse of contemporary digital design. Its major asset from a digital per-
spective is that the device performs very well as a switch, and introduces little parasitic
effects. Other important advantages are its integration density combined with a relatively
“simple” manufacturing process, which make it possible to produce large and complex
circuits in an economical way.
Following the approach we took for the diode, we restrict ourselves in this section to
a general overview of the transistor and its parameters. After a generic overview of the
device, we present an analytical description of the transistor from a static (steady-state)
and dynamic (transient) viewpoint. The discussion concludes with an enumeration of
some second-order effects and the introduction of the SPICE MOS transistor models.
3.3.1 A First Glance at the Device
The MOSFET is a four terminal device. The voltage applied to thegate terminal deter-
mines if and how much current flows between thesource and the drain ports. The body
represents the fourth terminal of the transistor. Its function is secondary as it only serves to
modulate the device characteristics and parameters.
At the most superficial level, the transistor can be considered to be a switch. When a
voltage is applied to the gate that is larger than a given value called thethreshold voltage
VT, a conducting channel is formed between drain and source. In the presence of a voltage
difference between the latter two, current flows between them. The conductivity of the
channel is modulated by the gate voltage— the larger the voltage difference between gate
and source, the smaller the resistance of the conducting channel and the larger the current.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 57 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 57
When the gate voltage is lower than the threshold, no such channel exists, and the switch
is considered open.
Two types of MOSFET devices can be identified. The NMOS transistor consists of
+ 
n drain and source regions, embedded in a p-type substrate. The current is carried by
electrons moving through an n-type channel between source and drain. This is in contrast
with the pn-junction diode, where current is carried by both holes and electrons. MOS
+ 
devices can also be made by using ann-type substrate and p drain and source regions. In
such a transistor, current is carried by holes moving through ap-type channel. The device
is called a p-channel MOS, or PMOS transistor. In a complementary MOS technology
(CMOS), both devices are present. The cross-section of a contemporary dual-well CMOS
process was presented in Chapter 2, and is repeated here for convenience (Figure 3.11).
gate-oxide
TiSi 2 A l C u
SiO 2
Tungsten
poly
p-well n-well SiO 2
n+ p- epi p+
p+
Figure 3.11 Cross-section of contemporary dual-well CMOS process.
Circuit symbols for the various MOS transistors are shown in Figure 3.12. As men-
tioned earlier, the transistor is a four-port device with gate, source, drain, and body termi-
nals (Figures a and c). Since the body is generally connected to a dc supply that is identical
for all devices of the same type (GND for NMOS,Vdd for PMOS), it is most often not
shown on the schematics (Figures b and d). If the fourth terminal is not shown, it is
assumed that the body is connected to the appropriate supply.
S S
G D G D
B
(a) NMOS transistor (b) NMOS transistor
as 4-terminal device as 3-terminal device
S S
G D G D Figure 3.12 Circuit symbols for
B MOS transistors.
(a) PMOS transistor (d) PMOS transistor
as 4-terminal device as 3-terminal device

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 58 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
58 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
3.3.2 The MOS Transistor under Static Conditions
In the derivation of the static model of the MOS transistor, we concentrate on the NMOS
device. All the arguments made are valid for PMOS devices as well as will be discussed at
the end of the section.
The Threshold Voltage
Consider first the case where VGS = 0 and drain, source, and bulk are connected to ground.
The drain and source are connected by back-to-back pn-junctions (substrate-source and
substrate-drain). Under the mentioned conditions, both junctions have a 0 V bias and can
be considered off, which results in an extremely high resistance between drain and source.
Assume now that a positive voltage is applied to the gate (with respect to the
source), as shown in Figure 3.13. The gate and substrate form the plates of a capacitor
with the gate oxide as the dielectric. The positive gate voltage causes positive charge to
accumulate on the gate electrode and negative charge on the substrate side. The latter
manifests itself initially by repelling mobile holes. Hence, a depletion region is formed
below the gate. This depletion region is similar to the one occurring in apn-junction
diode. Consequently, similar expressions hold for the width and the space charge per unit
area. Compare these expressions to Eq. (3.4) and Eq. (3.5).
2εsi φ
Wd = ------------ (3.14)
qNA
and
Qd = 2qNAεsi φ (3.15)
with NA the substrate doping and φ the voltage across the depletion layer (i.e., the potential
at the oxide-silicon boundary).
As the gate voltage increases, the potential at the silicon surface at some point
reaches a critical value, where the semiconductor surface inverts ton-type material. This
+
S V D
GS G
–
+ +
n n
n-channel Depletion
region
p-substrate
B
Figure 3.13 NMOS transistor for positive VGS, showing depletion region and induced channel.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 59 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 59
point marks the onset of a phenomenon known asstrong inversion and occurs at a voltage
equal to twice the Fermi Potential (Eq. (3.16)) (φF ≈ −0.3 V for typical p-type silicon sub-
strates):
NA
φF = – φTln ( ------) (3.16)
ni
Further increases in the gate voltage produce no further changes in the depletion-
layer width, but result in additional electrons in the thin inversion layer directly under the
oxide. These are drawn into the inversion layer from the heavily dopedn+ source region.
Hence, a continuous n-type channel is formed between the source and drain regions, the
conductivity of which is modulated by the gate-source voltage.
In the presence of an inversion layer, the charge stored in the depletion region is
fixed and equals
QB0 = 2qNAεsi – 2φF (3.17)
This picture changes somewhat in case a substrate bias voltageVSB is applied (VSB is nor-
mally positive for n-channel devices). This causes the surface potential required for strong
inversion to increase and to become |–2φF + VSB|. The charge stored in the depletion
region now is expressed by Eq. (3.18)
QB = 2qNAεsi ( – 2φF + VSB ) (3.18)
The value of VGS where strong inversion occurs is called the threshold voltage VT.
VT is a function of several components, most of which are material constants such as the
difference in work-function between gate and substrate material, the oxide thickness, the
Fermi voltage, the charge of impurities trapped at the surface between channel and gate
oxide, and the dosage of ions implanted for threshold adjustment. From the above argu-
ments, it has become clear that the source-bulk voltageVSB has an impact on the threshold.
as well. Rather than relying on a complex (and hardly accurate) analytical expression for
the threshold, we rely on an empirical parameter calledVT0, which is the threshold voltage
for VSB = 0, and is mostly a function of the manufacturing process. The threshold voltage
under different body-biasing conditions can then be determined in the following manner,
VT = VT0 + γ ( – 2φF + VSB – –2φF ) (3.19)
The parameter γ (gamma) is called the body-effect coefficient, and expresses the impact of
changes in VSB. Observe that the threshold voltage has a positive value for a typical
NMOS device, while it is negative for a normal PMOS transistor.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 60 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
60 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
The effect of the well bias on the
0.9
threshold voltage of an NMOS
0.85
transistor is plotted in for typical
0.8
values of |–2φF| = 0.6 V and γ =
0.75 0.5
0.4 V . A negative bias on the
0.7
well or substrate causes the
(V)0.65 
VT threshold to increase from 0.45 V
0.6
to 0.85 V. Note also that VSB
0.55
always has to be larger than -0.6 V
0.5
in an NMOS. If not, the source-
0.45
body diode becomes forward
0.4
-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 biased, which deteriorates the
VBS (V)
transistor operation.
Figure 3.14 Effect of body-bias on theshold.
Example 3.5 Threshold Voltage of a PMOS Transistor
An PMOS transistor has a threshold voltage of -0.4 V, while the body-effect coefficient
equals -0.4. Compute the threshold voltage forVSB = -2.5 V. 2φF = 0.6 V.
0.5  0.5
Using Eq. (3.19), we obtain VT(-2.5 V) = -0.4 - 0.4 × ((2.5+0.6) - 0.6 ) V = -0.79 V,
which is twice the threshold under zero-bias conditions!
Resistive Operation
Assume now that VGS > VT and that a small voltage, VDS, is applied between drain and
source. The voltage difference causes a current ID to flow from drain to source (Figure
3.15). Using a simple analysis, a first-order expression of the current as a function ofVGS
and VDS can be obtained.
VGS V
DS
S
G ID
D
+ +
n – V(x) + n
L x
p-substrate
B Figure 3.15 NMOS transistor with bias
voltages.
At a point x along the channel, the voltage isV(x), and the gate-to-channel voltage at
that point equals VGS – V(x). Under the assumption that this voltage exceeds the threshold
voltage all along the channel, the induced channel charge per unit area at pointx can be
computed.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 61 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 61
Qi ( x) = – Cox [ VGS – V x( ) – V]T (3.20)
Cox stands for the capacitance per unit area presented by the gate oxide, and equals
εox
Cox = ------- (3.21)
tox
-11 
with εox = 3.97 × εo = 3.5 × 10 F/m the oxide permittivity, andtox is the thickness of the
oxide. The latter which is 10 nm (= 100 Å) or smaller for contemporary processes. For an
2
oxide thickness of 5 nm, this translates into an oxide capacitance of 7 fF/μm .
The current is given as the product of the drift velocity of the carriersυn and the
available charge. Due to charge conservation, it is a constant over the length of the chan-
nel. W is the width of the channel in a direction perpendicular to the current flow.
ID = – υn ( x)Qi ( )x W (3.22)
The electron velocity is related to the electric field through a parameter called themobility
2
μn (expressed in m /V⋅s). The mobility is a complex function of crystal structure, and local
electrical field. In general, an empirical value is used.
dV
υn = – μnξ ( )x  = μ n  (3.23)
dx
Combining Eq. (3.20) − Eq. (3.23) yields
IDdx = μnCox W V( GS – V – VT)dV (3.24)
Integrating the equation over the length of the channelL yields the voltage-current relation
of the transistor.
2 2
W VDS VDS
ID = k'n ----- ( VGS – VT)VDS – ---------  = kn ( VGS – VT)VDS – ---------  (3.25)
L 2 2
k'n is called the process transconductance parameter and equals
μnεox
k'n = μnCox = ------------- (3.26)
tox
The product of the process transconductance k'n and the (W/L) ratio of an (NMOS) tran-
sistor is called the gain factor kn of the device. For smaller values of VDS, the quadratic
factor in Eq. (3.25) can be ignored, and we observe a linear dependence betweenVDS and
ID. The operation region where Eq. (3.25) holds is hence called the resistive or linear
region. One of its main properties is that it displays a continuous conductive channel
between source and drain regions.
NOTICE: The W and L parameters in Eq. (3.25) represent the effective channel width
and length of the transistor. These values differ from the dimensionsdrawn on the layout
due to effects such as lateral diffusion of the source and drain regions (L), and the
encroachment of the isolating field oxide (W). In the remainder of the text, W and L will

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 62 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
62 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
always stand for the effective dimensions, while ad subscript will be used to indicate the
drawn size. The following expressions related the two parameters, with∆W and ∆L
parameters of the manufacturing process:
W = Wd – ∆W
(3.27)
L = Ld – ∆L
The Saturation Region
As the value of the drain-source voltage is further increased, the assumption that the chan-
nel voltage is larger than the threshold all along the channel ceases to hold. This happens
when VGS − V(x) < VT. At that point, the induced charge is zero, and the conducting chan-
nel disappears or is pinched off. This is illustrated in Figure 3.16, which shows (in an
VGS
VDS > VGS – VT
G
D
S
– +
n+ VGS - VT n+
Figure 3.16 NMOS transistor under pinch-off conditions.
exaggerated fashion) how the channel thickness gradually is reduced from source to drain
until pinch-off occurs. No channel exists in the vicinity of the drain region. Obviously, for
this phenomenon to occur, it is essential that the pinch-off condition be met at the drain
region, or
VGS − VDS ≤ VT. (3.28)
Under those circumstances, the transistor is in thesaturation region, and Eq. (3.25)
no longer holds. The voltage difference over the induced channel (from the pinch-off point
to the source) remains fixed at VGS − VT, and consequently, the current remains constant
(or saturates). Replacing VDS by VGS − VT in Eq. (3.25) yields the drain current for the sat-
uration mode. It is worth observing that, to a first agree, the current is no longer a function
of VDS. Notice also the squared dependency of the drain current with respect to the control
voltage VGS.
k'nW
ID = ------ ----- ( VGS – VT)2 (3.29)
2 L

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 63 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 63
Channel-Length Modulation
The latter equation seems to suggest that the transistor in the saturation mode acts as a per-
fect current source — or that the current between drain and source terminal is a constant,
independent of the applied voltage over the terminals. This not entirely correct. The effec-
tive length of the conductive channel is actually modulated by the appliedVDS: increasing
VDS causes the depletion region at the drain junction to grow, reducing the length of the
effective channel. As can be observed from Eq. (3.29), the current increases when the length
factor L is decreased. A more accurate description of the current of the MOS transistor is
therefore given in Eq. (3.30).
ID = ID′ ( 1 + λVDS) (3.30)
with ID’ the current expressions derived earlier, and λ an empirical parameter, called the
channel-length modulation. Analytical expressions for λ have proven to be complex and
inaccurate. λ varies roughly with the inverse of the channel length. In shorter transistors,
the drain-junction depletion region presents a larger fraction of the channel, and the chan-
nel-modulation effect is more pronounced. It is therefore advisable to resort to long-chan-
nel transistors if a high-impedance current source is needed.
Velocity Saturation
The behavior of transistors with very short channel lengths (calledshort-channel devices)
deviates considerably from the resistive and saturated models, presented in the previous
paragraphs. The main culprit for this deficiency is thevelocity saturation effect. Eq. (3.23)
states that the velocity of the carriers is proportional to the electrical field, independent of
the value of that field. In other words, the carrier mobility is a constant. However, at high
field strengths, the carriers fail to follow this linear model. In fact, when the electrical field
along the channel reaches a critical value ξc, the velocity of the carriers tends to saturate
due to scattering effects (collisions suffered by the carriers). This is illustrated in Figure
3.17.
5
υsat = 10
Constant velocity
(m/s)
n 
υ Constant mobility (slope = μ)
Figure 3.17 Velocity-saturation effect.
ξ = 1.5
c  ξ (V/μm)
For p-type silicon, the critical field at which electron saturation occurs is around 1.5
6  5 
× 10 V/m (or 1.5 V/μm), and the saturation velocity υsat approximately equals 10 m/s.
This means that in an NMOS device with a channel length of 1μm, only a couple of volts
between drain and source are needed to reach the saturation point. This condition is easily
met in current short-channel devices. Holes in an-type silicon saturate at the same veloc-
ity, although a higher electrical field is needed to achieve saturation. Velocity-saturation
effects are hence less pronounced in PMOS transistors.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 64 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
64 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
This effect has a profound impact on the operation of the transistor. We will illus-
trate this with a first-order derivation of the device characteristics under velocity-saturat-
ing conditions [Ko89]. The velocity as a function of the electrical field, plotted in Figure
3.17, can be roughly approximated by the following expression:
μnξ
υ = --------------------- for ξ ≤ ξ c
1 + ξ ⁄ξ c (3.31)
= υsat for ξ ≥ ξc
The continuity requirement between the two regions dictates thatξc = 2υsat/μn. Re-evalu-
tion of Eq. (3.20) and Eq. (3.22) in light of revised velocity formula leads to a modified
expression of the drain current in the resistive region:
2
W VDS
ID = κ ( VDS)μ Cox----- ( VGS – VT)VDS – ---------  (3.32)
n 2
L
with
1
κ ( V) = ------------------------------ (3.33)
1 + ( V ⁄ ξc L)
κ is a measure of the degree of velocity saturation, sinceVDS/L can be interpreted as the
average field in the channel. In case of long-channel devices (large values ofL) or small
values of VDS, κ approaches 1 and Eq. (3.32) simplifies to the traditional current equation
for the resistive operation mode. For short-channel devices,κ is smaller than 1, which
means that the delivered current is smaller than what would be normally expected.
When increasing the drain-source voltage, the electrical field in the channel will
ultimately reach the critical value, and the carriers at the drain become velocity saturated.
The saturation drain voltage VDSAT can be calculated by equating the current at the drain to
the current given by Eq. (3.32) for VDS = VDSAT. The former is derived from Eq. (3.22),
assuming that the drift velocity is saturated and equalsυsat.
IDSAT = υsat Cox W V( GT – VDSAT)
V 2 (3.34)
W DSAT
= κ (V DSAT)μ Cox----- VGT VDSAT – -------------- 
n 2
L
VGT is a shorthand notation forVGS - VT. After some algebra, we obtain
VDSAT = κ ( VGT)VGT (3.35)
Further increasing the drain-source voltage does not yield more current (to a first degree)
and the transistor current saturates at IDSAT. This leads to some interesting observations:
• For a short-channel device and for large enough values ofVGT, κ(VGT) is substan-
tially smaller than 1, hence VDSAT < VGT. The device enters saturation before VDS
reaches VGS - VT. Short-channel devices therefore experience an extended saturation

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 65 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 65
ID
Long-channel device
VGS = VDD
Short-channel device
Figure 3.18 Short-channel devices display an
extended saturation region due to velocity-saturation.
VDSAT VGS - VT VDS
region, and tend to operate more often in saturation conditions than their long-chan-
nel counterparts, as is illustrated in Figure 3.18.
• The saturation current IDSAT displays a linear dependence with respect to the gate-
source voltage VGS, which is in contrast with the squared dependence in the long-
channel device. This reduces the amount of current a transistor can deliver for a
given control voltage. On the other hand, reducing the operating voltage does not
have such a significant effect in submicron devices as it would have in a long-chan-
nel transistor.
The equations above ignore that a larger portion of the channel becomes velocity-satu-
rated with a further increase ofVDS. From a modeling perspective, it appears as though the
effective channel is shortening with increasingVDS, similar in effect to the channel-length
modulation. The resulting increase in current is easily accommodated by introducing an
extra (1 + λ × VDS) multiplier.
Thus far we have only considered the effects of the tangential field along the chan-
nel due to the VDS, when considering velocity-saturation effects. However, there also
exists a normal (vertical) field originating from the gate voltage that further inhibits chan-
nel carrier mobility. This effect, which is calledmobility degradation, reduces the surface
mobility with respect to the bulk mobility. Eq. (3.36) provides a simple estimation of the
mobility reduction,
μn0
μn eff, = --------------------------------------- (3.36)
1 + η ( VGS – VT)
with μn0 the bulk mobility and η an empirical parameter. A typical approach is to use
derive the actual value ofμ for a given field strength from tables or empirical charts.
Readers interested in a more in-depth perspective on the short-channel effects in
MOS transistors are referred to the excellent reference works on this topic, such as
[Ko89].
Velocity Saturation — Revisited
Unfortunately, the drain-current equations Eq. (3.32) and Eq. (3.33) are complex expres-
sions of VGS and VDS, which makes them rather unwieldy for a first-order manual analysis.
A substantially simpler model can be obtained by making two assumptions:

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 66 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
66 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
1. The velocity saturates abruptly at ξc, and is approximated by the following expres-
sion:
υ = μn ξ for ξ ≤ ξc
(3.37)
= υsat = μnξc for ξ ≥ ξc
2. The drain-source voltage VDSAT at which the critical electrical field is reached and
velocity saturation comes into play is constant and is approximated by Eq. (3.38).
From Eq. (3.35), it can be observed that this assumption is reasonable for larger val-
ues of VGT (>> ξcL).
Lυsat
VDSAT = Lξc = ------------ (3.38)
μn
Under these circumstances, the current equations for the resistive region remain
unchanged from the long-channel model. OnceVDSAT is reached, the current abruptly satu-
rates. The value for IDSAT at that point can be derived by plugging the saturation voltage
into the current equation for the resistive region (Eq. (3.25)).
IDSAT = ID ( VDS = VDSAT)
2
W VDSAT
= μ C ----- ( V – V )V – --------------
n ox L  GS  T DSAT 2  (3.39)
VDSAT
 
= υsat Cox W VGS – VT – --------------
 2 
This model is truly first-order and empirical. The simplified velocity model causes
substantial deviations in the transition zone between linear and velocity-saturated regions.
Yet, by carefully choosing the model parameters, decent matching can be obtained with
empirical data in the other operation regions, as will be shown in one of the following sec-
tions. Most importantly, the equations are coherent with the familiar long-channel equa-
tions, and provide the digital designer with a much needed tool for intuitive understanding
and interpretation.
Drain Current versus Voltage Charts
The behavior for the MOS transistor in the different operation regions is best understood
by analyzing its ID-VDS curves, which plot ID versus VDS with VGS as a parameter. Figure
3.19 shows these charts for two NMOS transistors, implemented in the same technology
and with the same W/L ratio. One would hence expect both devices to display identicalI-
V characteristics, The main difference however is that the first device has a long channel
length (Ld = 10 μm), while the second transistor is a short channel device (Ld = 0.25 μm),
and experiences velocity saturation.
Consider first the long-channel device. In the resistive region, the transistor behaves
like a voltage-controlled resistor, while in the saturation region, it acts as a voltage-con-
trolled current source (when the channel-length modulation effect is ignored). The transi-

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 67 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 67
-4 -4
x 10 x 10
6  2.5 
VDS = VGS-VT V GS = 2.5 V VGS = 2.5 V
5
2
Resistive Saturation
4 VGS = 2.0 V
V  = 2.0 V 1.5
GS 
(A) 3 (A) 
ID ID
1 VGS = 1.5 V
2
V  = 1.5 V
GS  Linear dependence
Quatratic dependence
0.5
1 VGS = 1.0 V
V GS = 1.0 V
0 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
VDS (V) VDS (V)
(a) Long-channel transistor (Ld = 10 μm) (b) Short-channel transistor (Ld = 0.25 μm)
Figure 3.19 I-V characteristics of long- and a short-channel NMOS transistors in a 0.25μm CMOS technology. The (W/L)
ration of both transistors is identical and equals 1.5
tion between both regions is delineated by the VDS = VGS - VT curve. The squared
dependence of ID as a function of VGS in the saturation region — typical for a long channel
device — is clearly observable from the spacing between the different curves. The linear
dependence of the saturation current with respect to VGS is apparent in the short-channel
device of b. Notice also how velocity-saturation causes the device to saturate for substan-
tially smaller values ofVDS. This results in a substantial drop in current drive for high volt-
age levels. For instance, at (VGS = 2.5 V, VDS = 2.5 V), the drain current of the short
transistor is only 40% of the corresponding value of the longer device (220μA versus 540
μA).
-4 -4
x 10 x 10
6  2.5
5
2
4
1.5
linear
(A)3
D  (A) 
I ID
1
2
quadratic
0.5
1
quadratic
0 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
VGS (V) VGS (V)
(a) Long-channel device (Ld = 10 μm) (b) Short-channel device ( Ld = 0.25 μm)
Figure 3.20 NMOS transistor ID-VGS characteristic for long and short-channel devices (0.25 μm CMOS
technology). W/L = 1.5 for both transistors and VDS = 2.5 V.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 68 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
68 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
The difference in dependence upon VGS between long- and short-channel devices is
even more pronounced in another set of simulated charts that plotID as a function of VGS
for a fixed value of VDS (≥ VGS — hence ensuring saturation) (Figure 3.20). A quadratic
versus linear dependence is apparent for larger values ofVGS.
All the derived equations hold for the PMOS transistor as well. The only difference
is that for PMOS devices, the polarities of all voltages and currents are reversed. This
is illustrated in Figure 3.21, which plots the ID-VDS characteristics of a minimum-size
PMOS transistor in our generic 0.25 μm CMOS process. The curves are in the third quad-
rant as ID, VDS, and VGS are all negative. Interesting to observe is also that the effects of
velocity saturation are less pronounced than in the CMOS devices. This can be attributed
to the higher value of the critical electrical field, resulting from the smaller mobility of
holes versus electrons.
-4
x 10
0 
VGS = -1.0 V
-0.2
VGS = -1.5 V
-0.4
(A) 
ID VGS = -2.0 V
-0.6
Figure 3.21 I-V characteristics of (Wd=0.375 μm,
-0.8 Ld=0.25 μm) PMOS transistor in 0.25 μm CMOS
VGS = -2.5 V
process. Due to the smaller mobility, the maximum
current is only 42% of what is achieved by a similar
-1
-2.5 -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 NMOS transistor.
VDS (V)
Subthreshold Conduction
A closer inspection of the ID-VGS curves of Figure 3.20 reveals that the current does not
drop abruptly to 0 at VGS = VT. It becomes apparent that the MOS transistor is already par-
tially conducting for voltages below the threshold voltage. This effect is calledsubthresh-
old or weak-inversion conduction. The onset of strong inversion means that ample carriers
are available for conduction, but by no means implies that no current at all can flow for
gate-source voltages below VT, although the current levels are small under those condi-
tions. The transition from the on- to the off-condition is thus not abrupt, but gradual.
To study this effect in somewhat more detail, we redraw theID versus VGS curve of
Figure 3.20b on a logarithmic scale as shown in Figure 3.22. This confirms that the current
does not drop to zero immediately for VGS < VT, but actually decays in an exponential
2 
fashion, similar to the operation of a bipolar transistor. In the absence of a conducting
+  + 
channel, the n (source) - p (bulk) - n (drain) terminals actually form a parasitic bipolar
transistor. The current in this region can be approximated by the expression
2 
Discussion of the operation of bipolar transistors is out of the scope of this textbook. We refer to vari-
ous textbooks on semiconductor devices, or to the additional information that is available on the web-site of this
book.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 69 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 69
-2
10
-4
10
Linear region
-6 Quadratic region
10
(A) 
ID
-8
10
-10 Subthreshold exponential region
10 Figure 3.22 ID current versus VGS
(on logarithmic scale), showing the
-12 VT exponential characteristic of the
10 subthreshold region.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
VGS (V)
VGS VDS
---------------- –-------------
nkT ⁄q k T ⁄q
ID = ISe  1 – e  (3.40)
 
where IS and n are empirical parameters, with n ≥ 1 and typically ranging around 1.5.
In most digital applications, the presence of subthreshold current is undesirable as it
detracts from the ideal switch-like behavior that we like to assume for the MOS transistor.
We would rather have the current drop as fast as possible once the gate-source voltage
falls below VT. The (inverse) rate of decline of the current with respect toVGS below VT
hence is a quality measure of a device. It is often quantified by theslope factor S, which
measures by how much VGS has to be reduced for the drain current to drop by a factor of
10. From Eq. (3.40), we find
 kT 
S = n ------ ln 10( ) (3.41)
 q
with S is expressed in mV/decade. For an ideal transistor with the sharpest possible roll-
off, n = 1 and (kT/q)ln(10) evaluates to 60 mV/decade at room temperature, which means
that the subthreshold current drops by a factor of 10 for a reduction inVGS of 60 mV.
Unfortunately, n is larger than 1 for actual devices and the current falls at a reduced rate
(90 mV/decade for n = 1.5). The current roll-off is further affected in a negative sense by
an increase in the operating temperature (most integrated circuits operate at temperatures
considerably beyond room temperature). The value ofn is determined by the intrinsic
device topology and structure. Reducing its value hence requires a different process tech-
nology, such as silicon-on-insulator.
Subthreshold current has some important repercussions. In general, we want the cur-
rent through the transistor to be as close as possible to zero atVGS = 0. This is especially
important in the so-called dynamic circuits, which rely on the storage of charge on a
capacitor and whose operation can be severely degraded by subthreshold leakage. Achiev-
ing this in the presence of subthreshold current requires a firm lower bound on the value of
the threshold voltage of the devices.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 70 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
70 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
Example 3.6 Subthreshold Slope
For the example of Figure 3.22, a slope of 89.5 mV/decade is observed (between 0.2 and 0.4
V). This is equivalent to an n-factor of 1.49.
In Summary – Models for Manual Analysis
The preceding discussions made it clear that the deep-submicron transistor is a complex
device. Its behavior is heavily non-linear and is influenced by a large number of second-
order effects. Fortunately, accurate circuit-simulation models have been developed that
make it possible to predict the behavior of a device with amazing precision over a large
range of device sizes, shapes, and operation modes, as we will discuss later in this chapter.
While excellent from an accuracy perspective, these models fail in providing a designer
with an intuitive insight in the behavior of a circuit and its dominant design parameters.
Such an understanding is necessary in the design analysis and optimization process. A
designer who misses a clear vision on what drives and governs the circuit operation by
necessity resorts on a lengthy trial by error optimization process, that most often leads to
an inferior solution.
The obvious question is now how to abstract the behavior of our MOS transistor into
a simple and tangible analytical model that does not lead to hopelessly complex equations,
yet captures the essentials of the device. It turns out that the first-order expressions,
derived earlier in the chapter, can be combined into a single expression that meets these
goals. The model presents the transistor as a single current source (Figure 3.23), the value
of which is given defined in the Figure. The reader can verify that, depending upon the
operating condition, the model simplifies into either Eq. (3.25), Eq. (3.29), or Eq. (3.39)
(corrected for channel-length modulation), depending upon operating conditions..
ID = 0 for VGT ≤ 0
2
V
G W min 
ID = k′----- VGT Vmin – ---------- ( 1 + λVDS) for VGT ≥ 0
L  2 
ID
S D with V = min ( V , V , V ),
min  GT  DS  DSAT
B VGT = VGS – VT,
and VT = VT0 + γ ( – 2φF + VSB – –2φF )
Figure 3.23 A unified MOS model for manual analysis.
Besides being a function of the voltages at the four terminals of the transistor, the
model employs a set of five parameters:VTO, γ, VDSAT, k’, and λ. In principle, it would be
possible to determine these parameters from the process technology and from the device
physics equations. The complexity of the device makes this a precarious task. A more
rewarding approach is to choose the values such that a good matching with the actual
device characteristics is obtained. More significantly, the model should match the best in

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 71 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 71
the regions that matter the most. In digital circuits, this in the region of highVGS and VDS.
The performance of an MOS digital circuit is primarily determined by the maximum
available current (i.e., the current obtained for VGS = VDS = supply voltage). A good
matching in this region is therefore essential.
3
Example 3.7 Manual Analysis Model for 0.25 μm CMOS Process
Based on the simulated ID-VDS and ID-VGS plots of a (Wd = 0.375 μm, Ld = 0.25 μm) transistor,
implemented in our generic 0.25 micron CMOS process (Figure 3.19, Figure 3.20), we have
derived a set of device parameters to match well in the (VDS = 2.5 V, VGS = 2.5 V) region —
2.5 V being the typical supply voltage for this process. The resulting characteristics are plot-
ted in Figure 3.24 for the NMOS transistor, and compared to the simulated values.Overall, a
-4
x 10
2.5 
2
1.5
(A) 
ID
1
Figure 3.24 Correspondence between simple model
(solid line) and SPICE simulation (dotted) for minimum-
0.5 size NMOS transistor (Wd=0.375 μm, Ld=0.25 μm).
Observe the discrepancy in the transition zone between
resistive and velocity saturation.
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
V (V)
DS 
good correspondence can be observed with the exception of the transition region between
resistive and velocity-saturation. This discrepancy, which is due the simple velocity model of
Eq. (3.37) as explained earlier, is acceptable as it occurs in the lower value-range ofVDS. It
demonstrates that our model, while simple, manages to give a fair indication of the overall
behavior of the device.
Design Data — Transistor Model for Manual Analysis
Table 3.2 tabulates the obtained parameter values for the minimum-sized NMOS and a simi-
larly sized PMOS device in our generic 0.25 μm CMOS process. These values will be used as
generic model-parameters in later chapters.
Table 3.2 Parameters for manual model of generic 0.25μm CMOS process (minimum length device).
0.5 2 −1
VT0 (V) γ (V ) VDSAT (V) k' (A/V ) λ( V )
−6 
NMOS 0.43 0.4 0.63 115 × 10 0.06
−6 
PMOS −0.4 -0.4 -1 -30 × 10 -0.1
3 
A MATLAB implementation of the model is available on the web-site of the textbook.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 72 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
72 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
A word of caution — The model presented here is derived from the characteristics
of a single device with a minimum channel-length and width. Trying to extrapolate this
behavior to devices with substantially different values ofW and L will probably lead to
sizable errors. Fortunately, digital circuits typically use only minimum-length devices as
these lead to the smallest implementation area. Matching for these transistors will typi-
cally be acceptable. It is however advisable to use a different set of model parameters for
devices with dramatically different size- and shape-factors.
The presented current-source model will prove to be very useful in the analysis of
the basic properties and metrics of a simple digital gate, yet its non-linearity makes it
intractable for anything that is somewhat more complex. We therefore introduce an even
more simplified model that has the advantage of being linear and straightforward. It is
based on the underlying assumption in most digital designs that the transistor is nothing
more than a switch with an infinite off-resistance, and a finite on-resistanceRon.
VGS ≥ VT
Ron
S D
Figure 3.25 NMOS transistor modeled as a switch.
The main problem with this model is that Ron is still time-variant, non-linear and
depending upon the operation point of the transistor. When studying digital circuits in the
transient mode — which means while switching between different logic states — it is
attractive to assume Ron as a constant and linear resistance Req, chosen so that the final
result is similar to what would be obtained with the original transistor. A reasonable
approach in that respect is to use the average value of the resistance over the operation
region of interest, or even simpler, the average value of the resistances at the end-points of
the transition. The latter assumption works well if the resistance does not experience any
strong non-linearities over the range of the averaging interval.
t
t2 2
1 1 VDS ( )t
Req = average ( Ron ( )t ) = -------------- Ron ( )t  dt = -------------- ---------------- dt
t = t1 …t2 ∫  ∫
t2 – t1 t t2 – t1 ID ( )t
1 t1 (3.42)
1
≈ --- ( Ron ( t1) + Ron ( t2))
2
Example 3.8 Equivalent resistance when (dis)charging a capacitor
One of the most common scenario’s in contemporary digital circuits is the discharging of a
capacitor from VDD to GND through an NMOS transistor with its gate voltage set toVDD, or
vice-versa the charging of the capacitor toVDD through a PMOS with its gate at GND. Of spe-
cial interest is the point where the voltage on the capacitor reaches the mid-point (VDD/2) —
this is by virtue of the definition of the propagation delay as introduced in Chapter 2. Assum-
ing that the supply voltage is substantially larger than the velocity-saturation voltageVDSAT of
the transistor, it is fair to state that the transistor stays in velocity saturation for the entire

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 73 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 73
duration of the transition. This scenario is plotted in for the case of an NMOS discharging a
capacitor from VDD to VDD/2.
ID
V (V →V /2) VGS = VDD
DS  DD DD
VDD Rmid
ID
R0
VDS
(a) schematic VDD/2 VDD
(b) trajectory traversed on ID-VDS curve.
Figure 3.26 Discharging a capacitor through an NMOS transistor: Schematic (a) and I-V trajectory (b). The
instantianous resistance of the transistor equals (VDS/ID) and is visualized by the angle with respect to they-axis.
With the aid of Eq. (3.42) and Eq. , we can derive the value of the equivalent resis-
tance, which averages the resistance of the device over the interval.
VDD ⁄2
1 V 3 VDD  7 
Req = -------------------- ----------------------------------- dV ≈ --- ------------- 1 – ---λVDD
– VDD ⁄2 ∫ IDSAT ( 1 + λV) 4IDSAT 9 
VDD (3.43)
2
W VDSAT
with IDSAT = k'----- ( VDD – VT)VDSAT – --------------
L  2 
A similar result can be obtained by just averaging the values of the resistance at the end points
(and simplifying the result using a Taylor expansion):
1 VDD VDD ⁄ 2  3 VDD  5 
Req = --- ----------------------------------------- + ------------------------------------------------ ≈ --- ------------- 1 – ---λVDD (3.44)
2 IDSAT ( 1 + λVDD) IDSAT ( 1 + λVDD ⁄ 2) 4IDSAT 6 
A number of conclusions are worth drawing from the above expressions:
• The resistance is inversely proportional to the (W/L) ratio of the device. Doubling the tran-
sistor width halves the resistance.
• For VDD >> VT + VDSAT/2, the resistance becomes virtually independent of the supply volt-
age. This is confirmed in halves, which plots the simulated equivalent resistance as a func-
tion of the supply voltageVDD. Only a minor improvement in resistance, attributable to the
channel-length modulation, can be observed when raising the supply voltage.
• Once the supply voltage approaches VT, a dramatic increase in resistance can be observed.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 74 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
74 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
5
x 10
7 
6
5
4
(Ohm) 
3eq
R
2
Figure 3.27 Simulated equivalent
1 resistance of a minimum size NMOS
transistor in 0.25 μm CMOS process as a
0 function of VDD
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
(VGS = VDD, VDS = VDD →VDD/2).
V (V)
DD 
Design Data — Equivalent Resistance Model
Table 3.3 enumerates the equivalent resistances obtained by simulation of our generic 0.25μm
CMOS process. These values will come in handy when analyzing the performance of CMOS
gates in later chapters.
Table 3.3 Equivalent resistance Req (W/L= 1) of NMOS and PMOS transistors in 0.25 μm CMOS process (with
L = Lmin). For larger devices, divide Req by W/L.
VDD (V) 1 1.5 2 2.5
NMOS (kΩ) 35 19 15 13
PMOS (kΩ) 115 55 38 31
3.3.3 Dynamic Behavior
The dynamic response of a MOSFET transistor is a sole function of the time it takes to
(dis)charge the parasitic capacitances that are intrinsic to the device, and the extra capaci-
tance introduced by the interconnecting lines (and are the subject of Chapter 4). A pro-
found understanding of the nature and the behavior of these intrinsic capacitances is
essential for the designer of high-quality digital integrated circuits. They originate from
three sources: the basic MOS structure, the channel charge, and the depletion regions of
the reverse-biased pn-junctions of drain and source. Aside from the MOS structure capac-
itances, all capacitors are nonlinear and vary with the applied voltage, which makes their
analysis hard. We discuss each of the components in turn.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 75 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 75
MOS Structure Capacitances
The gate of the MOS transistor is isolated from the conducting channel by the gate oxide
that has a capacitance per unit area equal toCox = εox / tox. We learned earlier that from aI-
V perspective it is useful to have Cox as large as possible, or to keep the oxide thickness
very thin. The total value of this capacitance is called thegate capacitance Cg and can be
decomposed into two elements, each with a different behavior. Obviously, one part ofCg
contributes to the channel charge, and is discussed in a subsequent section. Another part is
solely due to the topological structure of the transistor. This component is the subject of
the remainder of this section.
Consider the transistor structure of Figure 3.28. Ideally, the source and drain diffu-
sion should end right at the edge of the gate oxide. In reality, both source and drain tend to
extend somewhat below the oxide by an amountxd, called the lateral diffusion. Hence, the
effective channel of the transistor L becomes shorter than the drawn length Ld (or the
length the transistor was originally designed for) by a factor of∆L = 2xd. It also gives rise
to a parasitic capacitance between gate and source (drain) that is called theoverlap capac-
itance. This capacitance is strictly linear and has a fixed value
Polysilicon gate
Source Drain
W
+  +
n xd xd n
Gate-bulk
Ld overlap
(a) Top view
Gate oxide
tox
+ +
n L n
(b) Cross section Figure 3.28 MOSFET overlap capacitance.
CGSO = CGDO = Cox xdW = Co W (3.45)
Since xd is a technology-determined parameter, it is customary to combine it with the
oxide capacitance to yield the overlap capacitance per unit transistor widthCo (more spe-
cifically, Cgso and Cgdo).
Channel Capacitance
Perhaps the most significant MOS parasitic circuit element, the gate-to-channel capaci-
tance CGC varies in both magnitude and in its division into three componentsCGCS, CGCD,
and CGCB (being the gate-to-source, gate-to-drain, and gate-to-body capacitances, respec-
tively), depending upon the operation region and terminal voltages. This varying distribu-
tion is best explained with the simple diagrams ofFigure 3.29. When the transistor is in

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 76 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
76 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
cut-off (a), no channel exists, and the total capacitanceCGC appears between gate and
body. In the resistive region (b), an inversion layer is formed, which acts as a conductor
between source and drain. Consequently,CGCB = 0 as the body electrode is shielded from
the gate by the channel. Symmetry dictates that the capacitance distributes evenly between
source and drain. Finally, in the saturation mode (c), the channel is pinched off. The
capacitance between gate and drain is approximately zero, and so is the gate-body capaci-
tance. All the capacitance hence is between gate and source.
G G G
CGC C C
GC GC
S D S D S D
(a) cut-off (b) resistive (c) saturation
Figure 3.29 The gate-to-channel capacitance and how the operation region influences is distribution over the three other
device terminals.
To actual value of the total gate-channel capacitance and its distribution over the
three components is best understood with the aid of a number of charts. The first plot (Fig-
ure 3.30a) captures the evolution of the capacitance as a function ofVGS for VDS = 0. For
VGS = 0, the transistor is off, no channel is present and the total capacitance, equal to
WLCox, appears between gate and body. When increasingVGS, a depletion region forms
under the gate. This seemingly causes the thickness of the gate dielectric to increase,
which means a reduction in capacitance. Once the transistor turns on (VGS = VT), a channel
is formed and CGCB drops to 0. With VDS = 0, the device operates in the resistive mode and
the capacitance divides equally between source and drain, orCGCS = CGCD = WLCox/2. The
large fluctuation of the channel capacitance aroundVGS=VT is worth remembering. A
designer looking for a well-behaved linear capacitance should avoid operation in this
region.
CGC
WLCox WLCox
CGC
2WLCox
C
GCS 3
WLC CGCS = CGCD WLC
ox CGCB ox
2 2 CGCD
VGS 0 V /(V -V ) 1
VT DS GS T
(a) CGC as a function of VGS (with VDS=0) (b) CGC as a function of the degree of saturation
Figure 3.30 Distribution of the gate-channel capacitance as a function ofVGS and VDS (from [Dally98]).
Once the transistor is on, the distribution of its gate capacitance depends upon the
degree of saturation, measured by the VDS/(VGS-VT) ratio. As illustrated in Figure 3.30b,

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 77 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 77
CGCD gradually drops to 0 for increasing levels of saturation, whileCGCS increases to 2/3
CoxWL. This also means that the total gate capacitance is getting smaller with an increased
level of saturation.
From the above, it becomes clear that the gate-capacitance components are nonlin-
ear and varying with the operating voltages. To make a first-order analysis possible, we
will use a simplified model with a constant capacitance value in each region of operation
in the remainder of the text. The assumed values are summarized in Table 3.4.
Table 3.4 Average distribution of channel capacitance of MOS transistor for different operation regions.
Operation Region CGCB CGCS CGCD CGC CG
Cutoff CoxWL 0 0 CoxWL CoxWL+2CoW
Resistive 0 CoxWL / 2 CoxWL / 2 CoxWL CoxWL+2CoW
Saturation 0 (2/3)CoxWL 0 (2/3)CoxWL (2/3)CoxWL+2CoW
Example 3.9 Using a circuit simulator to extract capacitance
Determining the value of the parasitic capacitances of an MOS transistor for a given operation
mode is a labor-intensive task, and requires the knowledge of a number of technology param-
eters that are often not explicitly available. Fortunately, once a SPICE model of the transistor
is attained, a simple simulation can give you the data you are interested in. Assume we would
like to know the value of the total gate capacitance of a transistor in a given technology as a
function of VGS (for VDS = 0). A simulation of the circuit of Figure 3.31a will give us exactly
this information. In fact, the following relation is valid:
dVGS
I = CG ( VGS) 
dt
which can be rewritten to yield an expression forCG.
dVGS
 
CG ( VGS) = I ⁄
 dt 
A transient simulation gives us VGS as a function of time, which can be translated into
the capacitance with the aid of some simple mathematical manipulations. This is demon-
strated in Figure 3.31b, which plots the simulated gate capacitance of a minimum size 0.25
μm NMOS transistor as a function of VGS. The graphs clearly shows the drop of the capaci-
tance when VGS approaches VT and the discontinuity atVT, predicted in Figure 3.30.
Junction Capacitances
A final capacitive component is contributed by the reverse-biased source-body and drain-
body pn-junctions. The depletion-region capacitance is nonlinear and decreases when the
reverse bias is raised as discussed earlier. To understand the components of the junction
capacitance (often called the diffusion capacitance), we must look at the source (drain)

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 78 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
78 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
-16
x 10
10 
V 9
GS
8
I
7
6
5
(a)
Gate Capacitance (F)
4
Figure 3.31 Simulating the gate capacitance of an MOS 3
transistor; (a) circuit configuration used for the analysis, (b)
resulting capacitance plot for minimum-size NMOS transistor 2
-2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
in 0.25 μm technology. VGS (V)
(b)
region and its surroundings. The detailed picture, shown in Figure 3.32, shows that the
junction consists of two components:
Channel-stop implant
NA+
Side wall
W Source
ND
Bottom
xj Side wall
Channel
L
S Substrate NA Figure 3.32 Detailed view of source junction.
• The bottom-plate junction, which is formed by the source region (with dopingND)
and the substrate with doping NA. The total depletion region capacitance for this
component equals Cbottom = CjWLS, with Cj the junction capacitance per unit area as
given by Eq. (3.9). As the bottom-plate junction is typically of the abrupt type, the
grading coefficient m approaches 0.5.
+ 
• The side-wall junction, formed by the source region with dopingND and the p chan-
+
nel-stop implant with doping level NA . The doping level of the stopper is usually
larger than that of the substrate, resulting in a larger capacitance per unit area. The
side-wall junction is typically graded, and its grading coefficient varies from 0.33 to
0.5. Its capacitance value equals Csw = C'jswxj (W + 2 × Ls). Notice that no side-wall
capacitance is counted for the fourth side of the source region, as this represents the
4
conductive channel.
Since xj, the junction depth, is a technology parameter, it is normally combined with
C'jsw into a capacitance per unit perimeter Cjsw = C'jswxj. An expression for the total
junction capacitance can then be derived,

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 79 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 79
Cdiff = Cbottom + Csw = Cj × AREA + Cjsw × PERIMETER
(3.46)
= CjLSW + Cjsw ( 2LS + W)
Since all these capacitances are small-signal capacitances, we normally linearize them and
use average capacitances along the lines of Eq. (3.10).
Problem 3.1 Using a circuit simulator to determine the drain capacitance
Derive a simple circuit that would help you to derive the drain capacitance of an NMOS
transistor in the different operation modes using circuit simulation (in the style ofFigure
3.31).
Capacitive Device Model
All the above contributions can be combined in a single capacitive model for the MOS
transistor, which is shown Figure 3.33. Its components are readily identified on the basis
of the preceding discussions.
G
CGS CGD
S D
CSB CGB CDB
Figure 3.33 MOSFET capacitance model.
B
CGS = CGCS + CGSO; CGD = CGCD + CGDO; CGB = CGCB
CSB = CSdiff; CDB = CDdiff (3.47)
It is essential for the designers of high-performance and low-energy circuits to be very
familiar with this model as well as to have an intuitive feeling of the relative values of its
components.
Example 3.10 MOS Transistor Capacitances
Consider an NMOS transistor with the following parameters:tox = 6 nm, L = 0.24 μm, W =
–10  –3  2 –10
0.36 μm, LD = LS = 0.625 μm, CO = 3 × 10 F/m, Cj0 = 2 × 10 F/m , Cjsw0 = 2.75 × 10
F/m. Determine the zero-bias value of all relevant capacitances.
2
The gate capacitance per unit area is easily derived as (εox / tox) and equals 5.7 fF/μm .
The gate-to-channel CGC then equals WLCox = 0.49 fF. To find the total gate capacitance, we
have to add the source and drain overlap capacitors, each of which equalsWCO = 0.105 fF.
This leads to a total gate capacitance of 0.7 fF.
4 
To be entirely correct, we should take the diffusion capacitance of the source(drain)-to-channel junction
into account. Due to the doping conditions and the small area, this component can virtually always be ignored in
a first-order analysis. Detailed SPICE models most often include a factor CJSWG to account for this junction.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 80 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
80 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
The diffusion capacitance consists of the bottom and the side-wall capacitances. The
former is equal to Cj0 LDW = 0.45 fF, while the side-wall capacitance under zero-bias condi-
tions evaluates to Cjsw0 (2LD + W) = 0.44 fF. This results in a total drain(source)-to-bulk
capacitance of 0.89 fF.
The diffusion capacitance seems to dominate the gate capacitance. This is a worst-case
condition, however. When increasing the value of the reverse bias over the junction — as is
the normal operation mode in MOS circuits — , the diffusion capacitance is substantially
reduced. Also, clever design can help to reduce the value ofLD (LS). In general, it can be
stated that the contribution of diffusion capacitances is at most equal, and very often substan-
tially smaller than the gate capacitance.
Design Data — MOS Transistor Capacitances
Table 3.5 summarizes the parameters needed to estimate the parasitic capacitances of the MOS
transistors in our generic 0.25 μm CMOS process.
Table 3.5 Capacitance parameters of NMOS and PMOS transistors in 0.25 μm CMOS process.
Cox CO Cj mj φb Cjsw mjsw φbsw
2 2
(fF/μm ) (fF/μm) (fF/μm ) (V) (fF/μm) (V)
NMOS 6 0.31 2 0.5 0.9 0.28 0.44 0.9
PMOS 6 0.27 1.9 0.48 0.9 0.22 0.32 0.9
Source-Drain Resistance
The performance of a CMOS circuit may further be affected by another set of parasitic
elements, being the resistances in series with the drain and source regions, as shown in
Figure 3.34a. This effect become more pronounced when transistors are scaled down, as
this leads to shallower junctions and smaller contact openings become smaller. The resis-
tance of the drain (source) region can be expressed as
LS D,
RS D, = ---------- R + RC (3.48)
W
with RC the contact resistance, W the width of the transistor, and LS,D the length of the
source or drain region (Figure 3.34b). Ro is the sheet resistance per square of the drain-
source diffusion, and ranges from 20 to 100Ω/ o . Observe that the resistance of a square
of material is constant, independent of its size (see also Chapter 4).
The series resistance causes a deterioration in the device performance, as it reduces
the drain current for a given control voltage. Keeping its value as small as possible is thus
an important design goal for both the device and the circuit engineer. One option, popular
in most contemporary processes, is to cover the drain and source regions with a low-resis-
tivity material such as titanium or tungsten. This process is calledsilicidation and effec-

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 81 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 81
5 
tively reduces the sheet resistance to values in the range from 1 to 4Ω/o . Making the
transistor wider than needed is another possibility as should be obvious from Eq. (3.48).
With a process that includes silicidation and proper attention to layout, parasitic resistance
is not important. However, the reader should be aware that careless layout may lead to
resistances that severely degrade the device performance.
3.3.4 The Actual MOS Transistor— Some Secondary Effects
The operation of a contemporary transistor may show some important deviations from the
model we have presented so far. These divergences become especially pronounced once
the dimensions of the transistor reach the deep sub-micron realm. At that point, the
assumption that the operation of a transistor is adequately described by a one-dimensional
model, where it is assumed that all current flows on the surface of the silicon and the elec-
trical fields are oriented along that plane, is not longer valid. Two- or even three-dimen-
sional models are more appropriate. An example of such was already given inSection
3.2.2 when we discussed the mobility degradation.
The understanding of some of these second-order effects and their impact on the
device behavior is essential in the design of today’s digital circuits and therefore merits
some discussion. One word of warning, though. Trying to take all those effects into
account in a manual, first-order analysis results in intractable and opaque circuit models. It
is therefore advisable to analyze and design MOS circuits first using the ideal model. The
impact of the non-idealities can be studied in a second round using computer-aided simu-
lation tools with more precise transistor models.
Polysilicon gate
Drain
contact
G LD
VGS,eff
S D W
RS RD
Drain
(a) Modeling the series resistance (b) Parameters of the series resistance
Figure 3.34 Series drain and source resistance.
5 
Silicidation is also used to reduce the resistance of the polysilicon gate, as will be discussed in Chapter
4.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 82 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
82 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
V
VT  T
Low V threshold
Long-channel threshold  DS 
V
L  DS
(a) Threshold as a function of the (b) Drain-induced barrier
length (for low VDS) lowering (for low L)
Figure 3.35 Threshold variations.
Threshold Variations
Eq. (3.19) states that the threshold voltage is only a function of the manufacturing technol-
ogy and the applied body biasVSB. The threshold can therefore be considered as a constant
over all NMOS (PMOS) transistors in a design. As the device dimensions are reduced, this
model becomes inaccurate, and the threshold potential becomes a function ofL, W, and
VDS. Two-dimensional second-order effects that were ignorable for long-channel devices
suddenly become significant.
In the traditional derivation of the VTO, for instance, it is assumed that the channel
depletion region is solely due to the applied gate voltage and that all depletion charge
beneath the gate originates from the MOS field effects. This ignores the depletion regions
of the source and reverse-biased drain junction, which become relatively more important
with shrinking channel lengths. Since a part of the region below the gate is already
depleted (by the source and drain fields), a smaller threshold voltage suffices to cause
strong inversion. In other words, VT0 decreases with L for short-channel devices (Figure
3.35a). A similar effect can be obtained by raising the drain-source (bulk) voltage, as this
increases the width of the drain-junction depletion region. Consequently, the threshold
decreases with increasing VDS. This effect, called the drain-induced barrier lowering, or
DIBL, causes the threshold potential to be a function of the operating voltages (Figure
3.35b). For high enough values of the drain voltage, the source and drain regions can even
be shorted together, and normal transistor operation ceases to exist. The sharp increase in
current that results from this effect, which is calledpunch-through, may cause permanent
damage to the device and should be avoided. Punch-through hence sets an upper bound on
the drain-source voltage of the transistor.
Since the majority of the transistors in a digital circuit are designed at the minimum
channel length, the variation of the threshold voltage as a function of the length is almost
uniform over the complete design, and is therefore not much of an issue except for the
increased sub-threshold leakage currents. More troublesome is the DIBL, as this effect
varies with the operating voltage. This is, for instance, a problem in dynamic memories,
where the leakage current of a cell (being the subthreshold current of the access transistor)
becomes a function of the voltage on the data-line, which depends upon the applied data
patterns. From the cell perspective, DIBL manifests itself as a data-dependent noise
source.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 83 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 83
Worth mentioning is that the threshold of the MOS transistor is also subject tonar-
row-channel effects. The depletion region of the channel does not stop abruptly at the
edges of the transistor, but extends somewhat under the isolating field-oxide. The gate
voltage must support this extra depletion charge to establish a conducting channel. This
effect is ignorable for wide transistors, but becomes significant for small values ofW,
where it results in an increase of the threshold voltage. For small geometry transistors,
with small values of L and W, the effects of short- and narrow channels may tend to cancel
each other out.
Hot-Carrier Effects
Besides varying over a design, threshold voltages in short-channel devices also have the
tendency to drift over time. This is the result of the hot-carrier effect [Hu92]. Over the last
decades, device dimensions have been scaled down continuously, while the power supply
and the operating voltages were kept constant. The resulting increase in the electrical field
strength causes an increasing velocity of the electrons, which can leave the silicon and
tunnel into the gate oxide upon reaching a high-enough energy level. Electrons trapped in
the oxide change the threshold voltage, typically increasing the thresholds of NMOS
devices, while decreasing the VT of PMOS transistors. For an electron to become hot, an
4 
electrical field of at least 10 V/cm is necessary. This condition is easily met in devices
with channel lengths around or below 1 μm. The hot-electron phenomenon can lead to a
long-term reliability problem, where a circuit might degrade or fail after being in use for a
while. This is illustrated in Figure 3.36, which shows the degradation in theI-V character-
istics of an NMOS transistor after it has been subjected to extensive operation. State-of-
the-art MOSFET technologies therefore use specially-engineered drain and source regions
to ensure that the peaks in the electrical fields are bounded, hence preventing carriers to
reach the critical values necessary to become hot. The reduced supply voltage that is typi-
cal for deep sub-micron technologies can in part be attributed to the necessity to keep hot-
carrier effects under control.
Figure 3.36 Hot-carrier effects cause the I-V characteristics of an NMOS transistor to degrade from
extensive usage (from [McGaughy98]).

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 84 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
84 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
CMOS Latchup
The MOS technology contains a number of intrinsic bipolar transistors. These are espe-
cially troublesome in CMOS processes, where the combination of wells and substrates
results in the formation of parasitic n-p-n-p structures. Triggering these thyristor-like
devices leads to a shorting of the VDD and VSS lines, usually resulting in a destruction of
the chip, or at best a system failure that can only be resolved by power-down.
Consider the n-well structure of Figure 3.37a. The n-p-n-p structure is formed by the
source of the NMOS, the p-substrate, the n-well and the source of the PMOS. A circuit
equivalent is shown in Figure 3.37b. When one of the two bipolar transistors gets forward
biased (e.g., due to current flowing through the well, or substrate), it feeds the base of the
other transistor. This positive feedback increases the current until the circuit fails or
burns out.
VDD
VDD
Rnwell
p-source
+ +  +  + 
p n n+ p p n+
n-well Rnwell
Rpsubs n-source
Rpsubs
p-substrate
(a) Origin of latchup (b) Equivalent circuit
Figure 3.37 CMOS latchup.
From the above analysis the message to the designer is clear— to avoid latchup, the
resistances Rnwell and Rpsubs should be minimized. This can be achieved by providing
numerous well and substrate contacts, placed close to the source connections of the
NMOS/PMOS devices. Devices carrying a lot of current (such as transistors in the I/O
drivers) should be surrounded by guard rings. These circular well/substrate contacts, posi-
tioned around the transistor, reduce the resistance even further and reduce the gain of the
parasitic bipolars. For an extensive discussion on how to avoid latchup, please refer to
[Weste93]. The latchup effect was especially critical in early CMOS processes. In recent
years, process innovations and improved design techniques have all but eliminated the
risks for latchup.
3.3.5 SPICE Models for the MOS Transistor
The complexity of the behavior of the short-channel MOS transistor and its many parasitic
effects has led to the development of a wealth of models for varying degrees of accuracy
and computing efficiency. In general, more accuracy also means more complexity and,
hence, an increased run time. In this section, we briefly discuss the characteristics of the

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 85 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor 85
more popular MOSFET models, and describe how to instantiate a MOS transistor in a cir-
cuit description.
SPICE Models
SPICE has three built-in MOSFET models, selected by the LEVEL parameter in the
model card. Unfortunately, all these models have been rendered obsolete by the progres-
sion to short-channel devices. They should only be used for first-order analysis, and we
therefore limit ourselves to a short discussion of their main properties.
• The LEVEL 1 SPICE model implements the Shichman-Hodges model , which is
based on the square law long-channel expressions, derived earlier in this chapter. It
does not handle short-channel effects.
• The LEVEL 2 model is a geometry-based model, which uses detailed device physics
to define its equations. It handles effects such as velocity saturation, mobility degra-
dation, and drain-induced barrier lowering. Unfortunately, including all 3D-effects
of an advanced submicron process in a pure physics-based model becomes complex
and inaccurate.
• LEVEL 3 is a semi-empirical model. It relies on a mixture of analytical and empiri-
cal expressions, and uses measured device data to determine its main parameters. It
works quite well for channel lengths down to 1μm.
In response to the inadequacy of the built-in models, SPICE vendors and semi-con-
ductor manufacturers have introduced a wide range of accurate, but proprietary models. A
complete description of all those would take the remainder of this book, which is, obvi-
ously, not the goal. We refer the interested reader to the extensive literature on this topic
[e.g. VladimirescuXX].
The BSIM3V3 SPICE Model
The confusing situation of having to use a different model for each manufacturer has for-
tunately been partially resolved by the adoption of the BSIM3v3 model as an industry-
wide standard for the modeling of deep-submicron MOSFET transistors. TheBerkeley
Short-Channel IGFET Model (or BSIM in short) provides a model that is analytically
simple and is based on a ‘small’ number of parameters, which are normally extracted from
experimental data. Its popularity and accuracy make it the natural choice for all the simu-
lations presented in this book.
A full-fledged BSIM3v3 model (denoted as LEVEL 49) contains over 200 parame-
ters, the majority of which are related to the modeling of second-order effects. Fortu-
nately, understanding the intricacies of all these parameters is not a requirement for the
digital designer. We therefore only present an overview of the parameter categories (Table
3.6). The Bin category deserves some extra attention. Providing a single set of parameters
that is acceptable over all possible device dimensions is deemed to be next to impossible.
So, a set of models is provided, each of which is valid for a limited region delineated by

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 86 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
86 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
LMIN, LMAX, WMIN, and WMAX (called a bin). It is typically left to the user to select
the correct bin for a particular transistor.
Table 3.6 BSIM3-V3 model parameter categories, and some important parameters.
Parameter Category Description
Control Selection of level and models for mobility, capacitance, and noise
LEVEL, MOBMOD, CAPMOD
DC Parameters for threshold and current calculations
VTH0, K1, U0, VSAT, RSH,
AC & Capacitance Parameters for capacitance computations
CGS(D)O, CJ, MJ, CJSW, MJSW
dW and dL Derivation of effective channel length and width
Process Process parameters such as oxide thickness and doping concentrations
TOX, XJ, GAMMA1, NCH, NSUB
Temperature Nominal temperature and temperature coefficients for various device parameters
TNOM
Bin Bounds on device dimensions for which model is valid
LMIN, LMAX, WMIN, WMAX
Flicker Noise Noise model parameters
We refer the interested reader to the BSIM3v3 documentation provided on the web-
site of the textbook (REFERENCE) for a complete description of the model parameters
and equations. The LEVEL-49 models for our generic 0.25 μm CMOS process can be
found at the same location.
Transistor Instantiation
The parameters that can be specified for an individual transistor are enumerated in
Table 3.7. Not all these parameters have to be defined for each transistor. SPICE assumes
default values (which are often zero!) for the missing factors.
WARNING: It is hard to expect accuracy from a simulator, when the circuit description
provided by the designer does not contain the necessary details. For instance, you must
accurately specify the area and the perimeter of the source and drain regions of the devices
when performing a performance analysis. Lacking this information, which is used for the
computation of the parasitic capacitances, your transient simulation will be next to use-
less. Similarly, it is often necessary to painstakingly define the value of the drain and
source resistance. The NRS and NRD values multiply the sheet resistance specified in the
transistor model for an accurate representation of the parasitic series source and drain
resistance of each transistor.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 87 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.4 A Word on Process Variations 87
Table 3.7 SPICE transistor parameters.
Parameter Name Symbol SPICE Name Units Default Value
Drawn Length L L m −
Effective Width W W m −
2 
Source Area AREA AS m 0
2 
Drain Area AREA AD m 0
Source Perimeter PERIM PS m 0
Drain Perimeter PERIM PD m 0
Squares of Source Diffusion NRS − 1
Squares of Drain Diffusion NRD − 1
Example 3.11 SPICE description of a CMOS inverter
An example of a SPICE description of a CMOS inverter, consisting of an NMOS and a
PMOS transistor, is given below. Transistor M1 is an NMOS device of model-type (and bin)
nmos.1 with its drain, gate, source, and body terminals connected to nodesnvout, nvin, 0, and
0, respectively. Its gate length is the minimum allowed in this technology (0.25μm). The ‘+’
character at the start of line 2 indicates that this line is a continuation of the previous one.
The PMOS device of type pmos.1, connected between nodes nvout, nvin, nvdd, and
nvdd (D, G, S, and B, respectively), is three times wider, which reduces the series resistance,
but increases the parasitic diffusion capacitances as the area and perimeter of the drain and
source regions go up.
Finally, the .lib line refers to the file that contains the transistor models.
M1 nvout nvin 0 0 nmos.1 W=0.375U L=0.25U
+AD=0.24P PD=1.625U AS=0.24P PS=1.625U NRS=1 NRD=1
M2 nvout nvin nvdd nvdd pmos.1 W=1.125U L=0.25U
+AD=0.7P PD=2.375U AS=0.7P PS=2.375U NRS=0.33 NRD=0.33
.lib 'c:\Design\Models\cmos025.l'
3.4 A Word on Process Variations
The preceding discussions have assumed that a device is adequately modeled by a single
set of parameters. In reality, the parameters of a transistor vary from wafer to wafer, or
even between transistors on the same die, depending upon the position. This observed ran-
dom distribution between supposedly identical devices is primarily the result of two fac-
tors:
1. Variations in the process parameters, such as impurity concentration densities, oxide
thicknesses, and diffusion depths, caused by nonuniform conditions during the dep-
osition and/or the diffusion of the impurities. These result in diverging values for
sheet resistances, and transistor parameters such as the threshold voltage.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 88 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
88 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
2. Variations in the dimensions of the devices, mainly resulting from the limited reso-
lution of the photolithographic process. This causes deviations in the (W/L) ratios of
MOS transistors and the widths of interconnect wires.
Observe that quite a number of these deviations are totally uncorrelated. For instance,
variations in the length of an MOS transistor are unrelated to variations in the threshold
voltage as both are set by different process steps. Below we examine the impact on some
of the parameters that determine the transistor current.
• The threshold voltage VT can vary for numerous reasons: changes in oxide thick-
ness, substrate, poly and implant impurity levels, and the surface charge. Accurate
control of the threshold voltage is an important goal for many reasons. Where in the
past thresholds could vary by as much as 50%, state-of-the-art digital processes
manage to control the thresholds to within 25-50 mV.
• k'n: The main cause for variations in the process transconductance is changes in
oxide thickness. Variations can also occur in the mobility but to a lesser degree.
• Variations in W and L. These are mainly caused by the lithographic process.
Observe that variations in W and L are totally uncorrelated since the first is deter-
mined in the field-oxide step, while the second is defined by the polysilicon defini-
tion and the source and drain diffusion processes.
The measurable impact of the process variations may be a substantial deviation of
the circuit behavior from the nominal or expected response, and this could be in either
positive or negative directions. This poses the designer for an important economic
dilemma. Assume, for instance, that you are supposed to design a microprocessor running
at a clock frequency of 500 MHz. It is economically important that the majority of the
manufactured dies meet that performance requirement. One way to achieve that goal is to
design the circuit assuming worst-case values for all possible device parameters. While
safe, this approach is prohibitively conservative and results in severely overdesigned and
hence uneconomical circuits.
To help the designer make a decision on how much margin to provide, the device
manufacturer commonly provides fast and slow device models in addition to the nominal
ones. These result in larger or smaller currents than expected, respectively.
Example 3.12 MOS Transistor Process Variations
To illustrate the possible impact of process variations on the performance of an MOS device,
consider a minimum-size NMOS device in our generic 0.25μm CMOS process. A later chap-
ter will establish that the speed of the device is proportional to the drain current that can be
delivered.
Assume initially that VGS = VDS = 2.5 V. From earlier simulations, we know that this
produces a drain current of 220 μA. The nominal model is now replaced by the fast and slow
models, that modify the length and width (±10%), threshold (±60 mV), and oxide thickness
(±5%) parameters of the device. Simulations produce the following data:
Fast: Id = 265 μA: +20%
Slow: Id = 182 μA: -17%
Let us now proceed one step further. The supply voltage delivered to a circuit is by no means
a constant either. For instance, the voltage delivered by a battery can drop off substantially

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 89 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.4 A Word on Process Variations 89
towards the end of its lifetime. In practice, a variation in 10% of the supply voltage may well
be expected.
Fast + Vdd = 2.75 V: Id = 302 μA: +37%
Slow + Vdd = 2.25 V: Id = 155 μA: -30%
The current levels and the associated circuit performance can thus vary by almost 100%
between the extreme cases. To guarantee that the fabricated circuits meet the performance
requirements under all circumstances, it is necessary to make the transistor 42%
(=220μA/155μA) wider then would be required in the nominal case. This translates into a
severe area penalty.
Fortunately, these worst- (or best-) case conditions occur only very rarely in reality.
The probability that all parameters assume their worst-case values simultaneously is very
low, and most designs will display a performance centered around the nominal design.
The art of the design for manufacturability is to center the nominal design so that the
majority of the fabricated circuits (e.g., 98%) will meet the performance specifications,
while keeping the area overhead minimal.
Specialized design tools to help meet this goal are available. For instance, the Monte
Carlo analysis approach [Jensen91] simulates a circuit over a wide range of randomly cho-
sen values for the device parameters. The result is a distribution plot of design parameters
(such as the speed or the sensitivity to noise) that can help to determine if the nominal
design is economically viable. Examples of such distribution plots, showing the impact of
variations in the effective transistor channel length and the PMOS transistor thresholds on
the speed of an adder cell, are shown in Figure 3.38. As can be observed, technology vari-
ations can have a substantial impact on the performance parameters of a design.
2.10
2.10
1.90
1.90
Delay (ns) Delay (ns)
1.70
1.70
1.50 1.50
1.10 1.20 1.30 1.40 1.50 1.60 –0.90 –0.80 –0.70 –0.60 –0.50
Leff (in mm) VTp (V)
Figure 3.38 Distribution plots of speed of adder circuit as a function of varying device parameters, as obtained
by a Monte Carlo analysis. The circuit is implemented in a 2μm (nominal) CMOS technology (courtesy of Eric
Boskin, UCB, and ATMEL corp.).
One important conclusion from the above discussion is that SPICE simulations
should be treated with care. The device parameters presented in a model represent average
values, measured over a batch of manufactured wafers. Actual implementations are bound
to differ from the simulation results, and for reasons other than imperfections in the mod-

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 90 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
90 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
eling approach. Be furthermore aware that temperature variations on the die can present
another source for parameter deviations. Optimizing an MOS circuit with SPICE to a res-
olution level of a picosecond or a microvolt is clearly a waste of effort.
3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling
Over the last decades, we have observed a spectacular increase in integration density and
computational complexity of digital integrated circuits. As already argued in the introduc-
tion, applications that were considered implausible yesterday are already forgotten today.
Underlying this revolution are the advances in device manufacturing technology that
allow for a steady reduction of the minimum feature size such as the minimum transistor
channel length realizable on a chip. To illustrate this point, we have plotted inFigure 3.39
the evolution of the (average) minimum device dimensions starting from the 1960s and
projecting into the 21st century. We observe a reduction rate of approximately 13% per
year, halving every 5 years. Another interesting observation is that no real sign of a slow-
down is in sight, and that the breathtaking pace will continue in the foreseeable future.
2
10
1
10
0
10
Figure 3.39 Evolution of (average) minimum channel
length of MOS transistors over time. Dots represent
-1
10 observed or projected (2000 and beyond) values. The
Minimum Feature Size (micron) continuous line represents a scaling scenario that
reduces the minimum feature with a factor 2 every 5
years.
-2
10
1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
Year
A pertinent question is how this continued reduction in feature size influences the
operating characteristics and properties of the MOS transistor, and indirectly the critical
digital design metrics such as switching frequency and power dissipation. A first-order
projection of this behavior is called a scaling analysis, and is the topic of this section. In
addition to the minimum device dimension, we have to consider the supply voltage as a
second independent variable in such a study. Different scaling scenarios result based on
how these two independent variables are varied with respect to each other [Dennard74,
Baccarani84].
Three different models are studied in Table 3.8. To make the results tractable, it is
assumed that all device dimensions scale by the same factorS (with S > 1 for a reduction
in size). This includes the width and length of the transistor, the oxide thickness, and the
junction depths. Similarly, we assume that all voltages, including the supply voltage and

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 91 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling 91
the threshold voltages, scale by a same ratioU. The relations governing the scaling behav-
ior of the dependent variables are tabulated in column 2. Observe that this analysis only
considers short-channel devices with a linear dependence between control voltage and sat-
uration current (as expressed by Eq. (3.39)). We discuss each scenario in turn.
Table 3.8 Scaling scenarios for short-channel devices.
Parameter Relation Full Scaling General Scaling Fixed-Voltage Scaling
W, L, tox 1/S 1/S 1/S
VDD, VT 1/S 1/U 1
2  2 2
NSUB V/Wdepl S S /U S
2  2  2
Area/Device WL 1/S 1/S 1/S
Cox 1/tox S S S
Cgate CoxWL 1/S 1/S 1/S
kn, kp CoxW/L S S S
Isat CoxWV 1/S 1/U 1
2 2
Current Density Isat/Area S S /U S
Ron V/Isat 1 1 1
Intrinsic Delay RonCgate 1/S 1/S 1/S
2  2 
P IsatV 1/S 1/U 1
2 2  2
Power Density P/Area 1 S /U S
Full Scaling (Constant Electrical Field Scaling)
In this ideal model, voltages and dimensions are scaled by the same factorS. The goal is to
keep the electrical field patterns in the scaled device identical to those in the original
device. Keeping the electrical fields constant ensures the physical integrity of the device
and avoids breakdown or other secondary effects. This scaling leads to greater device den-
sity (Area), higher performance (Intrinsic Delay), and reduced power consumption (P).
The effects of full scaling on the device and circuit parameters are summarized in the third
column of Table 3.8. We use the intrinsic time constant, which is the product of the gate
capacitance and the on-resistance, as a measure for the performance. The analysis shows
that the on-resistance remains constant due to the simultaneous scaling of voltage swing
and current level. The performance improved is solely due to the reduced capacitance. The
results clearly demonstrate the beneficial effects of scaling— the speed of the circuit
6
increases in a linear fashion, while the power/gate scales down quadratically!
6 
Some assumptions were made when deriving this table:
1. It is assumed that the carrier mobilities are not affected by the scaling.
2. The substrate doping Nsub is scaled so that the maximum depletion-layer width is reduced by a
factor S.
3. It is furthermore assumed that the delay of the device is mainly determined by the intrinsic
capacitance (the gate capacitance) and that other device capacitances, such as the diffusion
capacitances, scale appropriately. This assumption is approximately true for the full-scaling
case, but not for fixed-voltage scaling, whereCdiff scales as 1 ⁄ S .

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 92 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
92 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
Fixed-Voltage Scaling
In reality, full scaling is not a feasible option. First of all, to keep new devices compatible
with existing components, voltages cannot be scaled arbitrarily. Having to provide for
multiple supply voltages adds considerably to the cost of a system. As a result, voltages
have not been scaled down along with feature sizes, and designers adhere to well-defined
standards for supply voltages and signal levels. As is illustrated in Figure 3.40, 5 V was
the de facto standard for all digital components up to the early 1990s, and afixed-voltage
scaling model was followed.
Only with the introduction of the 0.5μm CMOS technology did new standards such
as 3.3 V and 2.5 V make an inroad. Today, a closer tracking between voltage and device
dimension can be observed.The reason for this change in operation model can partially be
5
4.5
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
Supply Voltage (V)
1.5
Figure 3.40 Evolution of min and max supply-
1
voltage in digital integrated circuits as a function
0.5 of feature size. All values for 0.15 micron and
0 -1
10 10 below are projected.
Minimum Feature Size (μm)
explained with the aid of the fixed-voltage scaling model, summarized in the fifth column
of Table 3.8. In a velocity-saturated device, keeping the voltage constant while scaling the
device dimensions does not give a performance advantage over the full-scaling model, but
instead comes with a major power penalty. The gain of an increased current is simply off-
set by the higher voltage level, and only hurts the power dissipation. This scenario is very
different from the situation that existed when transistors were operating in the long-chan-
nel mode, and the current was a quadratic function of the voltage (as per Eq. (3.29)).
Keeping the voltage constant under these circumstances gives a distinct performance
advantage, as it causes a net reduction in on-resistance.
While the above argumentation offers ample reason to scale the supply voltages
with the technology, other physical phenomena such as the hot-carrier effect and oxide
breakdown also contributed to making the fixed-voltage scaling model unsustainable.
Problem 3.2 Scaling of Long-channel Devices
Demonstrate that for a long-channel transistor, full-voltage scaling results in a reduction
2
of the intrinsic delay with a factorS , while increasing the power dissipation/device byS.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 93 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling 93
Reconstruct Table 3.8 assuming that the current is a quadratic function of the voltage (Eq.
(3.29)).
WARNING: The picture painted in the previous section represents a first-order model.
Increasing the supply voltage still offers somewhat of a performance benefit for short-
channel transistors. This is apparent in Figure 3.27 and Table 3.3, which show a reduction
of the equivalent on-resistance with increasing supply voltage — even for the high voltage
range. Yet, this effect, which is mostly due to the channel-length modulation, is secondary
and is far smaller than what would be obtained in case of long-channel devices.
The reader should keep this warning in the back of his mind throughout this scaling
study. The goal is to discover first-order trends. This implies ignoring second-order effects
such as mobility-degradation, series resistance, etc.
General Scaling
We observe in Figure 3.40 that the supply voltages, while moving downwards, are not
scaling as fast as the technology. For instance, for the technology scaling from 0.5μm to
0.1 μm, the maximum supply-voltage only reduces from 5 V to 1.5 V. The obvious ques-
tion is why not to stick to the full-scaling model, when keeping the voltage higher does not
yield any convincing benefits? This departure is motivated by the following argumenta-
tion:
• Some of the intrinsic device voltages such as the silicon bandgap and the built-in
junction potential, are material parameters and cannot be scaled.
• The scaling potential of the transistor threshold voltage is limited. Making the
threshold too low makes it difficult to turn off the device completely. This is aggra-
vated by the large process variation of the value of the threshold, even on the same
wafer.
Therefore, a more general scaling model is needed, where dimensions and voltages
are scaled independently. This general scaling model is shown in the fourth column of
Table 3.8. Here, device dimensions are scaled by a factorS, while voltages are reduced by
a factor U. When the voltage is held constant,U = 1, and the scaling model reduces to the
fixed-voltage model. Note that the general-scaling model offers a performance scenario
identical to the full- and the fixed scaling, while its power dissipation lies between the two
models (for S > U > 1).
Verifying the Model
To summarize this discussion on scaling, we have combined in Table 3.9 the characteris-
tics of some of the most recent CMOS processes and projections on some future ones.
Observe how the operating voltages are being continuously reduced with diminishing
device dimensions, while threshold voltages remain virtually constant. As predicted by the
scaling model, the maximum drive current remains approximately constant.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 94 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
94 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
Table 3.9 MOSFET technology projection (from [SIA97]).
Year of Introduction 1997 1999 2001 2003 2006 2009
Channel length (μm) 0.25 0.18 0.15 0.13 0.1 0.07
Gate oxide (nm) 4-5 3-4 2-3 2-3 1.5-2 < 1.5
VDD (V) 1.8-2.5 1.5-1.8 1.2-1.5 1.2-1.5 0.9-1.2 0.6-0.9
VT (V) 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4 0.4
NMOS/PMOS IDsat (nA/μm) 600/280 600/280 600/280 600/280 600/280 600/280
From the above, it is reasonable to conclude that both integration density and perfor-
mance will continue to increase. The obvious question is for how long? Experimental 25
nm CMOS devices have proven to be operational in the laboratories and to display current
characteristics that are surprisingly close to present-day transistors. These transistors,
while working along similar concepts as the current MOS devices, look very different
from the structures we are familiar with, and require some substantialdevice engineering.
For instance, Figure 3.41 shows a potential transistor structure, the folded channel dual-
gated transistor, which has proven to be operational up to very small channel lengths.
SiO2
Si
Figure 3.41 Folded dual-gated transistor with 25 nm channel length [Hu99].
Integrated circuits integrating more then one billion transistors clocked at speeds of
multiple GHz’s hence seem to be well under way. Whether this will actually happen is an
open question. Even though it might be technologically feasible, other parameters have an
equal impact on the feasibility of such an undertaking. A first doubt is if such a part can be
manufactured in an economical way. Current semiconductor plants cost over $5 billion,
and this price is expected to rise substantially with smaller feature sizes. Design consider-
ations also play a role. Power consumption of such a component might be prohibitive. The
growing role of interconnect parasitics might put an upper bound on performance. Finally,
system considerations might determine what level of integration is really desirable. All in
all, it is obvious that the design of semiconductor circuits still faces an exciting future.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 95 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.6 Summary 95
3.6 Summary
In this chapter, we have presented a a comprehensive overview of the operation of the
MOSFET transistor, the semiconductor device at the core of virtually all contemporary
digital integrated circuits. Besides an intuitive understanding of its behavior, we have pre-
sented a variety of modeling approaches ranging from simple models, useful for a first-
order manual analysis of the circuit operation, to complex SPICE models. These models
will be used extensively in later chapters, where we look at the fundamental building
blocks of digital circuits. We started off with a short discussion of the semiconductor
diode, one of the most dominant parasitic circuit elements in CMOS designs.
• The static behavior of the junction diode is well described by the ideal diode equa-
tion that states that the current is anexponential function of the applied voltage bias .
• In reverse-biased mode, the depletion-region space charge of the diode can be mod-
eled as a non-linear voltage-dependent capacitance. This is particularly important as
the omnipresent source-body and drain-body junctions of the MOS transistors all
operate in this mode. A linearized large-scale model for the depletion capacitance
was introduced for manual analysis.
• The MOS(FET) transistor is a voltage-controlled device, where the controlling gate
terminal is insulated from the conducting channel by a SiO2 capacitor. Based on the
value of the gate-source voltage with respect to a threshold voltageVT, three opera-
tion regions have been identified: cut-off, linear, and saturation. One of the most
enticing properties of the MOS transistor, which makes it particularly amenable to
digital design, is that it approximates a voltage-controlled switch: when the control
voltage is low, the switch is nonconducting (open); for a high control voltage, a con-
ducting channel is formed, and the switch can be considered closed. This two-state
operation matches the concepts of binary digital logic.
• The continuing reduction of the device dimensions to the submicron range has intro-
duced some substantial deviations from the traditional long-channel MOS transistor
model. The most important one is the velocity saturation effect, which changes the
dependence of the transistor current with respect to the controlling voltage from
quadratic to linear. Models for this effect as well as other second-order parasitics
have been introduced. One particular effect that is gaining in importance is thesub-
threshold conduction, which causes devices to conduct current even when the con-
trol voltage drops below the threshold.
• The dynamic operation of the MOS transistor is dominated by thedevice capacitors.
The main contributors are the gate capacitance and the capacitance formed by the
depletion regions of the source and drain junctions. The minimization of these
capacitances is the prime requirement in high-performance MOS design.
• SPICE models and their parameters have been introduced for all devices. It was
observed that these models represent an average behavior and can vary over a single
wafer or die.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 96 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
96 THE DEVICES Chapter 3
• The MOS transistor is expected to dominate the digital integrated circuit scene for
the next decade. Continued scaling will lead to device sizes of approximately 0.07
micron by the year 2010, and logic circuits integrating more than 1 billion transis-
tors on a die.
3.7 To Probe Further
Semiconductor devices have been discussed in numerous books, reprint volumes, tutori-
als, and journal articles. The IEEE Journal on Electron Devices is one of the prime jour-
nals, where most of the state-of-the-art devices and their modeling are discussed. The
books and journals referenced below contain excellent discussions of the semiconductor
devices of interest or refer to specific topics brought up in the course of this chapter.
REFERENCES
[Antognetti88] P. Antognetti and G. Masobrio (eds.),Semiconductor Device Modeling with SPICE,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Banzhaf92] W. Bhanzhaf, Computer Aided Analysis Using PSPICE, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1992.
[Chen90] J. Chen, CMOS Devices and Technology for VLSI , Prentice Hall, 1990.
[Gray69] P. Gray and C. Searle, Electronic Principles, John Wiley and Sons, 1969.
[Gray93] P. Gray and R. Meyer, Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits, 3rd ed., John
Wiley and Sons, 1993.
[Haznedar91] H. Haznedar, Digital Microelectronics, Benjamin/Cummings, 1991.
[Hodges88] D. Hodges and H. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, 2nd ed.,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Howe95] R. Howe and S. Sodini, Microelectronics: An Integrated Approach, Prentice Hall, 1995.
[Hu92] C. Hu, “IC Reliability Simulation,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.
241–246, March 1992.
[Hu93] C. Hu, “Future CMOS Scaling and Reliability,” IEEE Proceedings, vol. 81, no. 5, May
1993.
[Jensen91] G. Jensen et al., “Monte Carlo Simulation of Semiconductor Devices,”Computer Phys-
ics Communications, 67, pp. 1–61, August 1991.
[Ko89] P. Ko, “Approaches to Scaling,” in VLSI Electronics: Microstructure Science, vol. 18, chap-
ter 1, pp. 1–37, Academic Press, 1989.
[Muller86] R. Muller and T. Kamins, Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits, 2nd ed., John
Wiley and Sons, 1986.
[Nagel75] L. Nagel, “SPICE2: a Computer Program to Simulate Semiconductor Circuits,” Memo
ERL-M520, Dept. Elect. and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley, 1975.
[Sedra87] A. Sedra and K. Smith, Microelectronic Circuits, 2nd ed., Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1987.
[Sheu87] B. Sheu, D. Scharfetter, P. Ko, and M. Jeng, “BSIM: Berkeley Short-Channel IGFET
Model for MOS Transistors,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-22, no. 4, pp.
558–565, August 1987.

--- Page Break ---

chapter3.fm Page 97 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:50 PM
Section 3.8 Exercises and Design Problems 97
[Sze81] S. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, 1981.
[Thorpe92] T. Thorpe, Computerized Circuit Analysis with SPICE, John Wiley and Sons, 1992.
[Toh88] K. Toh, P. Koh, and R. Meyer, “An Engineering Model for Short-Channel MOS Devices,”
IEEE Journal of Solid-Sate Circuits, vol. 23. no. 4, pp 950–957, August 1988.
[Tsividis87] Y. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, McGraw-Hill, 1987.
[Yamaguchi88] T. Yamaguchi et al., “Process and Device Performance of a High-Speed Double
Poly-Si Bipolar Technology Using Borsenic-Poly Process with Coupling-Base Implant,”IEEE
Trans. Electron. Devices, vol. 35, no 8, pp. 1247–1255, August 1988.
[Weste93] N. Weste and K. Eshragian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems Perspective,
Addison-Wesley, 1993.
3.8 Exercises and Design Problems
For all problems, use the device parameters provided in Chapter 3 (XXX) and the inside back book
cover, unless otherwise mentioned. Also assume T = 300 K by default.
1. [E,SPICE,2.23]
a. Consider the circuit of Figure 3.42. Using the simple model, with VDon = 0.7 V, solve for
ID.
–14 
b. Find ID and VD using the ideal diode equation. Use Is = 10 A and T = 300 K.
c. Solve for VD1, VD2, and ID using SPICE.
–16  –14
d. Repeat parts b and c using IS = 10 A, T = 300K, and IS = 10 A, T = 350 K.
R1 = 2 kW
+ ID R2 = 2 kW
5 V +
– VD
–
Figure 3.42 Resistor diode circuit.
2
2. [M, None, 2.2.3] For the circuit in Figure 3.43,Vs = 3.3 V. Assume AD = 12 μm , φ0 = 0.65 V,
and m = 0.5. NA = 2.5 E16 and ND = 5 E15.
a. Find ID and VD.
b. Is the diode forward- or reverse-biased?
c. Find the depletion region width,Wj, of the diode.
d. Use the parallel-plate model to find the junction capacitance,Cj.
e. Set Vs = 1.5 V. Again using the parallel-plate model, explain qualitatively whyCj
increases.
3. [E, SPICE, 2.3.2] Figure 3.44 shows NMOS and PMOS devices with drains, source, and gate
ports annotated. Determine the mode of operation (saturation, triode, or cutoff) and drain cur-
rent ID for each of the biasing configurations given below. Verify with SPICE. Use the fol-
2 –1
lowing transistor data: NMOS: k'n = 60 μA/V , VT0 = 0.7 V, λ = 0.1 V , PMOS: k'p = 20
2 –1
μA/V , VT0 = –0.8 V, λ = 0.1 V . Assume (W/L) = 1.
a. NMOS: VGS = 3.3 V, VDS = 3.3 V. PMOS: VGS = –0.5 V, VDS = –1.5 V.

--- Page Break ---

2 CONTENTS
1.5 To Probe Further
1.6 Exercises
Chapter 2: The Manufacturing Process (30 pages)
2.1 Introduction
2.2 The CMOS Manufacturing Process
2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between Designer and Process Engineer
2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits
2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology
2.6 Summary
2.7 To Probe Further
2.8 Exercises and Design Problems
Design Methodology Insert A: Design Layout and Design Rule Verification (6 pages)
Chapter 3: The Devices (52 pages)
3.1 Introduction
3.2 The Diode
3.2.1 A First Glance at the Diode — The Depletion Region
3.2.2 Static Behavior
3.2.3 Dynamic, or Transient, Behavior
3.2.4 The Actual Diode—Secondary Effects
3.2.5 The SPICE Diode Model
3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor
3.3.1 A First Glance at the Device
3.3.2 The MOS Transistor under Static Conditions
3.3.3 Dynamic Behavior
3.3.4 The Actual MOS Transistor—Some Secondary Effects
3.3.5 SPICE Models for the MOS Transistor
3.4 A Word on Process Variations
3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling
3.6 Summary
3.7 To Probe Further
3.8 Exercises and Design Problems
Design Methodology Insert B: Device Models and Circuit Simulation (6 pages)
Chapter 4: The Wire (40 pages)
4.1 Introduction
4.2 A First Glance
4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance
4.3.1 Capacitance
4.3.2 Resistance
4.3.3 Inductance
4.4 Electrical Wire Models

--- Page Break ---

CONTENTS 3
4.4.1 The Ideal Wire
4.4.2 The Lumped Model
4.4.3 The Lumped RC model
4.4.4 The Distributed rc Line
4.4.5 The Transmission Line
4.5 SPICE Wire Models
4.5.1 Distributed rc Lines in SPICE
4.5.2 Transmission Line Models in SPICE
4.6 Perspective: A Look into the Future
4.7 Summary
4.8 To Probe Further
4.9 Exercises and Design Problems
PART II: A CIRCUIT PERSPECTIVE
Chapter 5: The Static CMOS Inverter (47 pages)
5.1 Introduction
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior
5.3.1 Switching Threshold
5.3.2 Noise Margins
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order Analysis
5.4.3 Propagation Delay Revisited
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
5.5.2 Static Consumption
5.5.3 Putting It All Together
5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using SPICE
5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter Metrics
5.7 Summary
5.8 To Probe Further
5.9 Exercises and Design Problems
Chapter 6: Designing Combinational Logic Gates in CMOS (64 pages)
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Static CMOS Design
6.2.1 Complementary CMOS
6.2.2 Ratioed Logic
6.2.3 Pass-Transistor Logic
6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design
6.3.1 Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles
6.3.2 Speed and Power Dissipation of Dynamic Logic

--- Page Break ---

4 CONTENTS
6.3.3 Issues in Dynamic Design
6.3.4 Cascading Dynamic Gates
6.4 How to Choose a Logic Style?
6.5 Perspective: Gate Design in the Ultra Deep-Submicorn Era
6.6 Summary
6.7 To Probe Further
Design Methodology Insert C: Gate-Level Design and Analysis of Digital Circuits (10 pages)
Chapter 7: Designing Sequential Logic Circuits (46 pages)
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Timing Metrics for Sequential Circuits
7.3 Classification of Memory Elements
7.4 Static Latches and Registers
7.4.1 The Bistability Principle
7.4.2 SR Flip-Flops
7.4.3 Multiplexer-Based Latches
7.4.4 Master-Slave Based Edge Triggered Register
7.4.5 Non-ideal clock signals
7.4.6 Low-Voltage Static Latches
7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers
7.5.1 Dynamic Transmission-Gate Based Edge-triggred Registers
7.5.2 C2MOS Dynamic Register: A Clock Skew Insensitive Approach
7.5.3 True Single-Phase Clocked Register (TSPCR)
7.6 Pulse Registers
7.7 Sense-Amplifier Based Registers (Consolidate with 7.6 under “other registers?”)
7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits
7.8.1 Latch- vs. Register-Based Pipelines
7.8.2 NORA-CMOS—A Logic Style for Pipelined Structures
7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits
7.9.1 The Schmitt Trigger
7.9.2 Monostable Sequential Circuits
7.9.3 Oscillators
7.10 Perspective: Choosing a Clocking Strategy
7.11 Summary
7.12 To Probe Further
7.13 Exercises and Design Problems
Design Methodology Insert D: Timing Analysis and Verification (8-10 pages)
Chapter 8: Dealing with Interconnect (45 pages)
8.1 Introduction
8.2 Capacitive Parasitics
8.2.1 Capacitance and Reliability—Cross Talk
8.2.2 Capacitance and Performance in CMOS

--- Page Break ---

CONTENTS 5
8.3 Resistive Parasitics
8.3.1 Resistance and Reliability—Ohmic Voltage Drop
8.3.2 Electromigration
8.3.3 Resistance and Performance—RC Delay
8.4 Inductive Parasitics
8.4.1 Inductance and Reliability— Voltage Drop
8.4.2 Inductance and Performance—Transmission Line Effects
8.5 Perspective: When to Consider Interconnect Parasitics
8.6 Chapter Summary
8.7 To Probe Further
8.8 Exercises and Design Problems
Design Methodology Insert E: Interconnect modeling and analysis (6 pages)
PART III: A SYSTEM PERSPECTIVE
Chapter 9: Designing Complex Digital Integrated Circuits (40 pages)
9.1 Introduction
9.2 The Standard-cell Design Approach
9.3 Array-based Design
9.4 Configurable and Reconfigurable Design
9.5 Perspective: Facing the Increasing Design Complexity
9.6 Summary
9.7 To Probe Further
9.8 Exercises and Design Problems
Chapter 10: Timing Issues in Digital Circuits (55 pages)
10.1 Introduction - Classification of Timing Approaches
10.2 Synchronous systems
10.3. Impact of clock variation on performance
10.4. Clock Distribution Basics
10.5. Performance and Power Optimization in Synchronous Design
10.6. Asynchronous Design
10.7.The Asynchronous-synchronous Interface
10.8. Clock Signal Generation
10.9 Perspective: Alternative Synchronization Approaches
10.10 Summary
10.11 To Probe Further
10.12 Exercises and Design Problems
Chapter 11: Designing Arithmetic Building Blocks (50 pages)
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Datapaths in Digital Processor Architectures
9.3 The Adder
9.3.1 The Binary Adder: Definitions

--- Page Break ---

6 CONTENTS
9.3.2 The Full Adder: Circuit Design Considerations
9.3.3 The Binary Adder: Logic Design Considerations
9.4 The Multiplier
9.4.1 The Multiplier: Definitions
9.4.2 The Array Multiplier
9.4.3 Other Multiplier Structures
9.5 The Shifter
9.5.1 Barrel Shifter
9.5.2 Logarithmic Shifter
9.6 Other Arithmetic Operators
9.7 Performance and Power Optimizations in Datapath Structures
9.8 Perspective: Design as a Trade-off
9.9 Summary
9.10 To Probe Further
9.11 Exercises and Design Problems
Chapter 12: Designing Memory Arrays (70 pages)
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Semiconductor Memories—An Introduction
10.2.1 Memory Classification
10.2.2 Memory Architectures and Building Blocks
10.3 The Memory Core
10.3.1 Read-Only Memories
10.3.2 Nonvolatile Read-Write Memories
10.3.3 Read-Write Memories (RAM)
10.4 Memory Peripheral Circuitry
10.4.1 The Address Decoders
10.4.2 Sense Amplifiers
10.4.3 Drivers/Buffers
10.4.4 Timing and Control
10.5 Memory Reliability and Yield
10.5.1 Signal-To-Noise Ratio
10.5.2 Memory yield
10.6 Case Studies in Memory Design
10.6.1 The Programmable Logic Array (PLA)
10.6.2 A 4 Mbit SRAM
10.7 Perspective: Semiconductor Memory Trends and Evolutions
10.8 Summary
10.9 To Probe Further
10.10 Exercises and Design Problems
Design Methodology Insert F: Chip Floorplanning (8 pages)
Chapter 13: Connecting to the Outside World (15-20 pages)
This also presents mostly new material. It addresses the following topics:
- pad design, ESD, guard rings, latchup

--- Page Break ---

CONTENTS 7
- off-chip signaling: termination, current versus voltage mode,
high-speed serial links,
Design Methodology Insert G: Validation and Test of Manufactured Circuits (8 pages)
G.1 Test Procedure
G.2 Design for Testability
G.3 Test-Pattern Generation
Problem Solutions
Index

--- Page Break ---

1 Table Of Contents
Digital Integrated Circuits—
A Design Perspective (2nd Ed)
Table of Contents
PREFACE
PART I. THE FOUNDATIONS
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
1.1 A Historical Perspective
1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design
1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design
1.3.1 Cost of an Integrated Circuit
1.3.2 Functionality and Robustness
1.3.3 Performance
1.3.4 Power and Energy Consumption
1.4 Summary
1.5 To Probe Further
Chapter 2: THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits
2.2.1 The Silicon Wafer
2.2.2 Photolithography
2.2.3 Some Recurring Process Steps
2.2.4 Simplified CMOS Process Flow
2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between Designer and Process Engineer
2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits
2.4.1 Package Materials
2.4.2 Interconnect Levels
2.4.3 Thermal Considerations in Packaging

--- Page Break ---

DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 2
2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology
2.5.1 Short-Term Developments
2.5.2 In the Longer Term
2.6 Summary
2.7 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT A: IC LAYOUT
CHPATER 3: THE DEVICES
3.1 Introduction
3.2 The Diode
3.2.1 A First Glance at the Diode — The Depletion Region
3.2.2 Static Behavior
3.2.3 Dynamic, or Transient, Behavior
3.2.4 The Actual Diode—Secondary Effects
3.2.5 The SPICE Diode Model
3.3 The MOS(FET) Transistor
3.3.1 A First Glance at the Device
3.3.2 The MOS Transistor under Static Conditions
3.3.3 Dynamic Behavior
3.3.4 The Actual MOS Transistor—Some Secondary Effects
3.3.5 SPICE Models for the MOS Transistor
3.4 A Word on Process Variations
3.5 Perspective: Technology Scaling
3.6 Summary
3.7 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT B: CIRCUIT SIMULATION
CHAPTER 4: THE WIRE
4.1 Introduction
4.2 A First Glance
4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance

--- Page Break ---

3 Table Of Contents
4.3.1 Capacitance
4.3.2 Resistance
4.3.3 Inductance
4.4 Electrical Wire Models
4.4.1 The Ideal Wire
4.4.2 The Lumped Model
4.4.3 The Lumped RC model
4.4.4 The Distributed rc Line
4.4.5 The Transmission Line
4.5 SPICE Wire Models
4.5.1 Distributed rc Lines in SPICE
4.5.2 Transmission Line Models in SPICE
4.6 Perspective: A Look into the Future
4.7 Summary
4.8 To Probe Further
PART II. A CIRCUIT PERSPECTIVE
Chapter 5: THE CMOS INVERTER
5.1 Introduction
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior
5.3.1 Switching Threshold
5.3.2 Noise Margins
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order Analysis
5.4.3 Propagation Delay from a Design Perspective
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
5.5.2 Static Consumption
5.5.3 Putting It All Together
5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using SPICE

--- Page Break ---

DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 4
5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter Metrics
5.7 Summary
5.8 To Probe Further
CHAPTER 6: DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Static CMOS Design
6.2.1 Complementary CMOS
6.2.2 Ratioed Logic
6.2.3 Pass-Transistor Logic
6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design
6.3.1 Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles
6.3.2 Speed and Power Dissipation of Dynamic Logic
6.3.3 Issues in Dynamic Design
6.3.4 Cascading Dynamic Gates
6.4 Perspectives
6.4.1 How to Choose a Logic Style?
6.4.2 Designing Logic for Reduced Supply Voltages
6.5 Summary
6.6 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT C: HOW TO SIMULATE COMPLEX
LOGIC GATES
C.1 Representing Digital Data as a Continuous Entity
C.2 Representing Data as a Discrete Entity
C.3 Using Higher-Level Data Models
C.4 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT D: LAYOUT TECHNIQUES FOR
COMPLEX GATES

--- Page Break ---

5 Table Of Contents
CHAPTER 7: DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS
7.1 Introduction
7.1.1 Timing Metrics for Sequential Circuits
7.1.2 Classification of Memory Elements
7.2 Static Latches and Registers
7.2.1 The Bistability Principle
7.2.2 Multiplexer-Based Latches
7.2.3 Master-Slave Edge-Triggered Register
7.2.4 Low-Voltage Static Latches
7.2.5 Static SR Flip-Flops—Writing Data by Pure Force
7.3 Dynamic Latches and Registers
7.3.1 Dynamic Transmission-Gate Edge-triggered Registers
7.3.2 C2MOS—A Clock-Skew Insensitive Approach
7.3.3 True Single-Phase Clocked Register (TSPCR)
7.4 Alternative Register Styles*
7.4.1 Pulse Registers
7.4.2 Sense-Amplifier Based Registers
7.5 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits
7.5.1 Latch- vs. Register-Based Pipelines
7.5.2 NORA-CMOS—A Logic Style for Pipelined Structures
7.6 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits
7.6.1 The Schmitt Trigger
7.6.2 Monostable Sequential Circuits
7.6.3 Astable Circuits
7.7 Perspective: Choosing a Clocking Strategy
7.8 Summary
7.9 To Probe Further

--- Page Break ---

DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 6
PART III. A SYSTEM PERSPECTIVE
CHAPTER 8: IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGIES FOR DIGITAL ICS
8.1 Introduction
8.2 From Custom to Semicustom and Structured Array Design Approaches
8.3 Custom Circuit Design
8.4 Cell-Based Design Methodology
8.4.1 Standard Cell
8.4.2 Compiled Cells
8.4.3 Macrocells, Megacells and Intellectual Property
8.4.4 Semi-Custom Design Flow
8.5 Array-Based Implementation Approaches
8.5.1 Pre-diffused (or Mask-Programmable) Arrays
8.5.2 Pre-wired Arrays
8.6 Perspective—The Implementation Platform of the Future
8.7 Summary
8.8 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT E: CHARACTERIZING LOGIC AND
SEQUENTIAL CELLS
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT F: DESIGN SYNTHESIS
CHAPTER 9: COPING WITH INTERCONNECT
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Capacitive Parasitics
9.2.1 Capacitance and Reliability—Cross Talk
9.2.2 Capacitance and Performance in CMOS
9.3 Resistive Parasitics
9.3.1 Resistance and Reliability—Ohmic Voltage Drop
9.3.2 Electromigration
9.3.3 Resistance and Performance—RC Delay
9.4 Inductive Parasitics

--- Page Break ---

7 Table Of Contents
9.4.1 Inductance and Reliability— Voltage Drop
9.4.2 Inductance and Performance—Transmission Line Effects
9.5 Advanced Interconnect Techniques
9.5.1 Reduced-Swing Circuits
9.5.2 Current-Mode Transmission Techniques
9.6 Perspective: Networks-on-a-Chip
9.7 Chapter Summary
9.8 To Probe Further
CHAPTER 10: TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS
10.1 Introduction
10.2 Timing Classification of Digital Systems
10.2.1 Synchronous Interconnect
10.2.2 Mesochronous interconnect
10.2.3 Plesiochronous Interconnect
10.2.4 Asynchronous Interconnect9
10.3 Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective
10.3.1 Synchronous Timing Basics
10.3.2 Sources of Skew and Jitter
10.3.3 Clock-Distribution Techniques
10.3.4 Latch-Based Clocking *
10.4 Self-Timed Circuit Design*
10.4.1 Self-Timed Logic - An Asynchronous Technique
10.4.2 Completion-Signal Generation
10.4.3 Self-Timed Signaling
10.4.4 Practical Examples of Self-Timed Logic
10.5 Synchronizers and Arbiters*
10.5.1 Synchronizers—Concept and Implementation
10.5.2 Arbiters
10.6 Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop
10.6.1 Basic Concept
10.6.2 Building Blocks of a PLL
10.7 Future Directions and Perspectives
10.7.1 Distributed Clocking Using DLLs

--- Page Break ---

DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 8
10.7.2 Optical Clock Distribution
10.7.3 Synchronous versus Asynchronous Design
10.8 Summary
10.9 To Probe Further
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT G: DESIGN VERIFICATION
CHAPTER 11: DESIGNING ARITHMETIC BUILDING BLOCKS
11.1 Introduction
11.2 Datapaths in Digital Processor Architectures
11.3 The Adder
11.3.1 The Binary Adder: Definitions
11.3.2 The Full Adder: Circuit Design Considerations
11.3.3 The Binary Adder: Logic Design Considerations
11.4 The Multiplier
11.4.1 The Multiplier: Definitions
11.4.2 Partial-Product Generation
11.4.3 Partial Product Accumulation
11.4.4 Final Addition
11.4.5 Multiplier Summary
11.5 The Shifter
11.5.1 Barrel Shifter
11.5.2 Logarithmic Shifter
11.6 Other Arithmetic Operators
11.7 Power and Speed Trade-off’s in Datapath Structures
11.7.1 Design Time Power-Reduction Techniques
11.7.2 Run-Time Power Management
11.7.3 Reducing the Power in Standby (or Sleep) Mode
11.8 Perspective: Design as a Trade-off
11.9 Summary
11.10 To Probe Further

--- Page Break ---

9 Table Of Contents
CHAPTER 12: DESIGNING MEMORY AND ARRAY STRUCTURES
12.1 Introduction
12.1.1 Memory Classification
12.1.2 Memory Architectures and Building Blocks
12.2 The Memory Core
12.2.1 Read-Only Memories
12.2.2 Nonvolatile Read-Write Memories
12.2.3 Read-Write Memories (RAM)
12.2.4 Contents-Addressable or Associative Memory (CAM)
12.3 Memory Peripheral Circuitry
12.3.1 The Address Decoders
12.3.2 Sense Amplifiers
12.3.3 Voltage References
12.3.4 Drivers/Buffers
12.3.5 Timing and Control
12.4 Memory Reliability and Yield
12.4.1 Signal-To-Noise Ratio
12.4.2 Memory yield
12.5 Power Dissipation in Memories
12.5.1 Sources of Power Dissipation in Memories
12.5.2 Partitioning of the memory
12.5.3 Addressing the Active Power Dissipation
12.5.4 Data-retention dissipation
12.5.5 Summary
12.6 Case Studies in Memory Design
12.6.1 The Programmable Logic Array (PLA)
12.6.2 A 4 Mbit SRAM
12.6.3 A 1 Gbit NAND Flash Memory
12.7 Perspective: Semiconductor Memory Trends and Evolutions
12.8 Summary
12.9 To Probe Further

--- Page Break ---

DIGITAL INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 10
DESIGN METHODOLOGY INSERT H: VALIDATION AND TEST OF
MANUFACTURED CIRCUITS
H.1 Introduction
H.2 Test Procedure
H.3 Design for Testability
H.3.1 Issues in Design for Testability
H.3.2 Ad Hoc Testing
H.3.3 Scan-Based Test
H.3.4 Boundary-Scan Design
H.3.5 Built-in Self-Test (BIST)
H.4 Test-Pattern Generation
H.4.1 Fault Models
H.4.2 Automatic Test-Pattern Generation (ATPG)
H.4.3 Fault Simulation
H.5 To Probe Further
INDEX

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 9 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
C H A P T E R
1
I N T R O D U C T I O N
The evolution of digital circuit design
n
Compelling issues in digital circuit design
n
How to measure the quality of a design
n
Valuable references
1.1 A Historical Perspective
1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design
1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design
1.4 Summary
1.5 To Probe Further
9

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 10 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
10 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
1.1 A Historical Perspective
The concept of digital data manipulation has made a dramatic impact on our society. One
has long grown accustomed to the idea of digital computers. Evolving steadily from main-
frame and minicomputers, personal and laptop computers have proliferated into daily life.
More significant, however, is a continuous trend towards digital solutions in all other
areas of electronics. Instrumentation was one of the first noncomputing domains where the
potential benefits of digital data manipulation over analog processing were recognized.
Other areas such as control were soon to follow. Only recently have we witnessed the con-
version of telecommunications and consumer electronics towards the digital format.
Increasingly, telephone data is transmitted and processed digitally over both wired and
wireless networks. The compact disk has revolutionized the audio world, and digital video
is following in its footsteps.
The idea of implementing computational engines using an encoded data format is by
no means an idea of our times. In the early nineteenth century, Babbage envisioned large-
scale mechanical computing devices, called Difference Engines [Swade93]. Although
these engines use the decimal number system rather than the binary representation now
common in modern electronics, the underlying concepts are very similar. The Analytical
Engine, developed in 1834, was perceived as a general-purpose computing machine, with
features strikingly close to modern computers. Besides executing the basic repertoire of
operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) in arbitrary sequences, the
machine operated in a two-cycle sequence, called “store” and “mill” (execute), similar to
current computers. It even used pipelining to speed up the execution of the addition opera-
tion! Unfortunately, the complexity and the cost of the designs made the concept impracti-
cal. For instance, the design of Difference Engine I (part of which is shown in Figure 1.1)
required 25,000 mechanical parts at a total cost of £17,470 (in 1834!).
Figure 1.1 Working part of Babbage’s
Difference Engine I (1832), the first known
automatic calculator (from [Swade93],
courtesy of the Science Museum of
London).

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 11 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.1 A Historical Perspective 11
The electrical solution turned out to be more cost effective. Early digital electronics
systems were based on magnetically controlled switches (or relays). They were mainly
used in the implementation of very simple logic networks. Examples of such are train
safety systems, where they are still being used at present. The age of digital electronic
computing only started in full with the introduction of the vacuum tube. While originally
used almost exclusively for analog processing, it was realized early on that the vacuum
tube was useful for digital computations as well. Soon complete computers were realized.
The era of the vacuum tube based computer culminated in the design of machines such as
the ENIAC (intended for computing artillery firing tables) and the UNIVAC I (the first
successful commercial computer). To get an idea about integration density, the ENIAC
was 80 feet long, 8.5 feet high and several feet wide and incorporated 18,000 vacuum
tubes. It became rapidly clear, however, that this design technology had reached its limits.
Reliability problems and excessive power consumption made the implementation of larger
engines economically and practically infeasible.
All changed with the invention of the transistor at Bell Telephone Laboratories in
1947 [Bardeen48], followed by the introduction of the bipolar transistor by Schockley in
1
1949 [Schockley49] . It took till 1956 before this led to the first bipolar digital logic gate,
introduced by Harris [Harris56], and even more time before this translated into a set of
integrated-circuit commercial logic gates, called the Fairchild Micrologic family
[Norman60]. The first truly successful IC logic family, TTL (Transistor-Transistor Logic)
was pioneered in 1962 [Beeson62]. Other logic families were devised with higher perfor-
mance in mind. Examples of these are the current switching circuits that produced the first
subnanosecond digital gates and culminated in the ECL (Emitter-Coupled Logic) family
[Masaki74]. TTL had the advantage, however, of offering a higher integration density and
was the basis of the first integrated circuit revolution. In fact, the manufacturing of TTL
components is what spear-headed the first large semiconductor companies such as Fair-
child, National, and Texas Instruments. The family was so successful that it composed the
largest fraction of the digital semiconductor market until the 1980s.
Ultimately, bipolar digital logic lost the battle for hegemony in the digital design
world for exactly the reasons that haunted the vacuum tube approach: the large power con-
sumption per gate puts an upper limit on the number of gates that can be reliably integrated
on a single die, package, housing, or box. Although attempts were made to develop high
2
integration density, low-power bipolar families (such as I L—Integrated Injection Logic
[Hart72]), the torch was gradually passed to the MOS digital integrated circuit approach.
The basic principle behind the MOSFET transistor (originally called IGFET) was
proposed in a patent by J. Lilienfeld (Canada) as early as 1925, and, independently, by O.
Heil in England in 1935. Insufficient knowledge of the materials and gate stability prob-
lems, however, delayed the practical usability of the device for a long time. Once these
were solved, MOS digital integrated circuits started to take off in full in the early 1970s.
Remarkably, the first MOS logic gates introduced were of the CMOS variety
[Wanlass63], and this trend continued till the late 1960s. The complexity of the manufac-
turing process delayed the full exploitation of these devices for two more decades. Instead,
1 
An intriguing overview of the evolution of digital integrated circuits can be found in [Murphy93].
(Most of the data in this overview has been extracted from this reference). It is accompanied by some of the his-
torically ground-breaking publications in the domain of digital IC’s.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 12 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
12 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
the first practical MOS integrated circuits were implemented in PMOS-only logic and
were used in applications such as calculators. The second age of the digital integrated cir-
cuit revolution was inaugurated with the introduction of the first microprocessors by Intel
in 1972 (the 4004) [Faggin72] and 1974 (the 8080) [Shima74]. These processors were
implemented in NMOS-only logic, which has the advantage of higher speed over the
PMOS logic. Simultaneously, MOS technology enabled the realization of the first high-
density semiconductor memories. For instance, the first 4Kbit MOS memory was intro-
duced in 1970 [Hoff70].
These events were at the start of a truly astounding evolution towards ever higher
integration densities and speed performances, a revolution that is still in full swing right
now. The road to the current levels of integration has not been without hindrances, how-
ever. In the late 1970s, NMOS-only logic started to suffer from the same plague that made
high-density bipolar logic unattractive or infeasible: power consumption. This realization,
combined with progress in manufacturing technology, finally tilted the balance towards
the CMOS technology, and this is where we still are today. Interestingly enough, power
consumption concerns are rapidly becoming dominant in CMOS design as well, and this
time there does not seem to be a new technology around the corner to alleviate the
problem.
Although the large majority of the current integrated circuits are implemented in the
MOS technology, other technologies come into play when very high performance is at
stake. An example of this is the BiCMOS technology that combines bipolar and MOS
devices on the same die. BiCMOS is used in high-speed memories and gate arrays. When
even higher performance is necessary, other technologies emerge besides the already men-
tioned bipolar silicon ECL family—Gallium-Arsenide, Silicon-Germanium and even
superconducting technologies. These technologies only play a very small role in the over-
all digital integrated circuit design scene. With the ever increasing performance of CMOS,
this role is bound to be further reduced with time. Hence the focus of this textbook on
CMOS only.
1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design
Integration density and performance of integrated circuits have gone through an astound-
ing revolution in the last couple of decades. In the 1960s, Gordon Moore, then with Fair-
child Corporation and later cofounder of Intel, predicted that the number of transistors that
can be integrated on a single die would grow exponentially with time. This prediction,
later called Moore’s law, has proven to be amazingly visionary [Moore65]. Its validity is
best illustrated with the aid of a set of graphs. Figure 1.2 plots the integration density of
both logic IC’s and memory as a function of time. As can be observed, integration com-
plexity doubles approximately every 1 to 2 years. As a result, memory density has
increased by more than a thousandfold since 1970.
An intriguing case study is offered by the microprocessor. From its inception in the
early seventies, the microprocessor has grown in performance and complexity at a steady
and predictable pace. The transistor counts for a number of landmark designs are collected
in Figure 1.3. The million-transistor/chip barrier was crossed in the late eighties. Clock
frequencies double every three years and have reached into the GHz range. This is illus-

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 13 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design 13
64 Gbits64 Gbits
**0.08μm0.08μm
10101010
Human memoryHuman memory
Human memoryHuman memory
101099 Human DNAHuman DNAHuman DNAHuman DNA 4 Gbits4 Gbits  0.15μm0.15μm
1 Gbits1 Gbits  0.15-0.2μm0.15-0.2μm
101088
256 Mbits256 Mbits  0.25-0.3μm0.25-0.3μm
101077
64 Mbits64 Mbits  0.35-0.4μm0.35-0.4μm
66
1010 BookBookBookBook 16 Mbits16 Mbits  0.5-0.6μm0.5-0.6μm
101055 4 Mbits4 Mbits  0.7-0.8μm0.7-0.8μm
Number of bits per chipNumber of bits per chip1 Mbits1 Mbits  1.0-1.2μm1.0-1.2μm
101044
256 Kbits256 Kbits  1.6-2.4μm1.6-2.4μm EncyclopediaEncyclopediaEncyclopediaEncyclopedia
2 hrs CD Audio2 hrs CD Audio
2 hrs CD Audio2 hrs CD Audio
30 sec HDTV30 sec HDTV
64 Kbits64 Kbits 30 sec HDTV30 sec HDTV
PagePage
PagePage
19701970  19801980  19901990  20002000  20102010
YearYear
(a) Trends in logic IC complexity (b) Trends in memory complexity
Figure 1.2 Evolution of integration complexity of logic ICs and memories as a function of time.
trated in Figure 1.4, which plots the microprocessor trends in terms of performance at the
st 
beginning of the 21 century. An important observation is that, as of now, these trends
have not shown any signs of a slow-down.
It should be no surprise to the reader that this revolution has had a profound impact
on how digital circuits are designed. Early designs were truly hand-crafted. Every transis-
tor was laid out and optimized individually and carefully fitted into its environment. This
is adequately illustrated in Figure 1.5a, which shows the design of the Intel 4004 micro-
processor. This approach is, obviously, not appropriate when more than a million devices
have to be created and assembled. With the rapid evolution of the design technology,
time-to-market is one of the crucial factors in the ultimate success of a component.
100000000100000000
Pentium 4Pentium 4
Pentium IIIPentium III
1000000010000000
Pentium IIPentium II
  Pentium ®Pentium ®
10000001000000 486486
386386
100000100000 286 ™286 ™
TransistorsTransistors
80868086
1000010000
80808080
40044004
80088008
10001000
19701970  19751975  19801980  19851985  19901990  19951995  20002000
Year of IntroductionYear of Introduction
Figure 1.3 Historical evolution of microprocessor transistor count (from [Intel01]).

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 14 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
14 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
1000010000
Doubles everyDoubles every
10001000 2 years2 years
P6P6
100100
Pentium ® procPentium ® proc
486486
1010 386386
286286
80868086
80858085
Frequency (Mhz)Frequency (Mhz)
11 80808080
80088008
40044004
0.10.1
19701970  19801980  19901990  20002000  20102010 Figure 1.4 Microprocessor performance
trends at the beginning of the 21st century.
YearYear
Designers have, therefore, increasingly adhered to rigid design methodologies and strate-
gies that are more amenable to design automation. The impact of this approach is apparent
from the layout of one of the later Intel microprocessors, the Pentium® 4, shown in Figure
1.5b. Instead of the individualized approach of the earlier designs, a circuit is constructed
in a hierarchical way: a processor is a collection of modules, each of which consists of a
number of cells on its own. Cells are reused as much as possible to reduce the design effort
and to enhance the chances for a first-time-right implementation. The fact that this hierar-
chical approach is at all possible is the key ingredient for the success of digital circuit
design and also explains why, for instance, very large scale analog design has never
caught on.
The obvious next question is why such an approach is feasible in the digital world
and not (or to a lesser degree) in analog designs. The crucial concept here, and the most
important one in dealing with the complexity issue, is abstraction. At each design level,
the internal details of a complex module can be abstracted away and replaced by a black
box view or model. This model contains virtually all the information needed to deal with
the block at the next level of hierarchy. For instance, once a designer has implemented a
multiplier module, its performance can be defined very accurately and can be captured in a
model. The performance of this multiplier is in general only marginally influenced by the
way it is utilized in a larger system. For all purposes, it can hence be considered a black
box with known characteristics. As there exists no compelling need for the system
designer to look inside this box, design complexity is substantially reduced. The impact of
this divide and conquer approach is dramatic. Instead of having to deal with a myriad of
elements, the designer has to consider only a handful of components, each of which are
characterized in performance and cost by a small number of parameters.
This is analogous to a software designer using a library of software routines such as
input/output drivers. Someone writing a large program does not bother to look inside those
library routines. The only thing he cares about is the intended result of calling one of those
modules. Imagine what writing software programs would be like if one had to fetch every
bit individually from the disk and ensure its correctness instead of relying on handy “file
open” and “get string” operators.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 15 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design 15
(a) The 4004 microprocessor
Standard Cell Module
Memory Module
(b) The Pentium ® 4 microprocessor
Figure 1.5 Comparing the design methodologies of the Intel 4004 (1971) and Pentium ® 4 (2000
microprocessors (reprinted with permission from Intel).

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 16 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
16 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
Typically used abstraction levels in digital circuit design are, in order of increasing
abstraction, the device, circuit, gate, functional module (e.g., adder) and system levels
(e.g., processor), as illustrated in Figure 1.6. A semiconductor device is an entity with a
SYSTEM
MODULE
+
GATE
CIRCUIT
DEVICE
G
S D
+ +
n n
Figure 1.6 Design abstraction levels in digital circuits.
very complex behavior. No circuit designer will ever seriously consider the solid-state
physics equations governing the behavior of the device when designing a digital gate.
Instead he will use a simplified model that adequately describes the input-output behavior
of the transistor. For instance, an AND gate is adequately described by its Boolean expres-
sion (Z = A.B), its bounding box, the position of the input and output terminals, and the
delay between the inputs and the output.
This design philosophy has been the enabler for the emergence of elaborate com-
puter-aided design (CAD) frameworks for digital integrated circuits; without it the current
design complexity would not have been achievable. Design tools include simulation at the
various complexity levels, design verification, layout generation, and design synthesis. An
overview of these tools and design methodologies is given in Chapter 8 of this textbook.
Furthermore, to avoid the redesign and reverification of frequently used cells such
as basic gates and arithmetic and memory modules, designers most often resort to cell
libraries. These libraries contain not only the layouts, but also provide complete docu-
mentation and characterization of the behavior of the cells. The use of cell libraries is, for

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 17 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design 17
instance, apparent in the layout of the Pentium ® 4 processor (Figure 1.5b). The integer
and floating-point unit, just to name a few, contain large sections designed using the so-
called standard cell approach. In this approach, logic gates are placed in rows of cells of
equal height and interconnected using routing channels. The layout of such a block can be
generated automatically given that a library of cells is available.
The preceding analysis demonstrates that design automation and modular design
practices have effectively addressed some of the complexity issues incurred in contempo-
rary digital design. This leads to the following pertinent question. If design automation
solves all our design problems, why should we be concerned with digital circuit design at
all? Will the next-generation digital designer ever have to worry about transistors or para-
sitics, or is the smallest design entity he will ever consider the gate and the module?
The truth is that the reality is more complex, and various reasons exist as to why an
insight into digital circuits and their intricacies will still be an important asset for a long
time to come.
• First of all, someone still has to design and implement the module libraries. Semi-
conductor technologies continue to advance from year to year. Until one has devel-
oped a fool-proof approach towards “porting” a cell from one technology to another,
each change in technology—which happens approximately every two
years—requires a redesign of the library.
• Creating an adequate model of a cell or module requires an in-depth understanding
of its internal operation. For instance, to identify the dominant performance parame-
ters of a given design, one has to recognize the critical timing path first.
• The library-based approach works fine when the design constraints (speed, cost or
power) are not stringent. This is the case for a large number of application-specific
designs, where the main goal is to provide a more integrated system solution, and
performance requirements are easily within the capabilities of the technology.
Unfortunately for a large number of other products such as microprocessors, success
hinges on high performance, and designers therefore tend to push technology to its
limits. At that point, the hierarchical approach tends to become somewhat less
attractive. To resort to our previous analogy to software methodologies, a program-
mer tends to “customize” software routines when execution speed is crucial; com-
pilers—or design tools—are not yet to the level of what human sweat or ingenuity
can deliver.
• Even more important is the observation that the abstraction-based approach is only
correct to a certain degree. The performance of, for instance, an adder can be sub-
stantially influenced by the way it is connected to its environment. The interconnec-
tion wires themselves contribute to delay as they introduce parasitic capacitances,
resistances and even inductances. The impact of the interconnect parasitics is bound
to increase in the years to come with the scaling of the technology.
• Scaling tends to emphasize some other deficiencies of the abstraction-based model.
Some design entities tend to be global or external (to resort anew to the software
analogy). Examples of global factors are the clock signals, used for synchronization
in a digital design, and the supply lines. Increasing the size of a digital design has a

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 18 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
18 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
profound effect on these global signals. For instance, connecting more cells to a sup-
ply line can cause a voltage drop over the wire, which, in its turn, can slow down all
the connected cells. Issues such as clock distribution, circuit synchronization, and
supply-voltage distribution are becoming more and more critical. Coping with them
requires a profound understanding of the intricacies of digital circuit design.
• Another impact of technology evolution is that new design issues and constraints
tend to emerge over time. A typical example of this is the periodical reemergence of
power dissipation as a constraining factor, as was already illustrated in the historical
overview. Another example is the changing ratio between device and interconnect
parasitics. To cope with these unforeseen factors, one must at least be able to model
and analyze their impact, requiring once again a profound insight into circuit topol-
ogy and behavior.
• Finally, when things can go wrong, they do. A fabricated circuit does not always
exhibit the exact waveforms one might expect from advance simulations. Deviations
can be caused by variations in the fabrication process parameters, or by the induc-
tance of the package, or by a badly modeled clock signal. Troubleshooting a design
requires circuit expertise.
For all the above reasons, it is my belief that an in-depth knowledge of digital circuit
design techniques and approaches is an essential asset for a digital-system designer. Even
though she might not have to deal with the details of the circuit on a daily basis, the under-
standing will help her to cope with unexpected circumstances and to determine the domi-
nant effects when analyzing a design.
Example 1.1 Clocks Defy Hierarchy
To illustrate some of the issues raised above, let us examine the impact of deficiencies in one
of the most important global signals in a design, the clock. The function of the clock signal in
a digital design is to order the multitude of events happening in the circuit. This task can be
compared to the function of a traffic light that determines which cars are allowed to move. It
also makes sure that all operations are completed before the next one starts—a traffic light
should be green long enough to allow a car or a pedestrian to cross the road. Under ideal cir-
cumstances, the clock signal is a periodic step waveform with transitions synchronized
throughout the designed circuit (Figure 1.7a). In light of our analogy, changes in the traffic
lights should be synchronized to maximize throughput while avoiding accidents. The impor-
tance of the clock alignment concept is illustrated with the example of two cascaded registers,
both operating on the rising edge of the clock φ (Figure 1.7b). Under normal operating condi-
tions, the input In gets sampled into the first register on the rising edge of φ and appears at the
output exactly one clock period later. This is confirmed by the simulations shown in Figure
1.8c (signal Out).
Due to delays associated with routing the clock wires, it may happen that the clocks
become misaligned with respect to each other. As a result, the registers are interpreting time
indicated by the clock signal differently. Consider the case that the clock signal for the second
register is delayed—or skewed—by a value δ. The rising edge of the delayed clock φ′ will
postpone the sampling of the input of the second register. If the time it takes to propagate the
output of the first register to the input of the second is smaller than the clock delay, the latter
will sample the wrong value. This causes the output to change prematurely, as clearly illus-
trated in the simulation, where the signal Out′ goes high at the first rising edge of φ′ instead of

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 19 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.2 Issues in Digital Integrated Circuit Design 19
In
φ (Volt) 3
2
φ φ′
t (nsec)
Volt1
(a) Ideal clock waveform
In 0
skew
φ
 REGISTER 3
2
 
skew Out’ Out
Volt
  1
φ′ REGISTER
0
Out time
(b) Two cascaded registers (c) Simulated waveforms
Figure 1.7 Impact of clock misalignment.
the second one. In terms of our traffic analogy, cars of a first traffic light hit the cars of the
next light that have not left yet.
Clock misalignment, or clock skew, as it is normally called, is an important example of
how global signals may influence the functioning of a hierarchically designed system. Clock
skew is actually one of the most critical design problems facing the designers of large, high-
performance systems.
Example 1.2 Power Distribution Networks Defy Hierarchy
While the clock signal is one example of a global signal that crosses the chip hierarchy
boundaries, the power distribution network represents another. A digital system requires a
stable DC voltage to be supplied to the individual gates. To ensure proper operation, this
voltage should be stable within a few hundred millivolts. The power distribution system
has to provide this stable voltage in the presence of very large current variations. The
resistive nature of the on-chip wires and the inductance of the IC package pins make this a
difficult proposition. For example, the average DC current to be supplied to a 100 W-1V
microprocessor equals 100 A! The peak current can easily be twice as large, and current
demand can readily change from almost zero to this peak value over a short time—in the
range of 1 nsec or less. This leads to a current variation of 100 GA/sec, which is a truly
astounding number.
Consider the problem of the resistance of power-distribution wires. A current of 1 A
running through a wire with a resistance of 1 Ω causes a voltage drop of 1V. With supply
voltages of modern digital circuits ranging between 1.2 and 2.5 V, such a drop is unaccept-

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 20 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
20 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
Block ABlock A  
Block ABlock A  Block BBlock B   Block BBlock B
(a) Routing through the block (b) Routing around the block
Figure 1.8 Power distribution network design.
able. Making the wires wider reduces the resistance, and hence the voltage drop. While
this sizing of the power network is relatively simple in a flat design approach, it is a lot
more complex in a hierarchical design. For example, consider the two blocks below in
Figure 1.8a [Saleh01]. If power distribution for Block A is examined in isolation, the addi-
tional loading due to the presence of Block B is not taken into account. If power is routed
through Block A to Block B, a larger IR drop will occur in Block B since power is also
being consumed by Block A before it reaches Block B.
Since the total IR drop is based on the resistance seen from the pin to the block, one
could route around the block and feed power to each block separately, as shown in Figure
1.8b. Ideally, the main trunks should be large enough to handle all the current flowing
through separate branches. Although routing power this way is easier to control and main-
tain, it also requires more area to implement. The large metal trunks of power have to be
sized to handle all the current for each block. This requirement forces designers to set
aside area for power busing that takes away from the available routing area.
As more and more blocks are added, the complex interactions between the blocks
determine the actual voltage drops. For instance, it is not always easy to determine which
way the current will flow when multiple parallel paths are available between the power
source and the consuming gate. Also, currents into the different modules do rarely peak at
the same time. All these considerations make the design of the power-distribution a chal-
lenging job. It requires a design methodology approach that supersedes the artificial
boundaries imposed by hierarchical design.
The purpose of this textbook is to provide a bridge between the abstract vision of
digital design and the underlying digital circuit and its peculiarities. While starting from a
solid understanding of the operation of electronic devices and an in-depth analysis of the
nucleus of digital design—the inverter—we will gradually channel this knowledge into
the design of more complex entities, such as complex gates, datapaths, registers, control-
lers, and memories. The persistent quest for a designer when designing each of the men-
tioned modules is to identify the dominant design parameters, to locate the section of the
design he should focus his optimizations on, and to determine the specific properties that
make the module under investigation (e.g., a memory) different from any others.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 21 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 21
The text also addresses other compelling (global) issues in modern digital circuit
design such as power dissipation, interconnect, timing, and synchronization.
1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design
This section defines a set of basic properties of a digital design. These properties help to
quantify the quality of a design from different perspectives: cost, functionality, robustness,
performance, and energy consumption. Which one of these metrics is most important
depends upon the application. For instance, pure speed is a crucial property in a compute
server. On the other hand, energy consumption is a dominant metric for hand-held mobile
applications such as cell phones. The introduced properties are relevant at all levels of the
design hierarchy, be it system, chip, module, and gate. To ensure consistency in the defini-
tions throughout the design hierarchy stack, we propose a bottom-up approach: we start
with defining the basic quality metrics of a simple inverter, and gradually expand these to
the more complex functions such as gate, module, and chip.
1.3.1 Cost of an Integrated Circuit
The total cost of any product can be separated into two components: the recurring
expenses or the variable cost, and the non-recurring expenses or the fixed cost.
Fixed Cost
The fixed cost is independent of the sales volume, the number of products sold. An impor-
tant component of the fixed cost of an integrated circuit is the effort in time and man-
power it takes to produce the design. This design cost is strongly influenced by the com-
plexity of the design, the aggressiveness of the specifications, and the productivity of the
designer. Advanced design methodologies that automate major parts of the design process
can help to boost the latter. Bringing down the design cost in the presence of an ever-
increasing IC complexity is one of the major challenges that is always facing the semicon-
ductor industry.
Additionally, one has to account for the indirect costs, the company overhead that
cannot be billed directly to one product. It includes amongst others the company’s
research and development (R&D), manufacturing equipment, marketing, sales, and build-
ing infrastructure.
Variable Cost
This accounts for the cost that is directly attributable to a manufactured product, and is
hence proportional to the product volume. Variable costs include the costs of the parts
used in the product, assembly costs, and testing costs. The total cost of an integrated cir-
cuit is now
 fixed cost
cost per IC = variable cost per IC + ----------------------- (1.1)
 volume 

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 22 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
22 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
Individual die
Figure 1.9 Finished wafer. Each
square represents a die - in this case
the AMD Duron™ microprocessor
(Reprinted with permission from AMD).
The impact of the fixed cost is more pronounced for small-volume products. This also
explains why it makes sense to have large design team working for a number of years on a
hugely successful product such as a microprocessor.
While the cost of producing a single transistor has dropped exponentially over the
past decades, the basic variable-cost equation has not changed:
cost of die + cost of die test + cost of packaging
variable cost = ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (1.2)
final test yield
As will be elaborated on in Chapter 2, the IC manufacturing process groups a number of
identical circuits onto a single wafer (Figure 1.9). Upon completion of the fabrication, the
wafer is chopped into dies, which are then individually packaged after being tested. We
will focus on the cost of the dies in this discussion. The cost of packaging and test is the
topic of later chapters.
The die cost depends upon the number of good die on a wafer, and the percentage of
those that are functional. The latter factor is called the die yield.
cost of wafer
cost of die = ------------------------------------------------------------- (1.3)
dies per wafer × die yield
The number of dies per wafer is, in essence, the area of the wafer divided by the die
area.The actual situation is somewhat more complicated as wafers are round, and chips are
square. Dies around the perimeter of the wafer are therefore lost. The size of the wafer has
been steadily increasing over the years, yielding more dies per fabrication run. Eq. (1.3)
also presents the first indication that the cost of a circuit is dependent upon the chip
area—increasing the chip area simply means that less dies fit on a wafer.
The actual relation between cost and area is more complex, and depends upon the
die yield. Both the substrate material and the manufacturing process introduce faults that
can cause a chip to fail. Assuming that the defects are randomly distributed over the wafer,
and that the yield is inversely proportional to the complexity of the fabrication process, we
obtain the following expression of the die yield:

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 23 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 23
–α
 defects per unit area × die area 
die yield = 1 + ------------------------------------------------------------------------- (1.4)
 α 
α is a parameter that depends upon the complexity of the manufacturing process, and is
roughly proportional to the number of masks. α = 3 is a good estimate for today’s complex
CMOS processes. The defects per unit area is a measure of the material and process
2 
induced faults. A value between 0.5 and 1 defects/cm is typical these days, but depends
strongly upon the maturity of the process.
Example 1.3 Die Yield
2 2
Assume a wafer size of 12 inch, a die size of 2.5 cm , 1 defects/cm , and α = 3. Determine the
die yield of this CMOS process run.
The number of dies per wafer can be estimated with the following expression, which
takes into account the lost dies around the perimeter of the wafer.
2
π × ( wafer diameter ⁄ 2) π × wafer diameter
dies per wafer = ----------------------------------------------------------- – ---------------------------------------------
die area 2 × die area
This means 252 (= 296 - 44) potentially operational dies for this particular example. The die
yield can be computed with the aid of Eq. (1.4), and equals 16%! This means that on the aver-
age only 40 of the dies will be fully functional.
The bottom line is that the number of functional of dies per wafer, and hence the
cost per die is a strong function of the die area. While the yield tends to be excellent for the
smaller designs, it drops rapidly once a certain threshold is exceeded. Bearing in mind the
equations derived above and the typical parameter values, we can conclude that die costs
are proportional to the fourth power of the area:
4
cost of die = f ( die area) (1.5)
The area is a function that is directly controllable by the designer(s), and is the prime met-
ric for cost. Small area is hence a desirable property for a digital gate. The smaller the
gate, the higher the integration density and the smaller the die size. Smaller gates further-
more tend to be faster and consume less energy, as the total gate capacitance—which is
one of the dominant performance parameters—often scales with the area.
The number of transistors in a gate is indicative for the expected implementation
area. Other parameters may have an impact, though. For instance, a complex interconnect
pattern between the transistors can cause the wiring area to dominate. The gate complex-
ity, as expressed by the number of transistors and the regularity of the interconnect struc-
ture, also has an impact on the design cost. Complex structures are harder to implement
and tend to take more of the designers valuable time. Simplicity and regularity is a pre-
cious property in cost-sensitive designs.
1.3.2 Functionality and Robustness
A prime requirement for a digital circuit is, obviously, that it performs the function it is
designed for. The measured behavior of a manufactured circuit normally deviates from the

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 24 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
24 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
expected response. One reason for this aberration are the variations in the manufacturing
process. The dimensions, threshold voltages, and currents of an MOS transistor vary
between runs or even on a single wafer or die. The electrical behavior of a circuit can be
profoundly affected by those variations. The presence of disturbing noise sources on or off
the chip is another source of deviations in circuit response. The word noise in the context
of digital circuits means “unwanted variations of voltages and currents at the logic
nodes.” Noise signals can enter a circuit in many ways. Some examples of digital noise
sources are depicted in Figure 1.10. For instance, two wires placed side by side in an inte-
grated circuit form a coupling capacitor and a mutual inductance. Hence, a voltage or cur-
rent change on one of the wires can influence the signals on the neighboring wire. Noise
on the power and ground rails of a gate also influences the signal levels in the gate.
Most noise in a digital system is internally generated, and the noise value is propor-
tional to the signal swing. Capacitive and inductive cross talk, and the internally-generated
power supply noise are examples of such. Other noise sources such as input power supply
noise are external to the system, and their value is not related to the signal levels. For these
sources, the noise level is directly expressed in Volt or Ampere. Noise sources that are a
function of the signal level are better expressed as a fraction or percentage of the signal
level. Noise is a major concern in the engineering of digital circuits. How to cope with all
these disturbances is one of the main challenges in the design of high-performance digital
circuits and is a recurring topic in this book.
VDD
v(t)
i(t)
(a) Inductive coupling (b) Capacitive coupling (c) Power and ground
noise
Figure 1.10 Noise sources in digital circuits.
The steady-state parameters (also called the static behavior) of a gate measure how
robust the circuit is with respect to both variations in the manufacturing process and noise
disturbances. The definition and derivation of these parameters requires a prior under-
standing of how digital signals are represented in the world of electronic circuits.
Digital circuits (DC) perform operations on logical (or Boolean) variables. A logical
variable x can only assume two discrete values:
x ∈ {0,1}
As an example, the inversion (i.e., the function that an inverter performs) implements the
following compositional relationship between two Boolean variables x and y:
y = x: {x = 0 ⇒ y = 1; x = 1 ⇒ y = 0} (1.6)

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 25 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 25
A logical variable is, however, a mathematical abstraction. In a physical implemen-
tation, such a variable is represented by an electrical quantity. This is most often a node
voltage that is not discrete but can adopt a continuous range of values. This electrical volt-
age is turned into a discrete variable by associating a nominal voltage level with each logic
state: 1 ⇔ VOH, 0 ⇔ VOL, where VOH and VOL represent the high and the low logic levels,
respectively. Applying VOH to the input of an inverter yields VOL at the output and vice
versa. The difference between the two is called the logic or signal swing Vsw.
VOH = ( VOL)
(1.7)
VOL = ( VOH)
The Voltage-Transfer Characteristic
Assume now that a logical variable in serves as the input to an inverting gate that produces
the variable out. The electrical function of a gate is best expressed by its voltage-transfer
characteristic (VTC) (sometimes called the DC transfer characteristic), which plots the
output voltage as a function of the input voltage Vout = f(Vin). An example of an inverter
VTC is shown in Figure 1.11. The high and low nominal voltages, VOH and VOL, can
readily be identified—VOH = f(VOL) and VOL = f(VOH). Another point of interest of the
VTC is the gate or switching threshold voltage VM (not to be confused with the threshold
voltage of a transistor), that is defined as VM = f(VM). VM can also be found graphically at
the intersection of the VTC curve and the line given by Vout = Vin. The gate threshold volt-
age presents the midpoint of the switching characteristics, which is obtained when the out-
put of a gate is short-circuited to the input. This point will prove to be of particular interest
when studying circuits with feedback (also called sequential circuits).
Vout
VOH
f
Vout = Vin
V
M
VOL
Figure 1.11 Inverter voltage-transfer
characteristic.
VOL VOH Vin
Even if an ideal nominal value is applied at the input of a gate, the output signal
often deviates from the expected nominal value. These deviations can be caused by noise
or by the loading on the output of the gate (i.e., by the number of gates connected to the
output signal). Figure 1.12a illustrates how a logic level is represented in reality by a range
of acceptable voltages, separated by a region of uncertainty, rather than by nominal levels

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 26 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
26 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
alone. The regions of acceptable high and low voltages are delimited by the VIH and VIL
voltage levels, respectively. These represent by definition the points where the gain
(= dVout / dVin) of the VTC equals −1 as shown in Figure 1.12b. The region between VIH
and VIL is called the undefined region (sometimes also referred to as transition width, or
TW). Steady-state signals should avoid this region if proper circuit operation is to be
ensured.
Noise Margins
For a gate to be robust and insensitive to noise disturbances, it is essential that the “0” and
“1” intervals be as large as possible. A measure of the sensitivity of a gate to noise is given
by the noise margins NML (noise margin low) and NMH (noise margin high), which quan-
tize the size of the legal “0” and “1”, respectively, and set a fixed maximum threshold on
the noise value:
NML = VIL – VOL
(1.8)
NMH = VOH – VIH
The noise margins represent the levels of noise that can be sustained when gates are cas-
caded as illustrated in Figure 1.13. It is obvious that the margins should be larger than 0
for a digital circuit to be functional and by preference should be as large as possible.
Regenerative Property
A large noise margin is a desirable, but not sufficient requirement. Assume that a signal is
disturbed by noise and differs from the nominal voltage levels. As long as the signal is
within the noise margins, the following gate continues to function correctly, although its
output voltage varies from the nominal one. This deviation is added to the noise injected at
the output node and passed to the next gate. The effect of different noise sources may
accumulate and eventually force a signal level into the undefined region. This, fortunately,
does not happen if the gate possesses the regenerative property, which ensures that a dis-

 Vout
“1” VOH
 Slope = -1
VOH
VIH
Undefined
Region
Slope = -1
 VIL
VOL

“0” V
 OL
VIL VIH Vin
(a) Relationship between voltage and logic levels (b) Definition of VIH and VIL
Figure 1.12 Mapping logic levels to the voltage domain.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 27 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 27
“1”
VOH
NMH
VIH
Undefined
region
NM VIL
L
VOL
“0”
Gate output Gate input
Figure 1.13 Cascaded inverter gates:
Stage M Stage M + 1 definition of noise margins.
turbed signal gradually converges back to one of the nominal voltage levels after passing
through a number of logical stages. This property can be understood as follows:
An input voltage vin (vin ∈ “0”) is applied to a chain of N inverters (Figure 1.14a).
Assuming that the number of inverters in the chain is even, the output voltage vout (N →
∞) will equal VOL if and only if the inverter possesses the regenerative property. Similarly,
when an input voltage vin (vin ∈ “1”) is applied to the inverter chain, the output voltage
will approach the nominal value VOH.
…
v0 v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6
(a) A chain of inverters
5
 v0
3 (b) Simulated response of
chain of MOS inverters
 (Volt)
V
1 v1 
v2
–1
2 
0  4 6 8 10
t (nsec)
Figure 1.14 The regenerative property.
Example 1.4 Regenerative property
The concept of regeneration is illustrated in Figure 1.14b, which plots the simulated transient
response of a chain of CMOS inverters. The input signal to the chain is a step-waveform with

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 28 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
28 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
a degraded amplitude, which could be caused by noise. Instead of swinging from rail to rail,
v0 only extends between 2.1 and 2.9 V. From the simulation, it can be observed that this devi-
ation rapidly disappears, while progressing through the chain; v1, for instance, extends from
0.6 V to 4.45 V. Even further, v2 already swings between the nominal VOL and VOH. The
inverter used in this example clearly possesses the regenerative property.
The conditions under which a gate is regenerative can be intuitively derived by ana-
lyzing a simple case study. Figure 1.15(a) plots the VTC of an inverter Vout = f(Vin) as well
as its inverse function finv(), which reverts the function of the x- and y-axis and is defined
as follows:
in = f out( ) ⇒ in = finv out( ) (1.9)
out 
out
v3
f(v) finv(v)
v1
v1
v
finv(v) 3 f(v)
v2 v0 in v0 v2 in
(a) Regenerative gate (b) Nonregenerative gate
Figure 1.15 Conditions for regeneration.
Assume that a voltage v0, deviating from the nominal voltages, is applied to the first
inverter in the chain. The output voltage of this inverter equals v1 = f(v0) and is applied to
the next inverter. Graphically this corresponds to v1 = finv(v2). The signal voltage gradu-
ally converges to the nominal signal after a number of inverter stages, as indicated by the
arrows. In Figure 1.15(b) the signal does not converge to any of the nominal voltage levels
but to an intermediate voltage level. Hence, the characteristic is nonregenerative. The dif-
ference between the two cases is due to the gain characteristics of the gates. To be regener-
ative, the VTC should have a transient region (or undefined region) with a gain greater
than 1 in absolute value, bordered by the two legal zones, where the gain should be
smaller than 1. Such a gate has two stable operating points. This clarifies the definition of
the VIH and the VIL levels that form the boundaries between the legal and the transient
zones.
Noise Immunity
While the noise margin is a meaningful means for measuring the robustness of a circuit
against noise, it is not sufficient. It expresses the capability of a circuit to “overpower” a

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 29 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 29
noise source. Noise immunity, on the other hand, expresses the ability of the system to pro-
cess and transmit information correctly in the presence of noise [Dally98]. Many digital
circuits with low noise margins have very good noise immunity because they reject a
noise source rather than overpower it. These circuits have the property that only a small
fraction of a potentially-damaging noise source is coupled to the important circuit nodes.
More precisely, the transfer function between noise source and signal node is far smaller
than 1. Circuits that do not posses this property are susceptible to noise.
To study the noise immunity of a gate, we have to construct a noise budget that allo-
cates the power budget to the various noise sources. As discussed earlier, the noise sources
can be divided into sources that are
• proportional to the signal swing Vsw. The impact on the signal node is expressed as g
Vsw.
• fixed. The impact on the signal node equals f VNf, with Vnf the amplitude of the noise
source, and f the transfer function from noise to signal node.
We assume, for the sake of simplicity, that the noise margin equals half the signal swing
(for both H and L). To operate correctly, the noise margin has to be larger than the sum of
the coupled noise values.
Vsw
VNM = -------- ≥ fiV + gjVsw (1.10)
Nfi
2 ∑ ∑
i j
Given a set of noise sources, we can derive the minimum signal swing necessary for the
system to be operational,
2 fiV
∑ Nfi
i
Vsw ≥ ------------------------- (1.11)
1 – 2 gj
∑
j
This makes it clear that the signal swing (and the noise margin) has to be large enough to
overpower the impact of the fixed sources (f VNf). On the other hand, the sensitivity to
internal sources depends primarily upon the noise suppressing capabilities of the gate, this
is the proportionality or gain factors gj. In the presence of large gain factors, increasing the
signal swing does not do any good to suppress noise, as the noise increases proportionally.
In later chapters, we will discuss some differential logic families that suppress most of the
internal noise, and hence can get away with very small noise margins and signal swings.
Directivity
The directivity property requires a gate to be unidirectional, that is, changes in an output
level should not appear at any unchanging input of the same circuit. If not, an output-sig-
nal transition reflects to the gate inputs as a noise signal, affecting the signal integrity.
In real gate implementations, full directivity can never be achieved. Some feedback
of changes in output levels to the inputs cannot be avoided. Capacitive coupling between
inputs and outputs is a typical example of such a feedback. It is important to minimize
these changes so that they do not affect the logic levels of the input signals.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 30 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
30 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
Fan-In and Fan-Out
The fan-out denotes the number of load gates N that are connected to the output of the
driving gate (Figure 1.16). Increasing the fan-out of a gate can affect its logic output lev-
els. From the world of analog amplifiers, we know that this effect is minimized by making
the input resistance of the load gates as large as possible (minimizing the input currents)
and by keeping the output resistance of the driving gate small (reducing the effects of load
currents on the output voltage). When the fan-out is large, the added load can deteriorate
the dynamic performance of the driving gate. For these reasons, many generic and library
components define a maximum fan-out to guarantee that the static and dynamic perfor-
mance of the element meet specification.
The fan-in of a gate is defined as the number of inputs to the gate (Figure 1.16b).
Gates with large fan-in tend to be more complex, which often results in inferior static and
dynamic properties.
M
N
(b) Fan-in M
Figure 1.16 Definition of fan-out and fan-
(a) Fan-out N in of a digital gate.
The Ideal Digital Gate
Based on the above observations, we can define the ideal digital gate from a static per-
spective. The ideal inverter model is important because it gives us a metric by which we
can judge the quality of actual implementations.
Its VTC is shown in Figure 1.17 and has the following properties: infinite gain in the
transition region, and gate threshold located in the middle of the logic swing, with high
and low noise margins equal to half the swing. The input and output impedances of the
ideal gate are infinity and zero, respectively (i.e., the gate has unlimited fan-out). While
this ideal VTC is unfortunately impossible in real designs, some implementations, such as
the static CMOS inverter, come close.
Example 1.5 Voltage-Transfer Characteristic
Figure 1.18 shows an example of a voltage-transfer characteristic of an actual, but outdated
gate structure (as produced by SPICE in the DC analysis mode). The values of the dc-param-
eters are derived from inspection of the graph.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 31 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 31
Vout
g = -∞
Vin Figure 1.17 Ideal voltage-transfer characteristic.
VOH = 3.5 V; VOL = 0.45 V
VIH = 2.35 V; VIL = 0.66 V
VM = 1.64 V
NMH = 1.15 V; NML = 0.21 V
The observed transfer characteristic, obviously, is far from ideal: it is asymmetrical,
has a very low value for NML, and the voltage swing of 3.05 V is substantially below the max-
imum obtainable value of 5 V (which is the value of the supply voltage for this design).
5.0
NM
4.0 L
) 3.0
V
( 
out
V
2.0
VM
NMH
1.0
Figure 1.18 Voltage-transfer
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 characteristic of an NMOS
Vin (V) inverter of the 1970s.
1.3.3 Performance
From a system designers perspective, the performance of a digital circuit expresses the
computational load that the circuit can manage. For instance, a microprocessor is often
characterized by the number of instructions it can execute per second. This performance

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 32 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
32 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
metric depends both on the architecture of the processor—for instance, the number of
instructions it can execute in parallel—, and the actual design of logic circuitry. While the
former is crucially important, it is not the focus of this text book. We refer the reader to the
many excellent books on this topic [for instance, Hennessy96]. When focusing on the pure
design, performance is most often expressed by the duration of the clock period (clock
cycle time), or its rate (clock frequency). The minimum value of the clock period for a
given technology and design is set by a number of factors such as the time it takes for the
signals to propagate through the logic, the time it takes to get the data in and out of the
registers, and the uncertainty of the clock arrival times. Each of these topics will be dis-
cussed in detail on the course of this text book. At the core of the whole performance anal-
ysis, however, lays the performance of an individual gate.
The propagation delay tp of a gate defines how quickly it responds to a change at its
input(s). It expresses the delay experienced by a signal when passing through a gate. It is
measured between the 50% transition points of the input and output waveforms, as shown
2 
in Figure 1.19 for an inverting gate. Because a gate displays different response times for
rising or falling input waveforms, two definitions of the propagation delay are necessary.
The tpLH defines the response time of the gate for a low to high (or positive) output transi-
tion, while tpHL refers to a high to low (or negative) transition. The propagation delay tp is
defined as the average of the two.
tpLH + tpHL
tp = -------------------------- (1.12)
2
Vin
50%
t
tpHL tpLH
Vout
90%
50%
10% t
Figure 1.19 Definition of propagation
tf tr
delays and rise and fall times.
2 
The 50% definition is inspired the assumption that the switching threshold VM is typically located in the
middle of the logic swing.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 33 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 33
CAUTION: : Observe that the propagation delay tp, in contrast to tpLH and tpHL, is an
artificial gate quality metric, and has no physical meaning per se. It is mostly used to com-
pare different semiconductor technologies, or logic design styles.
The propagation delay is not only a function of the circuit technology and topology,
but depends upon other factors as well. Most importantly, the delay is a function of the
slopes of the input and output signals of the gate. To quantify these properties, we intro-
duce the rise and fall times tr and tf, which are metrics that apply to individual signal
waveforms rather than gates (Figure 1.19), and express how fast a signal transits between
the different levels. The uncertainty over when a transition actually starts or ends is
avoided by defining the rise and fall times between the 10% and 90% points of the wave-
forms, as shown in the Figure. The rise/fall time of a signal is largely determined by the
strength of the driving gate, and the load presented by the node itself, which sums the con-
tributions of the connecting gates (fan-out) and the wiring parasitics.
When comparing the performance of gates implemented in different technologies or
circuit styles, it is important not to confuse the picture by including parameters such as
load factors, fan-in and fan-out. A uniform way of measuring the tp of a gate, so that tech-
nologies can be judged on an equal footing, is desirable. The de-facto standard circuit for
delay measurement is the ring oscillator, which consists of an odd number of inverters
connected in a circular chain (Figure 1.20). Due to the odd number of inversions, this cir-
cuit does not have a stable operating point and oscillates. The period T of the oscillation is
determined by the propagation time of a signal transition through the complete chain, or
T = 2 × tp × N with N the number of inverters in the chain. The factor 2 results from the
observation that a full cycle requires both a low-to-high and a high-to-low transition. Note
that this equation is only valid for 2Ntp >> tf + tr. If this condition is not met, the circuit
might not oscillate—one “wave” of signals propagating through the ring will overlap with
a successor and eventually dampen the oscillation. Typically, a ring oscillator needs a
least five stages to be operational.
v0 v1 v2 v3 v4 v5
v0 v1 v5
Figure 1.20 Ring oscillator circuit for propagation-delay measurement.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 34 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
34 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
CAUTION: We must be extremely careful with results obtained from ring oscillator
measurements. A tp of 20 psec by no means implies that a circuit built with those gates
will operate at 50 GHz. The oscillator results are primarily useful for quantifying the dif-
ferences between various manufacturing technologies and gate topologies. The oscillator
is an idealized circuit where each gate has a fan-in and fan-out of exactly one and parasitic
loads are minimal. In more realistic digital circuits, fan-ins and fan-outs are higher, and
interconnect delays are non-negligible. The gate functionality is also substantially more
complex than a simple invert operation. As a result, the achievable clock frequency on
average is 50 to a 100 times slower than the frequency predicted from ring oscillator mea-
surements. This is an average observation; carefully optimized designs might approach the
ideal frequency more closely.
Example 1.6 Propagation Delay of First-Order RC Network
Digital circuits are often modeled as first-order RC networks of the type shown in Figure
1.21. The propagation delay of such a network is thus of considerable interest.
R
vout
vin C
Figure 1.21 First-order RC network.
When applying a step input (with vin going from 0 to V), the transient response of this
circuit is known to be an exponential function, and is given by the following expression
(where τ = RC, the time constant of the network):
−t/τ
v out(t) = (1 − e ) V (1.13)
The time to reach the 50% point is easily computed as t = ln(2)τ = 0.69τ. Similarly, it takes t
= ln(9)τ = 2.2τ to get to the 90% point. It is worth memorizing these numbers, as they are
extensively used in the rest of the text.
1.3.4 Power and Energy Consumption
The power consumption of a design determines how much energy is consumed per opera-
tion, and much heat the circuit dissipates. These factors influence a great number of criti-
cal design decisions, such as the power-supply capacity, the battery lifetime, supply-line
sizing, packaging and cooling requirements. Therefore, power dissipation is an important
property of a design that affects feasibility, cost, and reliability. In the world of high-per-
formance computing, power consumption limits, dictated by the chip package and the heat
removal system, determine the number of circuits that can be integrated onto a single chip,
and how fast they are allowed to switch.With the increasing popularity of mobile and dis-
tributed computation, energy limitations put a firm restriction on the number of computa-
tions that can be performed given a minimum time between battery recharges.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 35 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.3 Quality Metrics of a Digital Design 35
Depending upon the design problem at hand, different dissipation measures have to
be considered. For instance, the peak power Ppeak is important when studying supply-line
sizing. When addressing cooling or battery requirements, one is predominantly interested
in the average power dissipation Pav. Both measures are defined in equation Eq. (1.14):
Ppeak = ipeakVsupply = max p t[ ( )]
T T
V (1.14)
1 supply
Pav = --- p t( )dt = ---------------- isupply ( )t dt
T∫  T ∫
0 0
where p(t) is the instantaneous power, isupply is the current being drawn from the supply
voltage Vsupply over the interval t ∈ [0,T], and ipeak is the maximum value of isupply over that
interval.
The dissipation can further be decomposed into static and dynamic components. The
latter occurs only during transients, when the gate is switching. It is attributed to the
charging of capacitors and temporary current paths between the supply rails, and is, there-
fore, proportional to the switching frequency: the higher the number of switching events,
the higher the dynamic power consumption. The static component on the other hand is
present even when no switching occurs and is caused by static conductive paths between
the supply rails or by leakage currents. It is always present, even when the circuit is in
stand-by. Minimization of this consumption source is a worthwhile goal.
The propagation delay and the power consumption of a gate are related—the propa-
gation delay is mostly determined by the speed at which a given amount of energy can be
stored on the gate capacitors. The faster the energy transfer (or the higher the power con-
sumption), the faster the gate. For a given technology and gate topology, the product of
power consumption and propagation delay is generally a constant. This product is called
the power-delay product (or PDP) and can be considered as a quality measure for a
switching device. The PDP is simply the energy consumed by the gate per switching
event. The ring oscillator is again the circuit of choice for measuring the PDP of a logic
family.
An ideal gate is one that is fast, and consumes little energy. The energy-delay prod-
uct (E-D) is a combined metric that brings those two elements together, and is often used
as the ultimate quality metric. From the above, it should be clear that the E-D is equivalent
2
to power-delay .
Example 1.7 Energy Dissipation of First-Order RC Network
Let us consider again the first-order RC network shown in Figure 1.21. When applying a step
input (with Vin going from 0 to V), an amount of energy is provided by the signal source to the
network. The total energy delivered by the source (from the start of the transition to the end)
can be readily computed:
∞ ∞ V
dvout 2
Ein = iin ( )t vin( )t dt = V C------------dt = ( CV) dvout = CV (1.15)
∫ ∫ dt ∫ 
0 0 0
It is interesting to observe that the energy needed to charge a capacitor from 0 to V volt
with a step input is a function of the size of the voltage step and the capacitance, but is inde-

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 36 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
36 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
pendent of the value of the resistor. We can also compute how much of the delivered energy
gets stored on the capacitor at the end of the transition.
∞ ∞ V
2
dvout CV
EC = iC ( )t vout( )t dt = C------------voutdt = C voutdvout = ---------- (1.16)
∫ ∫ dt ∫  2
0 0 0
This is exactly half of the energy delivered by the source. For those who wonder hap-
pened with the other half—a simple analysis shows that an equivalent amount gets dissipated
as heat in the resistor during the transaction. We leave it to the reader to demonstrate that dur-
ing the discharge phase (for a step from V to 0), the energy originally stored on the capacitor
gets dissipated in the resistor as well, and turned into heat.
1.4 Summary
In this introductory chapter, we learned about the history and the trends in digital circuit
design. We also introduced the important quality metrics, used to evaluate the quality of a
design: cost, functionality, robustness, performance, and energy/power dissipation. At the
end of the Chapter, you can find an extensive list of reference works that may help you to
learn more about some of the topics introduced in the course of the text.
1.5 To Probe Further
The design of digital integrated circuits has been the topic of a multitude of textbooks and
monographs. To help the reader find more information on some selected topics, an exten-
sive list of reference works is listed below. The state-of-the-art developments in the area
of digital design are generally reported in technical journals or conference proceedings,
the most important of which are listed.
JOURNALS AND PROCEEDINGS
IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits
IEICE Transactions on Electronics (Japan)
Proceedings of The International Solid-State and Circuits Conference (ISSCC)
Proceedings of the VLSI Circuits Symposium
Proceedings of the Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC)
European Solid-State Circuits Conference (ESSCIRC)

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 37 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.5 To Probe Further 37
REFERENCE BOOKS
MOS
M. Annaratone, Digital CMOS Circuit Design, Kluwer, 1986.
T. Dillinger, VLSI Engineering, Prentice Hall, 1988.
E. Elmasry, ed., Digital MOS Integrated Circuits, IEEE Press, 1981.
E. Elmasry, ed., Digital MOS Integrated Circuits II, IEEE Press, 1992.
L. Glasser and D. Dopperpuhl, The Design and Analysis of VLSI Circuits, Addison-Wesley, 1985.
A. Kang and Leblebici, CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits, 2nd Ed., McGraw-Hill, 1999.
C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Systems, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
K. Martin, Digital Integrated Circuit Design, Oxford University Press, 2000.
D. Pucknell and K. Eshraghian, Basic VLSI Design, Prentice Hall, 1988.
M. Shoji, CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice Hall, 1988.
J. Uyemura, Circuit Design for CMOS VLSI, Kluwer, 1992.
H. Veendrick, MOS IC’s: From Basics to ASICS, VCH, 1992.
Weste and Eshraghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design, Addison-Wesley, 1985, 1993.
High-Performance Design
K. Bernstein et al, High Speed CMOS Design Styles, Kluwer Academic, 1998.
A. Chandrakasan, F. Fox, and W. Bowhill, ed., Design of High-Performance Microprocessor Cir-
cuits, IEEE Press, 2000.
M. Shoji, High-Speed Digital Circuits, Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Low-Power Design
A. Chandrakasan and R. Brodersen, ed., Low-Power Digital CMOS Design, IEEE Press, 1998.
J. Rabaey and M. Pedram, ed., Low-Power Design Methodologies, Kluwer Academic, 1996.
G. Yeap, Practical Low-Power CMOS Design, Kluwer Academic, 1998.
Memory Design
K. Itoh, VLSI Memory Chip Design, Springer, 2001.
B. Prince, Semiconductor Memories, Wiley, 1991.
B. Prince, High Performance Memories, Wiley, 1996.
D. Hodges, Semiconductor Memories, IEEE Press, 1972.
Interconnections and Packaging
H. Bakoglu, Circuits, Interconnections, and Packaging for VLSI, Addison-Wesley, 1990.
W. Dally and J. Poulton, Digital Systems Engineering, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
E. Friedman, ed., Clock Distribution Networks in VLSI Circuits and Systems, IEEE Press, 1995.
J. Lau et al, ed., Electronic Packaging: Design, Materials, Process, and Reliability, McGraw-Hill,
1998.
Design Tools and Methodologies
V. Agrawal and S. Seth, Test Generation for VLSI Chips, IEEE Press, 1988.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 38 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
38 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1
D. Clein, CMOS IC Layout, Newnes, 2000.
G. De Micheli, Synthesis and Optimization of Digital Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 1994.
S. Rubin, Computer Aids for VLSI Design, Addison-Wesley, 1987.
J. Uyemura, Physical Design of CMOS Integrated Circuits Using L-Edit, PWS, 1995.
A. Vladimirescu, The Spice Book, John Wiley and Sons, 1993.
W. Wolf, Modern VLSI Design, Prentice Hall, 1998.
Bipolar and BiCMOS
A. Alvarez, BiCMOS Technology and Its Applications, Kluwer, 1989.
M. Elmasry, ed., BiCMOS Integrated Circuit Design, IEEE Press, 1994.
S. Embabi, A. Bellaouar, and M. Elmasry, Digital BiCMOS Integrated Circuit Design, Kluwer,
1993.
Lynn et al., eds., Analysis and Design of Integrated Circuits, McGraw-Hill, 1967.
General
J. Buchanan, CMOS/TTL Digital Systems Design, McGraw-Hill, 1990.
H. Haznedar, Digital Micro-Electronics, Benjamin/Cummings, 1991.
D. Hodges and H. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, 2nd ed., McGraw-
Hill, 1988.
M. Smith, Application-Specific Integrated Circuits, Addison-Wesley, 1997.
R. K. Watts, Submicron Integrated Circuits, Wiley, 1989.
REFERENCES
[Bardeen48] J. Bardeen and W. Brattain, “The Transistor, a Semiconductor Triode,” Phys. Rev.,
vol. 74, p. 230, July 15, 1948.
[Beeson62] R. Beeson and H. Ruegg, “New Forms of All Transistor Logic,” ISSCC Digest of Tech-
nical Papers, pp. 10–11, Feb. 1962.
[Dally98] B. Dally, Digital Systems Engineering, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[Faggin72] F. Faggin, M.E. Hoff, Jr, H. Feeney, S. Mazor, M. Shima, “The MCS-4 - An LSI Micro-
Computer System,” 1972 IEEE Region Six Conference Record, San Diego, CA, April 19-21,
1972, pp.1-6.
[Harris56] J. Harris, “Direct-Coupled Transistor Logic Circuitry in Digital Computers,” ISSCC
Digest of Technical Papers, p. 9, Feb. 1956.
[Hart72] C. Hart and M. Slob, “Integrated Injection Logic—A New Approach to LSI,” ISSCC
Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 92–93, Feb. 1972.
[Hoff70] E. Hoff, “Silicon-Gate Dynamic MOS Crams 1,024 Bits on a Chip,” Electronics,
pp. 68–73, August 3, 1970.
[Intel01] “Moore’s Law”, http://www.intel.com/research/silicon/mooreslaw.htm
[Masaki74] A. Masaki, Y. Harada and T. Chiba, “200-Gate ECL Master-Slice LSI,” ISSCC Digest
of Technical Papers, pp. 62–63, Feb. 1974.
[Moore65] G. Moore, “Cramming more Components into Integrated Circuits,” Electronics, Vol. 38,
Nr 8, April 1965.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 39 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
Section 1.6 Exercises 39
[Murphy93] B. Murphy, “Perspectives on Logic and Microprocessors,” Commemorative Supple-
ment to the Digest of Technical Papers, ISSCC Conf., pp. 49–51, San Francisco, 1993.
[Norman60] R. Norman, J. Last and I. Haas, “Solid-State Micrologic Elements,” ISSCC Digest of
Technical Papers, pp. 82–83, Feb. 1960.
[Hennessy96] J. Hennessy and D. Patterson, Computer Architecture A Quantitative Approach, Sec-
ond Edition, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1996
[Saleh01] R. Saleh, M. Benoit, and P, McCrorie, “Power Distribution Planning”, Simplex Solutions,
http://www.simplex.com/wt/sec.php?page_name=wp_powerplan
[Schockley49] W. Schockley, “The Theory of pn Junctions in Semiconductors and pn-Junction
Transistors,” BSTJ, vol. 28, p. 435, 1949.
[Shima74] M. Shima, F. Faggin and S. Mazor, “An N-Channel, 8-bit Single-Chip Microprocessor,”
ISSCC Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 56–57, Feb. 1974.
[Swade93] D. Swade, “Redeeming Charles Babbage’s Mechanical Computer,” Scientific American,
pp. 86–91, February 1993.
[Wanlass63] F. Wanlass, and C. Sah, “Nanowatt logic Using Field-Effect Metal-Oxide Semiconduc-
tor Triodes,” ISSCC Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 32–32, Feb. 1963.
1.6 Exercises
1. [E, None, 1.2] Based on the evolutionary trends described in the chapter, predict the integra-
tion complexity and the clock speed of a microprocessor in the year 2015. Determine also
how much DRAM should be available on a single chip at that point in time, if Moore’s law
would still hold.
2. [D, None, 1.2] Visit the Intel on-line microprocessor museum
(http://www.intel.com/intel/intelis/museum/exhibit/hist_micro/index.htm). While browsing
through the microprocessor hall-of-fame, determine the rate of increase in transistor counts
and clock frequencies in the 70’s, 80’s, and 90’s. Also, create a plot of the number of transis-
tors versus technology feature size. Spend some time browsing the site. It contains a large
amount of very interesting information.
3. [D, None, 1.2] By scanning the literature, find the leading-edge devices at this point in time in
the following domains: microprocessor, signal processor, SRAM, and DRAM. Determine for
each of those, the number of integrated devices, the overall area and the maximum clock
speed. Evaluate the match with the trends predicted in section 1.2.
4. [D, None, 1.2] Find in the library the latest November issue of the Journal of Solid State Cir-
cuits. For each of the papers, determine its application class (such as microprocessor, signal
processor, DRAM, SRAM), the type of manufacturing technology used (MOS, bipolar, etc.),
the minimum feature size, the number of devices on a single die, and the maximum clock
speed. Tabulate the results along the various application classes.
5. [E, None, 1.2] Provide at least three examples for each of the abstraction levels described in
Figure 1.6.

--- Page Break ---

chapter1.fm Page 40 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:58 AM
40 INTRODUCTION Chapter 1

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 41 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
C H A P T E R
2
T H E M A N U F A C T U R I N G P R O C E S S
Overview of manufacturing process
n
Design rules
n
IC packaging
n
Future Trends in Integrated Circuit Technology
2.1 Introduction 2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology
2.5.1 Short-Term Developments
2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits
2.5.2 In the Longer Term
2.2.1 The Silicon Wafer
2.2.2 Photolithography 2.6 Summary
2.2.3 Some Recurring Process Steps
2.2.4 Simplified CMOS Process Flow
2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between
Designer and Process Engineer
2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits
2.4.1 Package Materials
2.4.2 Interconnect Levels
2.4.3 Thermal Considerations in Packaging
41

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 42 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
42 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
2.1 Introduction
Most digital designers will never be confronted with the details of the manufacturing pro-
cess that lies at the core of the semiconductor revolution. Yet, some insight in the steps
that lead to an operational silicon chip comes in quite handy in understanding the physical
constraints that are imposed on a designer of an integrated circuit, as well as the impact of
the fabrication process on issues such as cost.
In this chapter, we briefly describe the steps and techniques used in a modern inte-
grated circuit manufacturing process. It is not our aim to present a detailed description of
the fabrication technology, which easily deserves a complete course [Plummer00]. Rather
we aim at presenting the general outline of the flow and the interaction between the vari-
ous steps. We learn that a set of optical masks forms the central interface between the
intrinsics of the manufacturing process and the design that the user wants to see trans-
ferred to the silicon fabric. The masks define the patterns that, when transcribed onto the
different layers of the semiconductor material, form the elements of the electronic devices
and the interconnecting wires. As such, these patterns have to adhere to some constraints
in terms of minimum width and separation if the resulting circuit is to be fully functional.
This collection of constraints is called the design rule set, and acts as the contract between
the circuit designer and the process engineer. If the designer adheres to these rules, he gets
a guarantee that his circuit will be manufacturable. An overview of the common design
rules, encountered in modern CMOS processes, will be given. Finally, an overview is
given of the IC packaging options. The package forms the interface between the circuit
implemented on the silicon die and the outside world, and as such has a major impact on
the performance, reliability, longevity, and cost of the integrated circuit.
2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits
A simplified cross section of a typical CMOS inverter is shown in Figure 2.1. The CMOS
process requires that both n-channel (NMOS) and p-channel (PMOS) transistors be built
in the same silicon material. To accommodate both types of devices, special regions called
wells must be created in which the semiconductor material is opposite to the type of the
channel. A PMOS transistor has to be created in either an n-type substrate or an n-well,
while an NMOS device resides in either a p-type substrate or a p-well. The cross section
Figure 2.1 Cross section of an n-well CMOS process.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 43 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits 43
shown in Figure 2.1 features an n-well CMOS process, where the NMOS transistors are
implemented in the p-doped substrate, and the PMOS devices are located in the n-well.
Modern processes are increasingly using a dual-well approach that uses both n- and p-
wells, grown on top on a epitaxial layer, as shown in Figure 2.2. We will restrict the
remainder of this discussion to the latter process (without loss of generality).
gate-oxidegate-oxide
TungstenTungsten  
TiSiTiSi22 AlCuAlCu
SiOSiO22
polypolypolypoly
p-wellp-well  n-welln-well SiOSiO22
n+n+ p-epip-epi p+p+
p+p+
Figure 2.2Cross section of modern dual-well CMOS process.
The CMOS process requires a large number of steps, each of which consists of a
sequence of basic operations. A number of these steps and/or operations are executed very
repetitively in the course of the manufacturing process. Rather than diving directly into a
description of the overall process flow, we first discuss the starting material followed by a
detailed perspective on some of the most-often recurring operations.
2.2.1 The Silicon Wafer
The base material for the manufacturing process comes
in the form of a single-crystalline, lightly doped wafer.
These wafers have typical diameters between 4 and 12
inches (10 and 30 cm, respectively) and a thickness of
at most 1 mm, and are obtained by cutting a single-
crystal ingot into thin slices (Figure 2.3). A starting
-
wafer of the p -type might be doped around the levels
21  3
of 2 × 10 impurities/m . Often, the surface of the
wafer is doped more heavily, and a single crystal epi-
taxial layer of the opposite type is grown over the sur-
face before the wafers are handed to the processing
company. One important metric is the defect density of
the base material. High defect densities lead to a larger
fraction of non-functional circuits, and consequently an Figure 2.3 Single-crystal ingot and
sliced wafers (from [Fullman99]).
increase in cost of the final product.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 44 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
44 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
2.2.2 Photolithography
In each processing step, a certain area on the chip is masked out using the appropriate opti-
cal mask so that a desired processing step can be selectively applied to the remaining
regions. The processing step can be any of a wide range of tasks including oxidation, etch-
ing, metal and polysilicon deposition, and ion implantation. The technique to accomplish
this selective masking, called photolithography, is applied throughout the manufacturing
process. Figure 2.4 gives a graphical overview of the different operations involved in a
typical photolitographic process. The following steps can be identified:
optical
mask
oxidation
photoresist photoresist coating
removal (ashing)
stepper exposure
Figure 2.4 Typical operations in a single
photolithographic cycle (from [Fullman99]).
photoresist
development
acid etch
process spin, rinse, dry
step
1. Oxidation layering — this optional step deposits a thin layer of SiO2 over the com-
plete wafer by exposing it to a mixture of high-purity oxygen and hydrogen at
approximately 1000°C. The oxide is used as an insulation layer and also forms tran-
sistor gates.
2. Photoresist coating — a light-sensitive polymer (similar to latex) is evenly applied
while spinning the wafer to a thickness of approximately 1 μm. This material is
originally soluble in an organic solvent, but has the property that the polymers cross-

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 45 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits 45
link when exposed to light, making the affected regions insoluble. A photoresist of
this type is called negative. A positive photoresist has the opposite properties; origi-
nally insoluble, but soluble after exposure. By using both positive and negative
resists, a single mask can sometimes be used for two steps, making complementary
regions available for processing. Since the cost of a mask is increasing quite rapidly
with the scaling of technology, a reduction of the number of masks is surely of high
priority.
3. Stepper exposure — a glass mask (or reticle), containing the patterns that we want to
transfer to the silicon, is brought in close proximity to the wafer. The mask is
opaque in the regions that we want to process, and transparent in the others (assum-
ing a negative photoresist). The glass mask can be thought of as the negative of one
layer of the microcircuit. The combination of mask and wafer is now exposed to
ultra-violet light. Where the mask is transparent, the photoresist becomes insoluble.
4. Photoresist development and bake — the wafers are developed in either an acid or
base solution to remove the non-exposed areas of photoresist. Once the exposed
photoresist is removed, the wafer is “soft-baked” at a low temperature to harden the
remaining photoresist.
5. Acid Etching — material is selectively removed from areas of the wafer that are not
covered by photoresist. This is accomplished through the use of many different
types of acid, base and caustic solutions as a function of the material that is to be
removed. Much of the work with chemicals takes place at large wet benches where
special solutions are prepared for specific tasks. Because of the dangerous nature of
some of these solvents, safety and environmental impact is a primary concern.
6. Spin, rinse, and dry — a special tool (called SRD) cleans the wafer with deionized
water and dries it with nitrogen. The microscopic scale of modern semiconductor
devices means that even the smallest particle of dust or dirt can destroy the circuitry.
To prevent this from happening, the processing steps are performed in ultra-clean
rooms where the number of dust particles per cubic foot of air ranges between 1 and
10. Automatic wafer handling and robotics are used whenever possible. This
explains why the cost of a state-of-the-art fabrication facility easily ranges in the
multiple billions of dollars. Even then, the wafers must be constantly cleaned to
avoid contamination, and to remove the left-over of the previous process steps.
7. Various process steps — the exposed area can now be subjected to a wide range of
process steps, such as ion implantation, plasma etching, or metal deposition. These
are the subjects of the subsequent section.
8. Photoresist removal (or ashing) — a high-temperature plasma is used to selectively
remove the remaining photoresist without damaging device layers.
We illustrate the use of the photolitographic process for one specific example, the
patterning of a layer of SiO2, in Figure 2.5. The sequence of process steps shown in the
Figure patterns exactly one layer of the semiconductor material, and may seem very com-
plex. Yet, the reader has to bear in mind that same sequence patterns the layer of the com-
plete surface of the wafer. It is hence a very parallel process, transferring hundreds of

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 46 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
46 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
Chemical or plasma
etch
Si-substrate
Hardened resist
SiO2
(a) Silicon base material
Si-substrate
Photoresist
SiO2
(d) After development and etching of resist,
chemical or plasma etch of SiO2
Si-substrate
Hardened resist
(b) After oxidation and deposition
of negative photoresist SiO2
Si-substrate
UV-light
Patterned (e) After etching
optical mask
Exposed resist
SiO2
Si-substrate Si-substrate
(f) Final result after removal of resist
(c) Stepper exposure
Figure 2.5 Process steps for patterning of SiO2.
millions of patterns to the semiconductor surface simultaneously. The concurrent and scal-
able nature of the optolithographical process is what makes the cheap manufacturing of
complex semiconductor circuits possible, and lies at the core of the economic success of
the semiconductor industry.
The continued scaling of the minimum feature sizes in integrated circuits puts an
enormous burden on the developer of semiconductor manufacturing equipment. This is
especially true for the optolithographical process. The dimensions of the features to be
transcribed surpass the wavelengths of the optical light sources, so that achieving the nec-
essary resolution and accuracy becomes harder and harder. So far, engineering engineer-
ing has extended the lifetime of this process at least until the 100 nm (or 0.1 μm) process
generation. Techniques such as optical-mask correction (OPC) pre-warp the drawn pat-
terns to account for the diffraction phenomena, encountered when printing close to the
limits of optical lithography. This adds substantially to the cost of mask making. In the
foreseeable future, other solutions that offer a a finer resolution such as extreme-ultravio-
let (EUV), X-ray or electron-beam may be needed. These techniques, while fully func-
tional, are currently less attractive from an economic viewpoint.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 47 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits 47
2.2.3 Some Recurring Process Steps
Diffusion and Ion Implantation
Many steps of the integrated circuit manufacturing process require a chance in the
dopant concentration of some parts of the material. The creation of the source and drain
regions, well and substrate contacts, the doping of the polysilicon, and the adjustments of
the device threshold are examples of such. There exist two approaches for introducing
these dopants—diffusion and ion implantation. In both techniques, the area to be doped is
exposed, while the rest of the wafer is coated with a layer of buffer material, typically
SiO2.
In diffusion implantation, the wafers are placed in a quartz tube embedded in a
heated furnace. A gas containing the dopant is introduced in the tube. The high tempera-
tures of the furnace, typically 900 to 1100 °C, cause the dopants to diffuse into the
exposed surface both vertically and horizontally. The final dopant concentration is the
greatest at the surface and decreases in a gaussian profile deeper in the material.
In ion implantation, dopants are introduced as ions into the material. The ion
implantation system directs and sweeps a beam of purified ions over the semiconductor
surface. The acceleration of the ions determines how deep they will penetrate the material,
while the beam current and the exposure time determine the dosage. The ion implantation
method allows for an independent control of depth and dosage. This is the reason that ion
implantation has largely displaced diffusion in modern semiconductor manufacturing.
Ion implantation has some unfortunate side effects however, the most important one
being lattice damage. Nuclear collisions during the high energy implantation cause the
displacement of substrate atoms, leading to material defects. This problem is largely
resolved by applying a subsequent annealing step, in which the wafer is heated to around
1000°C for 15 to 30 minutes, and then allowed to cool slowly. The heating step thermally
vibrates the atoms, which allows the bonds to reform.
Deposition
Any CMOS process requires the repetitive deposition of layers of a material over
the complete wafer, to either act as buffers for a processing step, or as insulating or con-
ducting layers. We have already discussed the oxidation process, which allows a layer of
SiO2 to be grown. Other materials require different techniques. For instance, silicon
nitride (Si3N4) is used as a sacrificial buffer material during the formation of the field
oxide and the introduction of the stopper implants. This silicon nitride is deposited every-
where using a process called chemical vapor deposition or CVD, which uses a gas-phase
reaction with energy supplied by heat at around 850°C.
Polysilicon, on the other hand, is deposited using a chemical deposition process,
which flows silane gas over the heated wafer coated with SiO2 at a temperature of approx-
imately 650°C. The resulting reaction produces a non-crystalline or amorphous material
called polysilicon. To increase to conductivity of the material, the deposition has to be fol-
lowed by an implantation step.
The Aluminum interconnect layers are typically deployed using a process known as
sputtering. The aluminum is evaporated in a vacuum, with the heat for the evaporation

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 48 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
48 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
delivered by electron-beam or ion-beam bombarding. Other metallic interconnect materi-
als such as Copper require different deposition techniques.
Etching
Once a material has been deposited, etching is used to selectively form patterns such
as wires and contact holes. The wet etching process was described earlier, and makes use
of acid or basic solutions. For instance, hydrofluoric acid buffered with ammonium fluo-
ride is typically used to etch SiO2.
In recent years, dry or plasma etching has made a lot of inroad. A wafer is placed
into the etch tool's processing chamber and given a negative electrical charge. The cham-
ber is heated to 100°C and brought to a vacuum level of 7.5 Pa, then filled with a posi-
tively charged plasma (usually a mix of nitrogen, chlorine and boron trichloride). The
opposing electrical charges cause the rapidly moving plasma molecules to align them-
selves in a vertical direction, forming a microscopic chemical and physical “sandblasting”
action which removes the exposed material. Plasma etching has the advantage of offering
a well-defined directionality to the etching action, creating patterns with sharp vertical
contours.
Planarization
To reliably deposit a layer of material onto the semiconductor surface, it is essential
that the surface is approximately flat. If no special steps were taken, this would definitely
not be the case in modern CMOS processes, where multiple patterned metal interconnect
layers are superimposed onto each other. Therefore, a chemical-mechanical planarization
(CMP) step is included before the deposition of an extra metal layer on top of the insulat-
ing SiO2 layer. This process uses a slurry compound—a liquid carrier with a suspended
abrasive component such as aluminum oxide or silica—to microscopically plane a device
layer and to reduce the step heights.
2.2.4 Simplified CMOS Process Flow
The gross outline of a potential CMOS process flow is given in Figure 2.6. The process
starts with the definition of the active regions, this is the regions where transistors will be
constructed. All other areas of the die will be covered with a thick layer of silicon dioxide
(SiO2), called the field oxide. This oxide acts as the insulator between neighboring
devices, and is either grown (as in the process of Figure 2.1), or deposited in etched
trenches (Figure 2.2) — hence the name trench insulation. Further insulation is provided
+ 
by the addition of a reverse-biased np-diode, formed by adding an extra p region, called
the channel-stop implant (or field implant) underneath the field oxide. Next, lightly doped
p- and n-wells are formed through ion implantation. To construct an NMOS transistor in a
p-well, heavily doped n-type source and drain regions are implanted (or diffused) into the
lightly doped p-type substrate. A thin layer of SiO2, called the gate oxide, separates the
region between the source and drain, and is itself covered by conductive polycrystalline
silicon (or polysilicon, for short). The conductive material forms the gate of the transistor.
PMOS transistors are constructed in an n-well in a similar fashion (just reverse n’s and

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 49 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits 49
Define active areas
Etch and fill trenches
Implant well regions
Deposit and pattern
polysilicon layer
Implant source and drain
regions and substrate contacts
Create contact and via windows Figure 2.6 Simplified process sequence for the manufacturing of a n-
Deposit and pattern metal layers 
dual-well CMOS circuit.
p’s). Multiple insulated layers of metallic (most often Aluminum) wires are deposited on
top of these devices to provide for the necessary interconnections between the transistors.
A more detailed breakdown of the flow into individual process steps and their
impact on the semiconductor material is shown graphically in Figure 2.7. While most of
the operations should be self-explanatory in light of the previous descriptions, some com-
ments on individual operations are worthwhile. The process starts with a p-substrate sur-
faced with a lightly doped p-epitaxial layer (a). A thin layer of SiO2 is deposited, which
will serve as the gate oxide for the transistors, followed by a deposition of a thicker sacri-
ficial silicon nitride layer (b). A plasma etching step using the complementary of the
active area mask creates the trenches, used for insulating the devices (c). After providing
the channel stop implant, the trenches are filled with SiO2 followed by a number of steps
to provide a flat surface (including inverse active pattern oxide etching, and chemical-
mechanical planarization). At that point, the sacrificial nitride is removed (d). The n-well
mask is used to expose only the n-well areas (the rest of the wafer is covered by a thick
buffer material), after which an implant-annealing sequence is applied to adjust the well-
doping. This is followed by a second implant step to adjust the threshold voltages of the
PMOS transistors. This implant only impacts the doping in the area just below the gate
oxide (e). Similar operations (using other dopants) are performed to create the p-wells,
and to adjust the thresholds of the NMOS transistors (f). A thin layer of polysilicon is
chemically deposited, and patterned with the aid of the polysilicon mask. Polysilicon is
used both as gate electrode material for the transistors as well as an interconnect medium
(g). Consecutive ion implantations are used to dope the source and drain regions of the
+ +
PMOS (p ) and NMOS (n ) transistors, respectively (h), after which the thin gate oxide
1
not covered by the polysilicon is etched away . The same implants are also used to dope
1 
Most modern processes also include extra implants for the creation of the lightly-doped drain regions
(LDD), and the creation of gate spacers at this point. We have omitted these for the sake of simplicity.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 50 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
50 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
p-epi
(a) Base material: p+ substrate
with p-epi layer
+
p
Si3N4
SiO2
(b) After deposition of gate-oxide and
p-epi
sacrificial nitride (acts as a
buffer layer)
+
p
(c) After plasma etch of insulating
trenches using the inverse of
+ the active area mask
p
SiO2
(d) After trench filling, CMP
planarization, and removal of
sacrificial nitride
n
(e) After n-well and
VTp adjust implants
p
(f) After p-well and
VTn adjust implants

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 51 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.2 Manufacturing CMOS Integrated Circuits 51
poly(silicon)
(g) After polysilicon deposition
and etch
+
n +
p
+ 
(h) After n source/drain and
+ 
p source/drain implants. These
steps also dope the polysilicon.
SiO2
(i) After deposition of SiO2
insulator and contact hole etch.
Al
(j) After deposition and
patterning of first Al layer.
Al
SiO2
(k) After deposition of SiO2
insulator, etching of via’s,
deposition and patterning of
second layer of Al.
Figure 2.7 Process flow for the fabrication of an NMOS and a PMOS transistor in a dual-well CMOS process. Be
aware that the drawings are stylized for understanding, and that the aspects ratios are not proportioned to reality.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 52 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
52 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
the polysilicon on the surface, reducing its resistivity. Undoped polysilicon has a very
high resistivity. Note that the polysilicon gate, which is patterned before the doping, actu-
ally defines the precise location of the channel region, and hence the location of the source
and drain regions. This procedure allows for a very precise positioning of the two regions
relative to the gate, and hence is called the self-aligned process. The process continues
with the deposition of the metallic interconnect layers. These consists of a repetition of the
following steps (i-k): deposition of the insulating material (most often SiO2), etching of
the contact or via holes, deposition of the metal (most often Aluminum and Copper,
although Tungsten is often used for the lower layers), and patterning of the metal. Inter-
mediate planarization steps ensure that the surface remains reasonable flat, even in the
presence of multiple interconnect layers. After the last level of metal is deposited, a final
passivation or overglass is deposited for protection. This layer would be CVD SiO2,
although often an additional layer of nitride is deposited as it is more impervious to mois-
ture. The final processing step is to etch openings to the pads used for bonding.
A cross-section of the final artifact is shown in Figure 2.8. Observe how the transis-
tors occupy only a small fraction of the total height of the structure. The interconnect lay-
ers take up the majority of the vertical dimension.
transistor
Figure 2.8 Cross-section of state-of-the-art
CMOS process.
2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between Designer and Process Engineer
As processes become more complex, requiring the designer to understand the intricacies
of the fabrication process and interpret the relations between the different masks is a sure
road to trouble. The goal of defining a set of design rules is to allow for a ready translation
of a circuit concept into an actual geometry in silicon. The design rules act as the interface
or even the contract between the circuit designer and the process engineer.
Circuit designers in general want tighter, smaller designs, which lead to higher per-
formance and higher circuit density. The process engineer, on the other hand, wants a
reproducible and high-yield process. Design rules are, consequently, a compromise that
attempts to satisfy both sides.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 53 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between Designer and Process Engineer 53
The design rules provide a set of guidelines for constructing the various masks
needed in the patterning process. They consist of minimum-width and minimum-spacing
constraints and requirements between objects on the same or on different layers.
The fundamental unity in the definition of a set of design rules is the minimum line
width. It stands for the minimum mask dimension that can be safely transferred to the
semiconductor material. In general, the minimum line width is set by the resolution of the
patterning process, which is most commonly based on optical lithography. More advanced
approaches use electron-beam. EUV or X-ray sources that offer a finer resolution, but are
less attractive from an economical viewpoint today.
Even for the same minimum dimension, design rules tend to differ from company to
company, and from process to process. This makes porting an existing design between dif-
ferent processes a time-consuming task. One approach to address this issue is to use
advanced CAD techniques, which allow for migration between compatible processes.
Another approach is to use scalable design rules. The latter approach, made popular by
Mead and Conway [Mead80], defines all rules as a function of a single parameter, most
often called λ. The rules are chosen so that a design is easily ported over a cross section of
industrial processes. Scaling of the minimum dimension is accomplished by simply
changing the value of λ. This results in a linear scaling of all dimensions. For a given pro-
cess, λ is set to a specific value, and all design dimensions are consequently translated into
absolute numbers. Typically, the minimum line width of a process is set to 2λ. For
instance, for a 0.25 μm process (i.e., a process with a minimum line width of 0.25 μm), λ
equals 0.125 μm.
This approach, while attractive, suffers from some disadvantages:
1. Linear scaling is only possible over a limited range of dimensions (for instance,
between 0.25 μm and 0.18 μm). When scaling over larger ranges, the relations
between the different layers tend to vary in a nonlinear way that cannot be ade-
quately covered by the linear scaling rules.
2. Scalable design rules are conservative. As they represent a cross section over differ-
ent technologies, they have to represent the worst-case rules for the whole set. This
results in over-dimensioned and less-dense designs.
2 
For these reasons, scalable design rules are normally avoided by industry. As circuit den-
sity is a prime goal in industrial designs, most semiconductor companies tend to use
micron rules, which express the design rules in absolute dimensions and can therefore
exploit the features of a given process to a maximum degree. Scaling and porting designs
between technologies under these rules is more demanding and has to be performed either
manually or using advanced CAD tools.
For this textbook, we have selected a “vanilla” 0.25 μm CMOS process as our pre-
ferred implementation medium. The rest of this section is devoted to a short introduction
and overview of the design rules of this process, which fall in the micron-rules class. A
complete design-rule set consists of the following entities: a set of layers, relations
2 
While not entirely accurate, lambda rules are still useful to estimate the impact of a technology scale on
the area of a design.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 54 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
54 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
between objects on the same layer, and relations between objects on different layers. We
discuss each of them in sequence.
Layer Representation
The layer concept translates the intractable set of masks currently used in CMOS into a
simple set of conceptual layout levels that are easier to visualize by the circuit designer.
From a designer’s viewpoint, all CMOS designs are based on the following entities:
• Substrates and/or wells, being p-type (for NMOS devices) and n-type (for PMOS)
+  +
• Diffusion regions (n and p ) defining the areas where transistors can be formed.
These regions are often called the active areas. Diffusions of an inverse type are
needed to implement contacts to the wells or to the substrate. These are called select
regions.
• One or more polysilicon layers, which are used to form the gate electrodes of the
transistors (but serve as interconnect layers as well).
• A number of metal interconnect layers.
• Contact and via layers to provide interlayer connections.
A layout consists of a combination of polygons, each of which is attached to a certain
layer. The functionality of the circuit is determined by the choice of the layers, as well as
the interplay between objects on different layers. For instance, an MOS transistor is
formed by the cross section of the diffusion layer and the polysilicon layer. An intercon-
nection between two metal layers is formed by a cross section between the two metal lay-
ers and an additional contact layer. To visualize these relations, each layer is assigned a
standard color (or stipple pattern for a black-and-white representation). The different lay-
ers used in our CMOS process are represented in Colorplate 1 (color insert).
Intralayer Constraints
A first set of rules defines the minimum dimensions of objects on each layer, as well as the
minimum spacings between objects on the same layer. All distances are expressed in μm.
These constraints are presented in a pictorial fashion in Colorplate 2.
Interlayer Constraints
Interlayer rules tend to be more complex. The fact that multiple layers are involved makes
it harder to visualize their meaning or functionality. Understanding layout requires the
capability of translating the two-dimensional picture of the layout drawing into the three-
dimensional reality of the actual device. This takes some practice.
We present these rules in a set of separate groupings.
1. Transistor Rules (Colorplate 3). A transistor is formed by the overlap of the active
and the polysilicon layers. From the intralayer design rules, it is already clear that
the minimum length of a transistor equals 0.24 μm (the minimum width of polysili-
con), while its width is at least 0.3 μm (the minimum width of diffusion). Extra rules

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 55 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.3 Design Rules — The Contract between Designer and Process Engineer 55
include the spacing between the active area and the well boundary, the gate overlap
of the active area, and the active overlap of the gate.
2. Contact and Via Rules (Colorplates 2 and 4). A contact (which forms an intercon-
nection between metal and active or polysilicon) or a via (which connects two metal
layers) is formed by overlapping the two interconnecting layers and providing a
contact hole, filled with metal, between the two. In our process, the minimum size of
the contact hole is 0.3 μm, while the polysilicon and diffusion layers have to extend
at least over 0.14 μm beyond the area of the contact hole. This sets the minimum
area of a contact to 0.44 μm × 0.44 μm. This is larger than the dimensions of a min-
imum-size transistor! Excessive changes between interconnect layers in routing are
thus to be avoided. The figure, furthermore, points out the minimum spacings
between contact and via holes, as well as their relationship with the surrounding lay-
ers.
Well and Substrate Contacts (Colorplate 5). For robust digital circuit design, it is
important for the well and substrate regions to be adequately connected to the supply volt-
ages. Failing to do so results in a resistive path between the substrate contact of the transis-
tors and the supply rails, and can lead to possibly devastating parasitic effects, such as
latchup. It is therefore advisable to provide numerous substrate (well) contacts spread over
the complete region. To establish an ohmic contact between a supply rail, implemented in
+ 
metal1, and a p-type material, a p diffusion region must be provided. This is enabled by
the select layer, which reverses the type of diffusion. A number of rules regarding the use
of the select layer are illustrated in Colorplate 5.
Consider an n-well process, which implements the PMOS transistors into an n-type
+
well diffused in a p-type material. The nominal diffusion is p . To invert the polarity of the
+ 
diffusion, an n-select layer is provided that helps to establish the n diffusions for the well-
+ 
contacts in the n-region as well as the n source and drain regions for the NMOS transis-
tors in the substrate.
Verifying the Layout
Ensuring that none of the design rules is violated is a fundamental requirement of the
design process. Failing to do so will almost surely lead to a nonfunctional design. Doing
so for a complex design that can contain millions of transistors is no sinecure, especially
when taking into account the complexity of some design-rule sets. While design teams in
the past used to spend numerous hours staring at room-size layout plots, most of this task
is now done by computers. Computer-aided Design-Rule Checking (called DRC) is an
integral part of the design cycle for virtually every chip produced today. A number of lay-
out tools even perform on-line DRC and check the design in the background during the
time of conception.
Example 2.1 Layout Example
An example of a complete layout containing an inverter is shown in Figure 2.9. To help
the visualization process, a vertical cross section of the process along the design center is
included as well as a circuit schematic.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 56 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
56 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
GND VDD
In
A A′
Out
(a) Layout
A A′
n
p-substrate Field
n+ p+ oxide
(b) Cross section along A-A′
In
GND VDD
Out
(c) Circuit diagram
Figure 2.9 A detailed layout example, including vertical process cross section and circuit diagram.
It is left as an exercise for the reader to determine the sizes of both the NMOS and
the PMOS transistors.
2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits
The IC package plays a fundamental role in the operation and performance of a compo-
nent. Besides providing a means of bringing signal and supply wires in and out of the sili-
con die, it also removes the heat generated by the circuit and provides mechanical support.
Finally, its also protects the die against environmental conditions such as humidity.
The packaging technology furthermore has a major impact on the performance and
power-dissipation of a microprocessor or signal processor. This influence is getting more
pronounced as time progresses by the reduction in internal signal delays and on-chip
capacitance as a result of technology scaling. Up to 50% of the delay of a high-perfor-
mance computer is currently due to packaging delays, and this number is expected to rise.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 57 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits 57
The search for higher-performance packages with fewer inductive or capacitive parasitics
has accelerated in recent years.
The increasing complexity of what can be integrated on a single die also translates into a
need for ever more input-output pins, as the number of connections going off-chip tends to
be roughly proportional to the complexity of the circuitry on the chip. This relationship
was first observed by E. Rent of IBM (published in [Landman71]), who translated it into
an empirical formula that is appropriately called Rent’s rule. This formula relates the num-
ber of input/output pins to the complexity of the circuit, as measured by the number of
gates.
P = K × Gβ (2.1)
where K is the average number of I/Os per gate, G the number of gates, β the Rent expo-
nent, and P the number of I/O pins to the chip. β varies between 0.1 and 0.7. Its value
depends strongly upon the application area, architecture, and organization of the circuit, as
demonstrated in Table 2.1. Clearly, microprocessors display a very different input/output
behavior compared to memories.
Table 2.1 Rent’s constant for various classes of systems ([Bakoglu90])
Application β K
Static memory 0.12 6
Microprocessor 0.45 0.82
Gate array 0.5 1.9
High-speed computer (chip) 0.63 1.4
High-speed computer (board) 0.25 82
The observed rate of pin-count increase for integrated circuits varies between 8% to
11% per year, and it has been projected that packages with more than 2000 pins will be
required by the year 2010. For all these reasons, traditional dual-in-line, through-hole
mounted packages have been replaced by other approaches such as surface-mount, ball-
grid array, and multichip module techniques. It is useful for the circuit designer to be
aware of the available options, and their pros and cons.
Due to its multi-functionality, a good package must comply with a large variety of
requirements.
• Electrical requirements—Pins should exhibit low capacitance (both interwire and
to the substrate), resistance, and inductance. A large characteristic impedance
should be tuned to optimize transmission line behavior. Observe that intrinsic inte-
grated-circuit impedances are high.
• Mechanical and thermal properties—The heat-removal rate should be as high as
possible. Mechanical reliability requires a good matching between the thermal prop-
erties of the die and the chip carrier. Long-term reliability requires a strong connec-
tion from die to package as well as from package to board.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 58 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
58 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
• Low Cost—Cost is always one of the more important properties. While ceramics
have a superior performance over plastic packages, they are also substantially more
expensive. Increasing the heat removal capacity of a package also tends to raise the
package cost. The least expensive plastic packaging can dissipate up to 1 W. Some-
what more expensive, but still cheap, plastic packages can dissipate up to 2W.
Higher dissipation requires more expensive ceramic packaging. Chips dissipating
over 50 W require special heat sink attachments. Even more extreme techniques
such as fans and blowers, liquid cooling hardware, or heat pipes, are needed for
higher dissipation levels.
Packing density is a major factor in reducing board cost. The increasing pin count
either requires an increase in the package size or a reduction in the pitch between the
pins. Both have a profound effect on the packaging economics.
Packages can be classified in many different ways —by their main material, the
number of interconnection levels, and the means used to remove heat. In this short section,
we can only glance briefly at each of those issues.
2.4.1 Package Materials
The most common materials used for the package body are ceramic and polymers (plas-
tics). The latter have the advantage of being substantially cheaper, but suffer from inferior
thermal properties. For instance, the ceramic Al2O3 (Alumina) conducts heat better than
SiO2 and the Polyimide plastic, by factors of 30 and 100 respectively. Furthermore, its
thermal expansion coefficient is substantially closer to the typical interconnect metals.
The disadvantage of alumina and other ceramics is their high dielectric constant, which
results in large interconnect capacitances.
2.4.2 Interconnect Levels
The traditional packaging approach uses a two-level interconnection strategy. The die is
first attached to an individual chip carrier or substrate. The package body contains an
internal cavity where the chip is mounted. These cavities provide ample room for many
connections to the chip leads (or pins). The leads compose the second interconnect level
and connect the chip to the global interconnect medium, which is normally a PC board.
Complex systems contain even more interconnect levels, since boards are connected
together using backplanes or ribbon cables. The first two layers of the interconnect hierar-
chy are illustrated in the drawing of Figure 2.10. The following sections provide a brief
overview of the interconnect techniques used at levels one and two of the interconnect
hierarchy, followed by a short discussion of some more advanced packaging approaches.
Interconnect Level 1 —Die-to-Package-Substrate
For a long time, wire bonding was the technique of choice to provide an electrical connec-
tion between die and package. In this approach, the backside of the die is attached to the
substrate using glue with a good thermal conductance. Next, the chip pads are individually
connected to the lead frame with aluminum or gold wires. The wire-bonding machine use

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 59 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits 59
Figure 2.10 Interconnect hierarchy in traditional IC
packaging.
for this purpose operates much like a sewing machine. An example of wire bonding is
shown in Figure 2.11. Although the wire-bonding process is automated to a large degree,
it has some major disadvantages.
Substrate
Bonding wire
Die
Pad
Figure 2.11 Wire bonding.
Lead frame
1. Wires must be attached serially, one after the other. This leads to longer manufactur-
ing times with increasing pin counts.
2. Larger pin counts make it substantially more challenging to find bonding patterns
that avoid shorts between the wires.
Bonding wires have inferior electrical properties, such as a high individual inductance (5
nH or more) and mutual inductance with neighboring signals. The inductance of a bonding
wire is typically about 1 nH/mm, while the inductance per package pin ranges between 7
and 40 nH per pin depending on the type of package as well as the positioning of the pin
on the package boundary [Steidel83].Typical values of the parasitic inductances and
capacitances for a number of commonly used packages are summarized in Table 2.2.
3. The exact value of the parasitics is hard to predict because of the manufacturing
approach and irregular outlay.
New attachment techniques are being explored as a result of these deficiencies. In
one approach, called Tape Automated Bonding (or TAB), the die is attached to a metal
lead frame that is printed on a polymer film (typically polyimide) (Figure 2.12a). The con-
nection between chip pads and polymer film wires is made using solder bumps (Figure
2.12b). The tape can then be connected to the package body using a number of techniques.
One possible approach is to use pressure connectors.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 60 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
60 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
Sprocket
hole Film + Pattern
Solder bump
Die
Test
pads
Substrate
Lead
frame (b) Die attachment using solder bumps
Polymer film
(a) Polymer tape with imprinted wiring pattern
Figure 2.12 Tape-automated bonding (TAB).
Table 2.2 Typical capacitance and inductance values of package and bonding styles (from [Steidel83]
and [Franzon93]).
Capacitance Inductance
Package Type (pF) (nH)
68-pin plastic DIP 4 35
68-pin ceramic DIP 7 20
256-pin grid array 1–5 2–15
Wire bond 0.5–1 1–2
Solder bump 0.1–0.5 0.01–0.1
The advantage of the TAB process is that it is highly automated. The sprockets in
the film are used for automatic transport. All connections are made simultaneously. The
printed approach helps to reduce the wiring pitch, which results in higher lead counts.
Elimination of the long bonding wires improves the electrical performance. For instance,
for a two-conductor layer, 48 mm TAB Circuit, the following electrical parameters hold: L
≈ 0.3–0.5 nH, C ≈ 0.2–0.3 pF, and R ≈ 50–200 Ω [Doane93, p. 420].
Another approach is to flip the die upside-down and attach it directly to the substrate
using solder bumps. This technique, called flip-chip mounting, has the advantage of a
superior electrical performance (Figure 2.13). Instead of making all the I/O connections
on the die boundary, pads can be placed at any position on the chip. This can help address
the power- and clock-distribution problems, since the interconnect materials on the sub-
strate (e.g., Cu or Au) are typically of a better quality than the Al on the chip.
Interconnect Level 2—Package Substrate to Board
When connecting the package to the PC board, through-hole mounting has been the pack-
aging style of choice. A PC board is manufactured by stacking layers of copper and insu-

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 61 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits 61
Die
Solder bumps
Interconnect
layers
Figure 2.13 Flip-chip bonding.
Substrate
lating epoxy glass. In the through-hole mounting approach, holes are drilled through the
board and plated with copper. The package pins are inserted and electrical connection is
made with solder (Figure 2.14a). The favored package in this class was the dual-in-line
package or DIP (Figure 2.15a). The packaging density of the DIP degrades rapidly when
the number of pins exceeds 64. This problem can be alleviated by using the pin-grid-array
(PGA) package that has leads on the entire bottom surface instead of only on the periphery
(Figure 2.15b). PGAs can extend to large pin counts (over 400 pins are possible).
(a) Through-hole mounting (b) Surface mount
Figure 2.14 Board-mounting approaches.
The through-hole mounting approach offers a mechanically reliable and sturdy con-
nection. However, this comes at the expense of packaging density. For mechanical rea-
sons, a minimum pitch of 2.54 mm between the through-holes is required. Even under
those circumstances, PGAs with large numbers of pins tend to substantially weaken the
board. In addition, through-holes limit the board packing density by blocking lines that
might otherwise have been routed below them, which results in longer interconnections.
PGAs with large pin counts hence require extra routing layers to connect to the multitudes
of pins. Finally, while the parasitic capacitance and inductance of the PGA are slightly
lower than that of the DIP, their values are still substantial.
Many of the shortcomings of the through-hole mounting are solved by using the
surface-mount technique. A chip is attached to the surface of the board with a solder con-
nection without requiring any through-holes (Figure 2.14b). Packing density is increased
for the following reasons: (1) through-holes are eliminated, which provides more wiring
space; (2) the lead pitch is reduced; and (3) chips can be mounted on both sides of the
board. In addition, the elimination of the through-holes improves the mechanical strength
of the board. On the negative side, the on-the-surface connection makes the chip-board
connection weaker. Not only is it cumbersome to mount a component on a board, but also
more expensive equipment is needed, since a simple soldering iron will not do anymore.
Finally, testing of the board is more complex, because the package pins are no longer
accessible at the backside of the board. Signal probing becomes hard or even impossible.
A variety of surface-mount packages are currently in use with different pitch and
pin-count parameters. Three of these packages are shown in Figure 2.15: the small-outline
package with gull wings, the plastic leaded package (PLCC) with J-shaped leads, and the

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 62 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
62 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
2
7
1 Bare die
2 DIP
5
3 PGA
4 Small-outline IC
5 Quad flat pack
6 PLCC
1
7 Leadless carrier
3
4
6 
Figure 2.15 An overview of commonly used package types.
leadless chip carrier. An overview of the most important parameters for a number of
packages is given in Table 2.3.
Table 2.3 Parameters of various types of chip carriers.
Lead spacing Lead count
Package type (Typical) (Maximum)
Dual-in-line 2.54 mm 64
Pin grid array 2.54 mm > 300
Small-outline IC 1.27 mm 28
Leaded chip carrier (PLCC) 1.27 mm 124
Leadless chip carrier 0.75 mm 124
Even surface-mount packaging is unable to satisfy the quest for evermore higher
pin-counts. This is worsened by the demand for power connections: today’s high perfor-
mance chips, operating at low supply voltages, require as many power and ground pins as
signal I/Os! When more than 300 I/O connections are needed, solder balls replace pins as
the preferred interconnect medium between package and board. An example of such a
packaging approach, called ceramic ball grid array (BGA), is shown in Figure 2.16. Sol-
der bumps are used to connect both the die to the package substrate, and the package to the
board. The area array interconnect of the BGA provides constant input/output density
regardless of the number of total package I/O pins. A minimum pitch between solder balls
of as low as 0.8 mm can be obtained, and packages with multiple 1000’s of I/O signals are
feasible.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 63 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.4 Packaging Integrated Circuits 63
Thermal
Flip-chip
Lid grease Chip 
solder joints
Ceramic base
Board
(b)
(a) Solder ball
Figure 2.16 Ball grid array packaging; (a) cross-section, (b) photo of package bottom
Multi-Chip Modules—Die-to-Board
The deep hierarchy of interconnect levels in the package is becoming unacceptable in
today’s complex designs with their higher levels of integration, large signal counts, and
increased performance requirements. The trend is toward reducing the number of levels.
For the time being, attention is focused on the elimination of the first level in the packag-
ing hierarchy. Eliminating one layer in the packaging hierarchy by mounting the die
directly on the wiring backplanes—board or substrate—offers a substantial benefit when
performance or density is a major issue. This packaging approach is called the multichip
module technique (or MCM), and results in a substantial increase in packing density as
well as improved performance.
A number of the previously mentioned die-mounting techniques can be adapted to
mount dies directly on the substrate. This includes wire bonding, TAB, and flip-chip,
although the latter two are preferable. The substrate itself can vary over a wide range of
materials, depending upon the required mechanical, electrical, thermal, and economical
requirements. Materials of choice are epoxy substrates (similar to PC boards), metal,
ceramics, and silicon. Silicon has the advantage of presenting a perfect match in mechani-
cal and thermal properties with respect to the die material.
The main advantages of the MCM approach are the increased packaging density and
performance. An example of an MCM module implemented using a silicon substrate
(commonly dubbed silicon-on-silicon) is shown in Figure 2.17. The module, which imple-
ments an avionics processor module and is fabricated by Rockwell International, contains
53 ICs and 40 discrete devices on a 2.2″ × 2.2″ substrate with aluminum polyimide inter-
connect. The interconnect wires are only an order of magnitude wider than what is typical
for on-chip wires, since similar patterning approaches are used. The module itself has 180
I/O pins. Performance is improved by the elimination of the chip-carrier layer with its
assorted parasitics, and through a reduction of the global wiring lengths on the die, a result
of the increased packaging density. For instance, a solder bump has an assorted capaci-
tance and inductance of only 0.1 pF and 0.01 nH respectively. The MCM technology can
also reduce power consumption significantly, since large output drivers—and associated
dissipation—become superfluous due to the reduced load capacitance of the output pads.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 64 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
64 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
Figure 2.17 Avionics processor module. Courtesy of Rockwell International.
The dynamic power associated with the switching of the large load capacitances is simul-
taneously reduced.
While MCM technology offers some clear benefits, its main disadvantage is eco-
nomic. This technology requires some advanced manufacturing steps that make the pro-
cess expensive. The approach is only justifiable when either dense housing or extreme
performance is essential. In the near future, this argument might become obsolete as
MCM approaches proliferate.
2.4.3 Thermal Considerations in Packaging
As the power consumption of integrated circuits rises, it becomes increasingly important
to efficiently remove the heat generated by the chips. A large number of failure mecha-
nisms in ICs are accentuated by increased temperatures. Examples are leakage in reverse-
biased diodes, electromigration, and hot-electron trapping. To prevent failure, the temper-
ature of the die must be kept within certain ranges. The supported temperature range for
commercial devices during operation equals 0° to 70°C. Military parts are more demand-
ing and require a temperature range varying from –55° to 125°C.
The cooling effectiveness of a package depends upon the thermal conduction of the
package material, which consists of the package substrate and body, the package composi-
tion, and the effectiveness of the heat transfer between package and cooling medium.
Standard packaging approaches use still or circulating air as the cooling medium. The
transfer efficiency can be improved by adding finned metal heat sinks to the package.
More expensive packaging approaches, such as those used in mainframes or supercomput-

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 65 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology 65
ers, force air, liquids, or inert gases through tiny ducts in the package to achieve even
greater cooling efficiencies.
<We may want to briefly introduce the thermal equation here.>
As an example, a 40-pin DIP has a thermal resistance of 38 °C/W and 25 °C/W for
natural and forced convection of air. This means that a DIP can dissipate 2 watts (3 watts)
of power with natural (forced) air convection, and still keep the temperature difference
between the die and the environment below 75 °C. For comparison, the thermal resistance
of a ceramic PGA ranges from 15 ° to 30 °C/W.
Since packaging approaches with decreased thermal resistance are prohibitively
expensive, keeping the power dissipation of an integrated circuit within bounds is an eco-
nomic necessity. The increasing integration levels and circuit performance make this task
nontrivial. An interesting relationship in this context has been derived by Nagata
[Nagata92]. It provides a bound on the integration complexity and performance as a func-
tion of the thermal parameters
NG ∆T
------- ≤ ------- (2.2)
tp θE
where NG is the number of gates on the chip, tp the propagation delay, ∆T the maximum
temperature difference between chip and environment, θ the thermal resistance between
them, and E the switching energy of each gate.
Example 2.2 Thermal Bounds On Integration
5 
For ∆T = 100 °C, θ = 2.5 °C/W and E = 0.1 pJ, this results in NG/tp ≤ 4 × 10 (gates/nsec). In
other words, the maximum number of gates on a chip, when all gates are operating simulta-
neously, must be less than 400,000 if the switching speed of each gate is 1 nsec. This is equiv-
alent to a power dissipation of 40 W.
Fortunately, not all gates are operating simultaneously in real systems. The maxi-
mum number of gates can be substantially larger, based on the activity in the circuit. For
instance, it was experimentally derived that the ratio between the average switching period
and the propagation delay ranges from 20 to 200 in mini- and large-scale computers
[Masaki92].
Nevertheless, Eq. (2.2) demonstrates that heat dissipation and thermal concerns
present an important limitation on circuit integration. Design approaches for low power
that reduce either E or the activity factor are rapidly gaining importance.
2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology
Modern CMOS processes pretty much track the flow described in the previous sections
although a number of the steps might be reversed, a single well approach might be fol-
lowed, a grown field oxide instead of the trench approach might be used, or extra steps
such as LDD (Lightly Doped Drain) might be introduced. Also, it is quite common to
cover the polysilicon interconnections as well as the drain and source regions with a sili-
cide such as TiSi2 to improve the conductivity (see Figure 2.2). This extra operation is

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 66 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
66 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
inserted between steps i and j of our process. Some important modifications or improve-
ments to the technology are currently under way or are on the horizon, and deserve some
attention. Beyond these, it is our belief that no dramatic changes, breaking away from the
described CMOS technology, must be expected in the next decade.
2.5.1 Short-Term Developments
Copper and Low-k Dielectrics
A recurring theme in this text book will be the increasing impact of interconnect on the
overall design performance. Process engineers are continuously evaluating alternative
options for the traditional ‘Aluminum conductor—SiO2 insulator’ combination that has
been the norm for the last decades. In 1998, engineers at IBM introduced an approach that
finally made the use of Copper as an interconnect material in a CMOS process viable and
economical [IEEESpectrum98]. Copper has the advantage of have a resistivity that is sub-
stantially lower than Aluminum. Yet it has the disadvantage of easy diffusion into silicon,
which degrades the characteristics of the devices. Coating the copper with a buffer mate-
rial such as Titanium Nitride, preventing the diffusion, addresses this problem, but
requires a special deposition process. The Dual Damascene process, introduced by IBM,
(Figure 2.18) uses a metallization approach that fills trenches etched into the insulator, fol-
lowed by a chemical-mechanical polishing step. This is in contrast with the traditional
approach that first deposits a full metal layer, and removes the redundant material through
etching.
In addition to the lower resistivity interconnections, insulator materials with a lower
dielectric constant than SiO2 —and hence lower capacitance— have also found their way
into the production process starting with the 0.18 μm CMOS process generation.
(a) (b)
Figure 2.18
The damascene process (from Geppert98]):
process steps (a), and microphotograph of interconnect after
removal of insulator (b)

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 67 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.5 Perspective — Trends in Process Technology 67
Silicon-on-Insulator
While having been around for quite a long time, there seems to be a good chance that Sili-
con-on-Insulator (SOI) CMOS might replace the traditional CMOS process, described in
the previous sections (also known as the bulk CMOS process). The main difference lies in
the start material: the transistors are constructed in a very thin layer of silicon, deposited
on top of a thick layer of insulating SiO2 (Figure 2.19). The primary advantages of the SOI
process are reduced parasitics and better transistor on-off characteristics. It has, for
instance, been demonstrated by researchers at IBM that the porting of a design from a bulk
CMOS to an SOI process —leaving all other design and process parameters such as chan-
nel length and oxide thickness identical— yields a performance improvement of 22%
[Allen99]. Preparing a high quality SOI substrate at an economical cost was long the main
hindrance against a large-scale introduction of the process. This picture has changed at the
end of the nineties, and SOI is steadily moving into the mainstream.
Gate
t ox
+  +
oxide n t Si p n oxide
Buried Oxide (BOX) tBox
p-substrate
(a) (b)
Figure 2.19 Silicon-on-insulator process— schematic diagram (a) and SEM cross-section (b).
2.5.2 In the Longer Term
Extending the life of CMOS technology beyond the next decade, and deeply below the
100 nm channel length region however will require re-engineering of both the process
technology and the device structure. We already are witnessing the emergence of a wide
range of new devices (such as organic transistors, molecular switches, and quantum
devices). While projecting what approaches will dominate in that era equals resorting to
crystal-ball gazing, one interesting development is worth mentioning.
Truly Three-Dimensional Integrated Circuits
Getting signals in and out of the computation elements in a timely fashion is one of the
main challenges presented by the continued increase in integration density. One way to
address this problem is to introduce extra active layers, and to sandwich them in-between
the metal interconnect layers (Figure 2.20). This enables us to position high density mem-
ory on top of the logic processors implemented in the bulk CMOS, reducing the distance
between computation and storage, and hence also the delay [Souri00]. In addition, devices
with different voltage, performance, or substrate material requirements can be placed in

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 68 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
68 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
different layers. For instance, the top active layer can be reserved for the realization of
optical transceivers, which may help to address the input/output requirements, or MEMS
(Micro Electro-Mechanical Systems) devices providing sensoring functions or radio-fre-
quency (RF) interfaces.
optical device T3 - Optical I/O; MEMS
M6
M5
M4
M3
n+/p+ n+/p+ T2 - High Density Memory
M2
M1
Figure 2.20 Example of true 3D integration. Extra
active layers (T*), implementing high density memory
n+/p+ n+/p+ and I/O, are sandwiched between the metal
Bulk T1 - Logic interconnect layers (M*).
While this approach may seem to be promising, a number of major challenges and
hindrances have to be resolved to make it really viable. How to remove the dissipated heat
is one of the compelling questions. Ensuring yield is another one. Yet, researchers are
demonstrating major progress, and 3D integration might very well be on the horizon.
Before the true solution arrives, we might have to rely on some intermediate approaches.
One alternative, called 2.5D integration, is to bond two fully processed wafers, on which
circuits are fabricated on the surface such that the chips completely overlap. Vias are
etched to electrically connect both chips after metallization. The advantages of this tech-
nology lie in the similar electrical properties of devices on all active levels and the inde-
pendence of processing temperature since all chips can be fabricated separately and later
bonded. The major limitation of this technique is its lack of precision (best case alignment
+/- 2 μm), which restricts the inter-chip communication to global metal lines.
One picture that strongly emerges from these futuristic devices is that the line
between chip, substrate, package, and board is blurring, and that designers of these sys-
tems-on-a-die will have to consider all these aspects simultaneously.
2.6 Summary
This chapter has presented an a birds-eye view on issues regarding the manufacturing and
packaging of CMOS integrated circuits.
• The manufacturing process of integrated circuits require a large number of steps,
each of which consists of a sequence of basic operations. A number of these steps
and/or operations, such as photolithograpical exposure and development, material
deposition, and etching, are executed very repetitively in the course of the manufac-
turing process.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 69 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
Section 2.7 To Probe Further 69
• The optical masks forms the central interface between the intrinsics of the manufac-
turing process and the design that the user wants to see transferred to the silicon fab-
ric.
• The design rules set define the constraints n terms of minimum width and separation
that the IC design has to adhere to if the resulting circuit is to be fully functional.
This design rules acts as the contract between the circuit designer and the process
engineer.
• The package forms the interface between the circuit implemented on the silicon die
and the outside world, and as such has a major impact on the performance, reliabil-
ity, longevity, and cost of the integrated circuit.
2.7 To Probe Further
Many textbooks on semiconductor manufacturing have been published over the last few
decades. An excellent overview of the state-of-the-art in CMOS manufacturing can be
found in the “Silicon VLSI Technology” book by J. Plummer, M. Deal, and P. Griffin
[Plummer00]. A visual overview of the different steps in the manufacturing process can be
found on the web at [Fullman99]. Other sources for information are the IEEE Transactions
on Electron Devices, and the Technical Digest of the IEDM conference.
REFERENCES
[Allen99] D. Allen, et al., “A 0.2 μm 1.8 V SOI 550 MHz PowerPC Microprocessor with Copper
Interconnects,” Proceedings IEEE ISSCC Conference, vol. XLII, pp. 438-439, February 1999.
[Bakoglu90] H. Bakoglu, Circuits, Interconnections and Packaging for VLSI, Addison-Wesley,
1990.
[Doane93] D. Doane, ed., Multichip Module Technologies and Alternatives, Van Nostrand-Rein-
hold, 1993.
[Franzon93] P. Franzon, “Electrical Design of Digital Multichip Modules,” in [Doane93], pp
525–568, 1993.
[Fullman99] Fullman Kinetics, “The Semiconductor Manufacturing Process”, http://www.fullman-
kinetics.com/semiconductors/semiconductors.html, 1999.
[Geppert98] L. Geppert, “Technology—1998 Analysis and Forecast”, IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 35, No
1, pp. 23, January 1998.
[Landman71] B. Landman and R. Russo, “On a Pin versus Block Relationship for Partitions of
Logic Graphs,” IEEE Trans. on Computers, vol. C-20, pp. 1469–1479, December 1971.
[Masaki92] A. Masaki, “Deep-Submicron CMOS Warms Up to High-Speed Logic,” Circuits and
Devices Magazine, Nov. 1992.
[Mead80] C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Systems, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
[Nagata92] M. Nagata, “Limitations, Innovations, and Challenges of Circuits and Devices into a
Half Micrometer and Beyond,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 465–472,
April 1992.

--- Page Break ---

chapter2.fm Page 70 Friday, January 18, 2002 8:59 AM
70 THE MANUFACTURING PROCESS Chapter 2
[Plummer00] J. Plummer, M. Deal, and P. Griffin, Silicon VLSI Technology, Prentice Hall, 2000.
[Steidel83] C. Steidel, “Assembly Techniques and Packaging,” in [Sze83], pp. 551–598, 1983.
[Souri00] S. J. Souri, K. Banerjee, A. Mehrotra and K. C. Saraswat, “Multiple Si Layer ICs: Motiva-
tion, Performance Analysis, and Design Implications,” Proceedings 37th Design Automation
Conference, pp. 213-220, June 2000.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 103 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
C H A P T E R
4
T H E W I R E
Determining and quantifying interconnect parameters
n
Introducing circuit models for interconnect wires
n
Detailed wire models for SPICE
n
Technology scaling and its impact on interconnect
4.1 Introduction 4.4.5 The Transmission Line
4.2 A First Glance 4.5 SPICE Wire Models
4.5.1 Distributed rc Lines in SPICE
4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance,
Resistance, and Inductance 4.5.2 Transmission Line Models in SPICE
4.3.1 Capacitance 4.6 Perspective: A Look into the Future
4.3.2 Resistance
4.3.3 Inductance
4.4 Electrical Wire Models
4.4.1 The Ideal Wire
4.4.2 The Lumped Model
4.4.3 The Lumped RC model
4.4.4 The Distributed rc Line
103

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 104 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
104 THE WIRE Chapter 4
4.1 Introduction
Throughout most of the past history of integrated circuits, on-chip interconnect wires were
considered to be second class citizens that had only to be considered in special cases or
when performing high-precision analysis. With the introduction of deep-submicron semi-
conductor technologies, this picture is undergoing rapid changes. The parasitics effects
introduced by the wires display a scaling behavior that differs from the active devices such
as transistors, and tend to gain in importance as device dimensions are reduced and circuit
speed is increased. In fact, they start to dominate some of the relevant metrics of digital
integrated circuits such as speed, energy-consumption, and reliability. This situation is
aggravated by the fact that improvements in technology make the production of ever-
larger die sizes economically feasible, which results in an increase in the average length of
an interconnect wire and in the associated parasitic effects. A careful and in-depth analysis
of the role and the behavior of the interconnect wire in a semiconductor technology is
therefore not only desirable, but even essential.
4.2 A First Glance
The designer of an electronic circuit has multiple choices in realizing the interconnections
between the various devices that make up the circuit. State-of-the-art processes offer mul-
+
tiple layers of Aluminum, and at least one layer of polysilicon. Even the heavily doped n
+ 
or p layers, typically used for the realization of source and drain regions, can be
employed for wiring purposes. These wires appear in the schematic diagrams of electronic
circuits as simple lines with no apparent impact on the circuit performance. In our discus-
sion on the integrated-circuit manufacturing process, it became clear that this picture is
overly simplistic, and that the wiring of today’s integrated circuits forms a complex geom-
etry that introduces capacitive, resistive, and inductive parasitics. All three have multiple
effects on the circuit behavior.
1. An increase in propagation delay, or, equivalently, a drop in performance.
2. An impact on the energy dissipation and the power distribution.
3. An introduction of extra noise sources, which affects the reliability of the circuit.
A designer can decide to play it safe and include all these parasitic effects in her analysis
and design optimization process. This conservative approach is non-constructive and even
unfeasible. First of all, a “complete” model is dauntingly complex and is only applicable
to very small topologies. It is hence totally useless for today’s integrated circuits with their
millions of circuit nodes. Furthermore, this approach has the disadvantage that the “forest
gets lost between the trees”. The circuit behavior at a given circuit node is only determined
by a few dominant parameters. Bringing all possible effects to bear, only obscures the pic-
ture and turns the optimization and design process a “trial-and-error” operation rather than
an enlightened and focused search.
To achieve the latter, it is important that the designer has a clear insight in the para-
sitic wiring effects, their relative importance, and their models. This is best illustrated with
the simple example, shown in Figure 4.1. Each wire in a bus network connects a transmit-

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 105 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.2 A First Glance 105
transmitters receivers
schematics view physical view
Figure 4.1 Schematic and physical views of wiring of bus-network. The latter shows only a limited area (as indicated by
the shadings in the schematics).
ter (or transmitters) to a set of receivers and is implemented as a link of wire segments of
various lengths and geometries. Assume that all segments are implemented on a single
interconnect layer, isolated from the silicon substrate and from each other by a layer of
dielectric material. Be aware that the reality may be far more complex.
A full-fledged circuit model, taking into account the parasitic capacitance, resis-
tance, and the inductance of the interconnections, is shown inFigure 4.2a. Observe that
these extra circuit elements are not located in a single physical point, but are distributed
over the length of the wire. This is a necessity when the length of the wire becomes signif-
icantly larger than its width. Notice also that some parasitics are inter-wire, hence creating
coupling effects between the different bus-signals that were not present in the original
schematics.
Analyzing the behavior of this schematic, which only models a small part of the cir-
cuit, is slow and cumbersome. Fortunately, substantial simplifications can often be made,
some of which are enumerated below.
• Inductive effects can be ignored if the resistance of the wire is substantial — this is
for instance the case for long Aluminum wires with a small cross-section — or if the
rise and fall times of the applied signals are slow.
• When the wires are short, the cross-section of the wire is large, or the interconnect
material used has a low resistivity, a capacitance-only model can be used (Figure
4.2b).
• Finally, when the separation between neighboring wires is large, or when the wires
only run together for a short distance, inter-wire capacitance can be ignored, and all
the parasitic capacitance can be modeled as capacitance to ground.
Obviously, the latter problems are the easiest to model, analyze, and optimize. The
experienced designer knows to differentiate between dominant and secondary effects. The
goal of this chapter is to present the reader the basic techniques to estimate the values of

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 106 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
106 THE WIRE Chapter 4
(a) (b)
Figure 4.2 Wire models for the circuit of Figure 4.1. Model (a) considers most of the wire parasitics (with the
exception of interwire resistance and mutual inductance), while model (b) only considers capacitance.
the various interconnect parameters, simple models to evaluate their impact, and a set of
rules-of-thumb to decide when and where a particular model or effect should be consid-
ered.
4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance
4.3.1 Capacitance
An accurate modeling of the wire capacitance(s) in a state-of-the-art integrated circuit is a
non-trivial task and is even today the subject of advanced research. The task is compli-
cated by the fact that the interconnect structure of contemporary integrated circuits is
three-dimensional, as was clearly demonstrated in the process cross-section of FIGURE
(CHAPTER 2). The capacitance of such a wire is a function of its shape, its environment,
its distance to the substrate, and the distance to surrounding wires. Rather than getting lost
in complex equations and models, a designer typically will use an advanced extraction
tool to get precise values of the interconnect capacitances of a completed layout. Most
semiconductor manufacturers also provide empirical data for the various capacitance con-
tributions, as measured from a number of test dies. Yet, some simple first-order models
come in handy to provide a basic understanding of the nature of interconnect capacitance
and its parameters, and of how wire capacitance will evolve with future technologies.
Consider first a simple rectangular wire placed above the semiconductor substrate,
as shown in Figure 4.3. If the width of the wire is substantially larger than the thickness of
the insulating material, it may be assumed that the electrical-field lines are orthogonal to
the capacitor plates, and that its capacitance can be modeled by theparallel-plate capaci-

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 107 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 107
tor model (also called area capacitance). Under those circumstances, the total capacitance
1
of the wire can be approximated as
εdi
cint = ------ WL (4.1)
tdi
where W and L are respectively the width and length of the wire, andtdi and εdi represent
the thickness of the dielectric layer and its permittivity. SiO2 is the dielectric material of
choice in integrated circuits, although some materials with lower permittivity, and hence
lower capacitance, are coming in use. Examples of the latter are organic polyimides and
-
aerogels. ε is typically expressed as the product of two terms, orε = ε rε0. ε 0 = 8.854 × 10
12 
F/m is the permittivity of free space, andεr the relative permittivity of the insulating
material. Table 4.1 presents the relative permittivity of several dielectrics used in inte-
grated circuits. In summary, the important message from Eq. (4.1) is that the capacitance
is proportional to the overlap between the conductors and inversely proportional to their
separation.
Table 4.1 Relative permittivity of some typical dielectric materials.
Material εr
Free space 1
Aerogels ~1.5
Polyimides (organic) 3-4
Silicon dioxide 3.9
Glass-epoxy (PC board) 5
Silicon Nitride (Si3N4) 7.5
Alumina (package) 9.5
Silicon 11.7
Current flow
L
Electrical-field lines
W
H
tdi Dielectric
Figure 4.3 Parallel-plate capacitance
Substrate 
model of interconnect wire.
1 
To differentiate between distributed (per unit lenght) wire parameters versus total lumped values, we
will use lowercase to denote the former and uppercase for the latter.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 108 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
108 THE WIRE Chapter 4
In actuality, this model is too simplistic. To minimize the resistance of the wires
while scaling technology, it is desirable to keep the cross-section of the wire (W×H) as
large as possible — as will become apparent in a later section. On the other hand, small
values of W lead to denser wiring and less area overhead. As a result, we have over the
years witnessed a steady reduction in theW/H-ratio, such that it has even dropped below
unity in advanced processes. This is clearly visible on the process cross-section of FIG-
URE. Under those circumstances, the parallel-plate model assumed above becomes inac-
curate. The capacitance between the side-walls of the wires and the substrate, called the
fringing capacitance, can no longer be ignored and contributes to the overall capacitance.
This effect is illustrated in Figure 4.4a. Presenting an exact model for this difficult geome-
cfringe
(a) Fringing fields
cpp
w
H
Figure 4.4 The fringing-field
+ capacitance. The model decomposes the
capacitance into two contributions: a
parallel-plate capacitance, and a fringing
capacitance, modeled by a cylindrical wire
with a diameter equal to the thickness of
the wire.
(b) Model of fringing-field capacitance.
try is hard. So, as good engineering practice dictates, we will use a simplified model that
approximates the capacitance as the sum of two components (Figure 4.4b): a parallel-plate
capacitance determined by the orthogonal field between a wire of widthw and the ground
plane, in parallel with the fringing capacitance modeled by a cylindrical wire with a
dimension equal to the interconnect thicknessH. The resulting approximation is simple
and works fairly well in practice.
wεdi 2πε di
cwire = cpp + cfringe = ---------- + -------------------------- (4.2)
tdi log( tdi ⁄ H)
with w = W - H/2 a good approximation for the width of the parallel-plate capacitor.
Numerous more accurate models (e.g. [Vdmeijs84]) have been developed over time, but
these tend to be substantially more complex, and defeat our goal of developing a concep-
tual understanding.
To illustrate the importance of the fringing-field component, Figure 4.5 plots the
value of the wiring capacitance as a function of (W/H). For larger values of (W/H) the total
capacitance approaches the parallel-plate model. For (W/H) smaller than 1.5, the fringing

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 109 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 109
component actually becomes the dominant component. The fringing capacitance can
increase the overall capacitance by a factor of more than 10 for small line widths. It is
interesting to observe that the total capacitance levels off to a constant value of approxi-
mately 1 pF/cm for line widths smaller than the insulator thickness. In other words, the
capacitance is no longer a function of the width.
Figure 4.5 Capacitance of interconnect wire as a function of (W/H), including fringing-field effects (from
[Schaper83]). Two values of T/H are considered.
So far, we have restricted our analysis to the case of a single rectangular conductor
placed over a ground plane. This structure, called a microstripline, used to be a good
model for semiconductor interconnections when the number of interconnect layers was
restricted to 1 or 2. Todays processes offer many more layers of interconnect, which are
packed quite densily in addition. In this scenario, the assumption that a wire is completely
isolated from its surrounding structures and is only capacitively coupled to ground,
becomes untenable. This is illustrated in Figure 4.6, where the capacitance components of
a wire embedded in an interconnect hierarchy are identified. Each wire is not only coupled
to the grounded substrate, but also to the neighboring wires on the same layer and on adja-
cent layers. To a first order, this does not change the total capacitance connected to a given
wire. The main difference is that not all its capacitive components do terminate at the
grounded substrate, but that a large number of them connect to other wires, which have
dynamically varying voltage levels. We will later see that thesefloating capacitors form
not only a source of noise (crosstalk), but also can have a negative impact on the perfor-
mance of the circuit.
In summary, interwire capacitances become a dominant factor in multi-layer inter-
connect structures. This effect is more outspoken for wires in the higher interconnect lay-
ers, as these wires are farther away from the substrate. The increasing contribution of the
interwire capacitance to the total capacitance with decreasing feature sizes is best illus-
trated by Figure 4.7. In this graph,which plots the capacitive components of a set of paral-
lel wires routed above a ground plane, it is assumed that dielectric and wire thickness are

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 110 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
110 THE WIRE Chapter 4
fringing parallel
Figure 4.6 Capacitive coupling
between wires in interconnect
hierarchy.
held constant while scaling all other dimensions. WhenW becomes smaller than 1.75 H,
the interwire capacitance starts to dominate.
Figure 4.7 Interconnect capacitance as a
function of design rules. It consists of a
capacitance to ground and an inter-wire
capacitance (from [Schaper83]).
Design DataDInterconnect Design Data
Interconnect Capacitance Design Data
A set of typical interconnect capacitances for a standard 0.25μm CMOS process are given in
Table 4.2. The process supports 1 layer of polysylicon and 5 layers of Aluminum. Metal layers
1 to 4 have the same thickness and use a similar dielectric, while the wires at metal layer 5 are
almost twice as thick and are embedded in a dielectric with a higher permittivity. When placing
the wires over the thick field oxide that is used to isolate different transistors, use the “Field”
column in the table, while wires routed over the active area see a higher capacitance as seen in
the “Active” column. Be aware that the presented values are only indicative. To obtain more

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 111 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 111
accurate results for actual structures, complex 3-dimensional models should be used that take
the environment of the wire into account.
Table 4.2 Wire area and fringe capacitance values for typical 0.25μm CMOS process. The table
rows represent the top plate of the capacitor, the columns the bottom plate. The area
2
capacitances are expressed in aF/μm , while the fringe capacitances (given in the
shaded rows) are in aF/μm.
Field Active Poly Al1 Al2 Al3 Al4
Poly 88
54
Al1 30 41 57
40 47 54
Al2 13 15 17 36
25 27 29 45
Al3 8.9 9.4 10 15 41
18 19 20 27 49
Al4 6.5 6.8 7 8.9 15 35
14 15 15 18 27 45
Al5 5.2 5.4 5.4 6.6 9.1 14 38
12 12 12 14 19 27 52
Table 4.3 tabulates indicative values for the capacitances between parallel wires placed
on the same layer with a minimum spacing (as dictated by the design rules). Observe that these
numbers include both the parallel plate and fringing components. Once again, the capacitances
are a strong function of the topology. For instance, a ground plane placed on a neighboring
layer terminates a large fraction of the fringing field, and effectively reduces the interwire
capacitance. The polysilicon wires experience a reduced interwire capacitance due to the
smaller thickness of the wires. On the other hand, the thick Al5 wires display the highest inter-
wire capacitance. It is therefore advisable to either separate wires at this level by an amount
that is larger than the minimum allowed, or to use it for global signals that are not that sensitive
to interference. The supply rails are an example of the latter.
Table 4.3 Interwire capacitance per unit wire length for different interconnect layers of typical 0.25μm CMOS
process. The capacitances are expressed in aF/μm, and are for minimally-spaced wires.
Layer Poly Al1 Al2 Al3 Al4 Al5
Capacitance 40 95 85 85 85 115

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 112 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
112 THE WIRE Chapter 4
Example 4.1 Capacitance of Metal Wire
Some global signals, such as clocks, are distributed all over the chip. The length of those
wires can be substantial. For die sizes between 1 and 2 cm, wires can reach a length of 10 cm
and have associated wire capacitances of substantial value. Consider an aluminum wire of 10
cm long and 1 μm wide, routed on the first Aluminum layer. We can compute the value of the
total capacitance using the data presented in Table 4.2.
6  2 2
Area (parallel-plate) capacitance: (0.1 × 10 μm ) × 30 aF/μm = 3 pF
6 
Fringing capacitance: 2 × (0.1 × 10 μm) × 40 aF/μm = 8 pF
Total capacitance: 11 pF
Notice the factor 2 in the computation of the fringing capacitance, which takes the two sides
of the wire into account.
Suppose now that a second wire is routed alongside the first one, separated by only the
minimum allowed distance. From Table 4.3, we can determine that this wire will couple to
the first with a capacitance equal to
6 
Cinter =(0.1 × 10 μm) × 95 aF/μm = 9.5 pF
which is almost as large as the total capacitance to ground!
A similar exercise shows that moving the wire to Al4 would reduce the capacitance to
ground to 3.45 pF (0.65 pF area and 2.8 pF fringe), while the interwire capacitance would
remain approximately the same at 8.5 pF.
4.3.2 Resistance
The resistance of a wire is proportional to its lengthL and inversily proportional to its
cross-section A. The resistance of a rectangular conductor in the style of Figure 4.3 can be
expressed as
ρL ρL
R = ------ = --------- (4.3)
A HW
where the constant ρ is the resistivity of the material (in Ω-m). The resistivities of some
commonly-used conductive materials are tabulated in Table 4.4. Aluminum is the inter-
connect material most often used in integrated circuits because of its low cost and its com-
patibility with the standard integrated-circuit fabrication process. Unfortunately, it has a
large resistivity compared to materials such as Copper. With ever-increasing performance
targets, this is rapidly becoming a liability and top-of-the-line processes are now increas-
ingly using Copper as the conductor of choice..
Table 4.4 Resistivity of commonly-used conductors (at 20 C).
Material ρ (Ω -m)
− 8
Silver (Ag) 1.6 ×10 

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 113 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 113
Table 4.4 Resistivity of commonly-used conductors (at 20 C).
Material ρ (Ω -m)
− 8
Copper (Cu) 1.7 ×10 
− 8
Gold (Au) 2.2 ×10 
− 8
Aluminum (Al) 2.7 ×10 
− 8
Tungsten (W) 5.5 ×10 
Since H is a constant for a given technology, Eq. (4.3) can be rewritten as follows,
L
R = Rq ----- (4.4)
W
with
ρ
Rq = ---- (4.5)
H
the sheet resistance of the material, having units of Ω/q (pronounced as Ohm-per-
square). This expresses that the resistance of a square conductor is independent of its abso-
lute size, as is apparent from Eq. (4.4). To obtain the resistance of a wire, simply multiply
the sheet resistance by its ratio (L/W).
Interconnect Resistance Design Data
Typical values of the sheet resistance of various interconnect materials are given in Table 4.5.
Table 4.5 Sheet resistance values for a typical 0.25μm CMOS process.
Material Sheet Resistance (Ω/q )
n- or p-well diffusion 1000 – 1500
+ + 
n , p diffusion 50 – 150
+ + 
n , p diffusion with silicide 3 – 5
+ + 
n , p polysilicon 150 – 200
+ + 
n , p polysilicon with silicide 4 – 5
Aluminum 0.05 – 0.1
From this table, we conclude that Aluminum is the preferred material for the wiring of
long interconnections. Polysilicon should only be used for local interconnect. Although the
+ +
sheet resistance of the diffusion layer (n , p ) is comparable to that of polysilicon, the use of dif-
fusion wires should be avoided due to its large capacitance and the associatedRC delay.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 114 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
114 THE WIRE Chapter 4
Advanced processes also offer silicided polysilicon and diffusion layers.A silicide is
a compound material formed using silicon and a refractory metal. This creates a highly
conductive material that can withstand high-temperature process steps without melting.
Examples of silicides are WSi2, TiSi2, PtSi2, and TaSi. WSi2, for instance, has a resistivity
ρ of 130 μΩ-cm, which is approximately eight times lower than polysilicon. The silicides
are most often used in a configuration called apolycide, which is a simple layered combi-
nation of polysilicon and a silicide. A typical polycide consists of a lower level of polysil-
icon with an upper coating of silicide and combines the best properties of both
materials— good adherence and coverage (from the poly) and high conductance (from the
silicide). A MOSFET fabricated with a polycide gate is shown in Figure 4.8. The advan-
tage of the silicided gate is a reduced gate resistance. Similarly, silicided source and drain
regions reduce the source and drain resistance of the device.
Silicide
Polysilicon
SiO2
+ +
n n Figure 4.8 A polycide-gate
p 
MOSFET.
Transitions between routing layers add extra resistance to a wire, called thecontact
resistance. The preferred routing strategy is thus to keep signal wires on a single layer
whenever possible and to avoid excess contacts or vias. It is possible to reduce the contact
resistance by making the contact holes larger. Unfortunately, current tends to concentrate
around the perimeter in a larger contact hole. This effect, calledcurrent crowding, puts a
practical upper limit on the size of the contact. The followingcontact resistances (for min-
imum-size contacts) are typical for a 0.25 μm process: 5-20 Ω for metal or polysilicon to
+ +
n , p , and metal to polysilicon; 1-5Ω for via’s (metal-to-metal contacts).
Example 4.2 Resistance of a Metal Wire
Consider again the aluminum wire of Example 4.2, which is 10 cm long and 1μm wide, and
is routed on the first Aluminum layer. Assuming a sheet resistance for Al1 of 0.075Ω/q , we
can compute the total resistance of the wire
6 
Rwire = 0.075 Ω/q × (0.1 × 10 μm) / (1 μm)= 7.5 kΩ
Implementing the wire in polysilicon with a sheet resistance of 175Ω/q raises the overall
resistance to 17.5 MΩ, which is clearly unacceptable. Silicided polysilicon with a sheet resis-
tance of 4 Ω/q offers a better alternative, but still translates into a wire with a 400 kΩ resis-
tance.
So far, we have considered the resistance of a semiconductor wire to be linear and
constant. This is definitely the case for most semiconductor circuits. At very high frequen-
cies however, an additional phenomenum — called theskin effect — comes into play such
that the resistance becomes frequency-dependent. High-frequency currents tend to flow
primarily on the surface of a conductor with the current density falling off exponentially

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 115 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 115
with depth into the conductor. The skin depth δ is defined as the depth where the current
-1 
falls off to a value ofe of its nominal value, and is given by
ρ
δ = --------- (4.6)
πfμ
with f the frequency of the signal andμ the permeability of the surrounding dielectric (typ-
-7 
ically equal to the permeability of free space, orμ = 4π × 10 H/m). For Aluminum at 1
GHz, the skin depth is equal to 2.6 μm. The obvious question is now if this is something
we should be concerned about when designing state-of-the-art digital circuits?
The effect can be approximated by assuming that the current flows uniformly in an
outer shell of the conductor with thicknessδ, as is illustrated in Figure 4.9 for a rectangu-
lar wire. Assuming that the overall cross-section of the wire is now limited to approxi-
δ
H
Figure 4.9 The skin-effect reduces the flow of the current to the
surface of the wire.
W
mately 2(W+H)δ, we obtain the following expression for the resistance (per unit length) at
high frequencies (f > fs):
πfμρ
r f( ) = ----------------------- (4.7)
2 ( H + W)
The increased resistance at higher frequencies may cause an extra attenuation — and
hence distortion — of the signal being transmitted over the wire. To determine the on-set
of the skin-effect, we can find the frequencyfs where the skin depth is equal to half the
largest dimension (W or H) of the conductor. Belowfs the whole wire is conducting cur-
rent, and the resistance is equal to (constant) low-frequency resistance of the wire. From
Eq. (4.6), we find the value offs:
4ρ
fs = ----------------------------------------- (4.8)
2
πμ ( max ( W H, ))
Example 4.3 Skin-effect and Aluminum wires
We determine the impact of the skin-effect on contemporary integrated circuits by analyz-
-8 
ing an Aluminum wire with a resistivity of 2.7×10 Ω-m, embedded in a SiO2 dielectric
-7 
with a permeability of 4π × 10 H/m. From Eq. (4.8), we find that the largest dimension of
wire should be at least 5.2 μm for the effect to be noticable at 1 GHz. This is confirmed by
the more accurate simulation results of Figure 4.10, which plots the increase in resistance
due to skin effects for different width Aluminum conductors. A 30% increase in resistance

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 116 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
116 THE WIRE Chapter 4
can be observed at 1 GHz for a 20 μm wire, while the increase for a 1μm wire is less than
1%.
Figure 4.10 Skin-effect induced
increase in resistance as a function
of frequency and wire width. All
simulations were performed for a
wire thickness of 0.7 μm
[Sylvester97].
In summary, the skin-effect is only an issue for wider wires. Since clocks tend to
carry the highest-frequency signals on a chip and also are fairly wide to limit resistance,
the skin effect is likely to have its first impact on these lines. This is a real concern for
GHz-range design, as clocks determine the overall performance of the chip (cycle time,
instructions per second, etc.). Another major design concern is that the adoption of better
conductors such as Copper may move the on-set of skin-effects to lower frequencies.
4.3.3 Inductance
Integrated-circuit designers tend to dismiss inductance as something they heard about in
their physics classes, but that has no impact on their field. This was definitely the case in
the first decades of integrated digital circuit design. Yet with the adoption of low-resistive
interconnect materials and the increase of switching frequencies to the super GHz range,
inductance starts to play a role even on a chip. Consequences of on-chip inductance
include ringing and overshoot effects, reflections of signals due to impedance mismatch,
inductive coupling between lines, and switching noise due toLdi/dt voltage drops.
The inductance of a section of a circuit can always be evaluated with the aid of its
definition, which states that a changing current passing through an inductor generates a
voltage drop DV
di
∆V = L  (4.9)
dt

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 117 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.3 Interconnect Parameters — Capacitance, Resistance, and Inductance 117
It is possible to compute the inductance a wire directly from its geometry and its
environment. A simpler approach relies on the fact that the capacitancec and the induc-
tance l (per unit length) of a wire are related by the following expression
cl = εμ (4.10)
with ε and μ respectivily the permittivity and permeability of the surrounding dielectric.
The caveat is that for this expression to be valid the conductor must be completely sur-
rounded by a uniform dielectric medium. This is most often not the case. Yet even when
the wire is embedded in different dielectric materials, its is possible to adopt “average”
dielectric constants such that Eq. (4.10) still can be used to get an approximative value of
the inductance.
Some other interesting relations, obtained from Maxwell’s laws, can be pointed out.
The constant product of permeability and permittivity also defines the speedν at which an
electromagnetic wave can propagate through the medium
1 1 c0
ν = -------- = ---------- = -------------- (4.11)
lc εμ εrμr
c0 equals the speed of light (30 cm/nsec) in a vacuum. The propagation speeds for a num-
ber of materials used in the fabrication of electronic circuits are tabulated inTable 4.6.
The propagation speed for SiO2 is two times slower than in a vacuum.
Table 4.6 Dielectric constants and wave-propagation speeds for various materials used in electronic circuits.
The relative permeability μr of most dielectrics is approximately equal to 1.
Propagation speed
Dielectric εr (cm/nsec)
Vacuum 1 30
SiO2 3.9 15
PC board (epoxy glass) 5.0 13
Alumina (ceramic package) 9.5 10
Example 4.4 Inductance of a Semiconductor Wire
Consider an Al1 wire implemented in the 0.25 micron CMOS technology and routed on top
of the field oxide. From Table 4.2, we can derive the capacitance of the wire per unit length:
c = (W×30 + 2×40) aF/μm
From Eq. (4.10), we can derive the inductance per unit length of the wire, assuming
SiO2 as the dielectric and assuming a uniform dielectric (make sure to use the correct units!)
− 12 − 7
l = (3.9 × 8.854 × 10  )×(4 π 10  )/ C
For wire widths of 0.4 μm, 1μm and 10μm, this leads to the following numbers:

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 118 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
118 THE WIRE Chapter 4
W = 0.4 μm: c = 92 aF/μm; l = 0.47 pH/μm
W = 1 μm: c = 110 aF/μm; l = 0.39 pH/μm
W = 10 μm: c = 380 aF/μm; l = 0.11 pH/μm
Assuming a sheet resistance of 0.075 Ω/q , we can also determine the resistance of the
wire,
r = 0.075/W Ω/μm
It is interesting to observe that the inductive part of the wire impedance becomes equal
in value to the resistive component at a frequency of 27.5 GHz (for a 1μm wide wire), as can
be obtained from solving the following expression:
ωl = 2πfl = r
For extra wide wires, this frequency reduces to approximately 11 GHz. For wires with
a smaller capacitance and resistance (such as the thicker wires located at the upper intercon-
nect layers), this frequency can become as low as 500 MHz, especially when better intercon-
nect materials such as Copper are being used. Yet, these numbers indicate that inductance
only becomes an issue in integrated circuits for frequencies that are well above 1 GHz.
4.4 Electrical Wire Models
In previous sections, we have introduced the electrical properties of the interconnect wire
— capacitance, resistance, and inductance — and presented some simple relations and
techniques to derive their values from the interconnect geometries and topologies. These
parasitic elements have an impact on the electrical behavior of the circuit and influence its
delay, power dissipation, and reliability. To study these effects requires the introduction of
electrical models that estimate and approximate the real behavior of the wire as a function
of its parameters. These models vary from very simple to very complex depending upon
the effects that are being studied and the required accuracy. In this section, we first derive
models for manual analysis, while how to cope with interconnect wires in the SPICE cir-
cuit simulator is the topic follows next.
4.4.1 The Ideal Wire
In schematics, wires occur as simple lines with no attached parameters or parasatics.
These wires have no impact on the electrical behavior of the circuit. A voltage change at
one end of the wire propagates immediately to its other ends, even if those are some dis-
tance away. Hence, it may be assumed that the same voltage is present at every segment of
the wire at the every point in time, and that the whole wire is anequipotential region.
While this ideal-wire model is simplistic, it has its value, especially in the early phases of
the design process when the designer wants to concentrate on the properties and the
behavior of the transistors that are being connected. Also, when studying small circuit
components such as gates, the wires tend to be very short and their parasitics ignorable.
Taking these into account would just make the analysis unnecessarily complex. More
often though, wire parasitics play a role and more complex models should be considered.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 119 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 119
4.4.2 The Lumped Model
The circuit parasitics of a wire are distributed along its length and are not lumped into a
single position. Yet, when only a single parasitic component is dominant, when the inter-
action between the components is small, or when looking at only one aspect of the circuit
behavior, it is often useful to lump the different fractions into a single circuit element. The
advantage of this approach is that the effects of the parasitic then can be described by an
ordinary differential equation. As we will see later, the description of a distributed element
requires partial differential equations.
As long as the resistive component of the wire is small and the switching frequen-
cies are in the low to medium range, it is meaningful to consider only the capacitive com-
ponent of the wire, and to lump the distributed capacitance into a single capacitor as
shown in Figure 4.11. Observe that in this model the wire still represents an equipotential
region, and that the wire itself does not introduce any delay. The only impact on perfor-
mance is introduced by the loading effect of the capacitor on the driving gate. This capac-
itive lumped model is simple, yet effective, and is the model of choice for the analysis of
most interconnect wires in digital integrated circuits.
Rdriver
Vout
Vout
c Vin
wire
Clumped
Driver
Figure 4.11 Distributed versus lumped capacitance model of wire.Clumped = L×cwire, with L the length of the wire and
cwire the capacitance per unit length. The driver is modeled as a voltage source and a source resistanceRdriver.
Example 4.5 Lumped capacitance model of wire
For the circuit of Figure 4.11, assume that a driver with a source resistance of 10 kΩ is used to
drive a 10 cm long, 1 μm wide Al1 wire. In Example 4.1, we have found that the total lumped capac-
itance for this wire equals 11 pf.
The operation of this simple RC network is described by the following ordinary differential
equation:
dVout Vout – Vin
Clumped  + ----------------------- = 0
dt Rdriver
When applying a step input (with Vin going from 0 to V), the transient response of this circuit is
known to be an exponential function, and is given by the following expression (whereτ =
Rdriver×Clumped, the time constant of the network):
−t/τ
Vout(t) = (1 − e ) V
The time to reach the 50% point is easily computed ast = ln(2)τ = 0.69τ. Similarly, it takes t
= ln(9)τ = 2.2τ to get to the 90% point. It is worth memorizing these numbers, as they are exten-
sively used in the rest of the text. Plugging in the numbers for this specific example yields

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 120 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
120 THE WIRE Chapter 4
t50% = 0.69 × 10 KΩ × 11 pF = 76 nsec
t90% =2.2 × 10 KΩ × 11 pF = 242 nsec
These numbers are not even acceptable for the lowest performance digital circuits. Techniques to
deal with this bottleneck, such as reducing the source resistance of the driver, will be introduced in
Chapter ZZZ.
While the lumped capacitor model is the most popular, sometimes it is also useful to
present lumped models of a wire with respect to either resistance and inductance. This is
often the case when studying the supply distribution network. Both the resistance and
inductance of the supply wires can be interpreted as parasitic noise sources that introduce
voltage drops and bounces on the supply rails.
4.4.3 The Lumped RC model
On-chip metal wires of over a few mm length have a significant resistance. The equipoten-
tial assumption, presented in the lumped-capacitor model, is no longer adequate, and a
resistive-capacitive model has to be adopted.
A first approach lumps the total wire resistance of each wire segment into one single
R and similarly combines the global capacitance into a single capacitorC. This simple
model, called the lumped RC model is pessimistic and inaccurate for long interconnect
wires, which are more adequately represented by adistributed rc-model. Yet, before ana-
lyzing the distributed model, its is worthwhile to spend some time on the analysis and the
modeling of lumped RC networks for the following reasons:
• The distributed rc-model is complex and no closed form solutions exist. The behav-
ior of the distributed rc-line can be adequately modeled by a simpleRC network.
• A common practice in the study of the transient behavior of complex transistor-wire
networks is to reduce the circuit to anRC network. Having a means to analyze such
a network effectively and to predict its first-order response would add a great asset
to the designers tool box.
In Example 4.5, we analyzed a single resistor-single capacitor network. The behavior of
such a network is fully described by a single differential equation, and its transient wave-
form is a modeled by an exponential with a single time-constant (or network pole). Unfor-
tunately, deriving the correct waveforms for a network with a larger number of capacitors
and resistors rapidly becomes hopelessly complex: describing its behavior requires a set of
ordinary differential equations, and the network now contains many time-constants (or
poles and zeros). Short of running a full-fledged SPICE simulation, delay calculation
methods such as the Elmore delay formula come to the rescue [Elmore48].
Consider the resistor-capacitor network of Figure 4.12. This circuit is called anRC-
tree and has the following properties:
• the network has a single input node (calleds in Figure 4.12)
• all the capacitors are between a node and the ground
• the network does not contain any resistive loops (which makes it a tree)

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 121 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 121
R2 2
C
R1 1 2
s
4
1
R4 C
0 C1 4
R3
3
Ri
C3
i
Ci
Figure 4.12 Tree-structured RC network.
An interesting result of this particilar circuit topology is that there exists a unique resistive
path between the source node s and any node i of the network. The total resistance along
this path is called the path resistance Rii. For example, the path resistance between the
source node s and node 4 in the example of Figure 4.12 equals
R44 = R1 + R3 + R4
The definition of the path resistance can be extended to address theshared path
resistance Rik, which represents the resistance shared among the paths from the root nodes
to nodes k and i:
Rik = Rj ⇒ ( Rj ∈ [ path s(  → i) ∩ path s(  → k]) ) (4.12)
∑
For the circuit of Figure 4.12, Ri4 = R1 + R3 while Ri2 = R1.
Assume now that each of theN nodes of the network is initially discharged to GND,
and that a step input is applied at node s at time t = 0. The Elmore delay at node i is then
given by the following expression:
N
τDi = Ck Rik (4.13)
∑
k = 1
The Elmore delay is equivalent to the first-order time constant of the network (or the first
moment of the impulse response). The designer should be aware that this time-constant
represents a simple approximation of the actual delay between source node and nodei. Yet
in most cases this approximation has proven to be quite reasonable and acceptable. It
offers the designer a powerful mechanism for providing a quick estimate of the delay of a
complex network.
Example 4.6 RC delay of a tree-structured network
Using Eq. (4.13), we can compute the Elmore delay for nodei in the network of Figure 4.12.
τDi = R1C1 + R1C2 + (R1 + R3)C3 + (R1 + R3)C4 + (R1 + R3 + Ri)Ci

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 122 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
122 THE WIRE Chapter 4
As a special case of the RC tree network, let us consider the simple, non-branched
RC chain (or ladder) shown in Figure 4.13. This network is worth analyzing because it is a
structure that is often encountered in digital circuits, and also because it represents an
approximative model of a resistive-capacitive wire. The Elmore delay of this chain net-
work can be derived with the aid of Eq. (4.13):
Vin R1 1 R2 2 Ri–1 i – 1 Ri i RN
N
VN
C1 C2 Ci–1 Ci CN
Figure 4.13 RC chain.
N i N
τDN = Ci Rj = CiRii (4.14)
∑ ∑ ∑
i = 1 j = 1 i = 1
or the shared-path resistance is replaced by simply the path resistance. As an example,
consider node 2 in the RC chain of Figure 4.13. Its time-constant consists of two compo-
nents contributed by nodes 1 and 2. The component of node 1 consists ofC1R1 with R1 the
total resistance between the node and the source, while the contribution of node 2 equals
C2(R1 + R2). The equivalent time constant at node2 equals C1R1 + C2(R1 + R2). τi of node
i can be derived in a similar way.
τDi = C1R1 + C2(R1 + R2) + … +Ci(R1 + R2 + … + Ri)
Example 4.7 Time-Constant of Resistive-Capacitive Wire
The model presented in Figure 4.13 can be used as an approximation of a resistive-capacitive wire.
The wire with a total length ofL is partitioned into N identical segments, each with a length ofL/N .
The resistance and capacitance of each segment are hence given byrL/N and cL/N, respectively.
Using the Elmore formula, we can compute the dominant time-constant of the wire:
2
 L   2 N N(  + 1) N + 1
τDN = ---- ( rc + 2rc + … + Nrc) = ( rcL )---------------------- = RC------------- (4.15)
 N 2 2N
2N
with R (= rL) and C (= cL) the total lumped resistance and capacitance of the wire. For very large
values of N, this model asymptotically approaches the distributedrc line. Eq. (4.15) then simplifies
to the following expression:
2
RC rcL
τDN = -------- = ----------- (4.16)
2 2
Eq. (4.16) leads to two important conclusions:
• The delay of a wire is a quadratic function of its length! This means that doubling
the length of the wire quadruples its delay.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 123 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 123
• The delay of the distributed rc-line is one half of the delay that would have been
predicted by the lumped RC model. The latter combines the total resistance and
capacitance into single elements, and has a time-constant equal toRC (as is also
obtained by setting N = 1 in Eq. (4.15)). This confirms the observation made earlier
that the lumped model presents a pessimistic view on the delay of resistive wire.
WARNING: Be aware that an RC-chain is characterized by a number of time-constants.
The Elmore expression determines the value of only the dominant one, and presents thus a
first-order approximation.
The Elmore delay formula has proven to be extremely useful. Besides making it
possible to analyze wires, the formula can also be used to approximate the propagation
delay of complex transistor networks. In the switch model, transistors are replaced by their
equivalent, linearized on-resistance. The evaluation of the propagation delay is then
reduced to the analysis of the resultingRC network. More precise minimum and maxi-
mum bounds on the voltage waveforms in an RC tree have further been established
[Rubinstein83]. These bounds have formed the base for most computer-aided timing ana-
lyzers at the switch and functional level [Horowitz83]. An interesting result [Ref] is that
the exponential voltage waveform with the Elmore delay as time constant is always situ-
ated between these min and max bounds, which demonstrates the validity of the Elmore
approximation.
4.4.4 The Distributed rc Line
In the previous paragraphs, we have shown that the lumpedRC model is a pessimistic
model for a resistive-capacitive wire, and that a distributedrc model (Figure 4.14a) is
more appropriate. As before, L represents the total length of the wire, whiler and c stand
for the resistance and capacitance per unit length. A schematic representation of the dis-
tributed rc line is given in Figure 4.14b.
The voltage at node i of this network can be determined by solving the following set
of partial differential equations:
∂Vi ( Vi + 1 – Vi) + ( Vi – Vi –1)
c∆L  = ------------------------------------------------------------- (4.17)
∂t r∆L
The correct behavior of the distributed rc line is then obtained by reducing∆L asymptoti-
cally to 0. For ∆L → 0, Eq. (4.17) becomes the well-known diffusion equation:
2
∂V ∂ V
rc  = (4.18)
∂t ∂x2
where V is the voltage at a particular point in the wire, andx is the distance between this
point and the signal source. No closed-form solution exists for this equation, but approxi-
mative expressions such as the formula presented in Eq. (4.19) can be derived
[Bakoglu90]. These equations are difficult to use for ordinary circuit analysis. It is known
however that the distributed rc line can be approximated by a lumped RC ladder network,

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 124 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
124 THE WIRE Chapter 4
Vin r∆L r∆L Vi-1 r∆L Vi r∆L Vi+1 r∆L Vout
c∆L c∆L c∆L c∆L c∆L
L
(a) Distributed model
(r,c,L)
Vin Vout
(b) Schematic symbol for distributedRC line
Figure 4.14 Distributed RC line wire-model and its schematic symbol.
which can be easily used in computer-aided analysis. Some of these models will be pre-
sented in a later section, discussing SPICE wire models.
RC
Vout ( )t  = 2erfc ( --------) t « RC
4t
(4.19)
t t
–2.5359 -------- –9.4641 --------
RC RC
= 1.0 – 1.366e + 0.366e t » RC
Figure 4.15 shows the response of a wire to a step input, plotting the waveforms at
different points in the wire as a function of time. Observe how the step waveform “dif-
fuses” from the start to the end of the wire, and the waveform rapidly degrades, resulting
in a considerable delay for long wires. Driving theserc lines and minimizing the delay and

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 125 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 125
signal degradation is one of the trickiest problems in modern digital integrated circuit
design. It hence will receive considerable attention in later chapters.
2.5
x= L/10
2
x = L/4
1.5
x = L/2
1
voltage (V)
x= L
0.5
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
time (nsec)
Figure 4.15 Simulated step response of resistive-capacitive wire as a function of time and place.
Some of the important reference points in the step response of the lumped and the
distributed RC model of the wire are tabulated in Table 4.7. For instance, the propagation
delay (defined at 50% of the final value) of the lumped network not surprisingly equals
0.69 RC. The distributed network, on the other hand, has a delay of only 0.38RC, with R
and C the total resistance and capacitance of the wire. This confirms the result of Eq.
(4.16).
Table 4.7 Step response of lumped and distributed RC networks— points of Interest.
Voltage range Lumped RC network Distributed RC network
0 → 50% (tp) 0.69 RC 0.38 RC
0 → 63% (τ) RC 0.5 RC
10% → 90% (tr) 2.2 RC 0.9 RC
0% → 90% 2.3 RC 1.0 RC
Example 4.8 RC delay of Aluminum Wire
Let us consider again the 10 cm long, 1 μm wide Al1 wire of Example 4.1. In Example 4.4, we
derived the following values forr and c:
c = 110 aF/μm; r = 0.075 Ω/μm;
Using the entry of Table 4.7, we derive the propagation delay of the wire:
5  2 
tp = 0.38 RC = 0.38 × ( 0.075 Ω/μm) × ( 110 aF/μm) × (10 μm) = 31.4 nsec
We can also deduce the propagation delays of an identical wire implemented in polysilicon
and Al5. The values of the capacitances are obtained fromTable 4.2, while the resistances are
assumed to be respectively 150 Ω/μm and 0.0375 Ω/μm for Poly and Al5:

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 126 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
126 THE WIRE Chapter 4
5  2 
Poly: tp = 0.38 × ( 150 Ω/μm) × ( 88 + 2 × 54 aF/μm) × (10 μm) = 112 μsec!
5  2 
Al5: tp = 0.38 × ( 0.0375 Ω/μm) × ( 5.2 + 2 × 12 aF/μm) × (10 μm) = 4.2 nsec
Obviously, the choice of the interconnect material and layer has a dramatic impact on the delay of
the wire.
An important question for a designer to answer when analyzing an interconnect network
whether the effects ofRC delays should be considered, or whether she can get away with a
simpler lumped capacitive model. A simple rule of thumb proves to be very useful here.
Design Rules of Thumb
• rc delays should only be considered when tpRC >> tpgate of the driving gate.
This translates into Eq. (4.20), which determines the critical lengthL of the interconnect
wire where RC delays become dominant.
tpgate
Lcrit >> ---------------- (4.20)
0.38rc
The actual value of Lcrit depends upon the sizing of the driving gate and the chosen inter-
connect material.
• rc delays should only be considered when the rise (fall) time at the line input is
smaller than RC, the rise (fall) time of the line.
trise < RC (4.21)
with R and C the total resistance and capacitance of the wire. When this condition is not
met, the change in signal is slower than the propgation delay of the wire, and a lumped capaci-
tive model suffices.
Example 4.9 RC versus Lumped C
The presented rule can be illustrated with the aid of the simple circuit shown inFigure
4.16. It is assumed here that the driving gate can be modeled as voltage source with a
finite source resistance Rs. The total propagation delay of the network can be approxi-
2
mated by the following expression, obtained by applying the Elmore formula:
RwCw 2
τD = RsCw + -------------- = RsCw + 0.5rwcwL
2
and
2 
Hint: replace the wire by the lumped RC network ofFigure 4.13 and apply the Elmore equation on the
resulting network.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 127 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 127
Rs (rw,cw,L)
Vout
Vin
Figure 4.16 rc-line of length L driven by source with
resistance equal to Rs.
tp = 0.69 RsCw + 0.38 RwCw
with Rw = rL and Cw = cL. The delay introduced by the wire resistance becomes dominant
when (RwCw)/2 ≥ RsCw, or L ≥ 2Rs/r. Assume now a driver with a source resitance of 1 kΩ,
driving an Al1 wire of 1 μm wide (r = 0.075 Ω/μm). This leads to a critical lenght of 2.67
cm.
4.4.5 The Transmission Line
When the switching speeds of the circuits become sufficiently fast, and the quality of the
interconnect material become high enough so that the resistance of the wire is kept within
bounds, the inductance of the wire starts to dominate the delay behavior, and transmission
line effects must be considered. This is more precisely the case when the rise and fall times
of the signal become comparable to the time of flight of the signal waveform across the
line as determined by the speed of light. With the advent of Copper interconnect and the
high switching speeds enabled by the deep-submicron technologies, transmission line
effects are soon to be considered in the fastest CMOS designs.
In this section, we first analyze the transmission line model. Next, we apply it to the
current semiconductor technology and determine when those effects should be actively
considered in the design process.
Transmission Line Model
Similar to the resistance and capacitance of an interconnect line, the inductance is distrib-
uted over the wire. A distributed rlc model of a wire, known as the transmission line
model, becomes the most accurate approximation of the actual behavior. The transmission
line has the prime property that a signal propagates over the interconnection medium as a
wave. This is in contrast to the distributed rc model, where the signal diffuses from the
source to the destination governed by the diffusion equation, Eq. (4.18). In the wave
mode, a signal propagates by alternatively transferring energy from the electric to the
magnetic fields, or equivalently from the capacitive to the inductive modes.
Consider the point x along the transmission line of Figure 4.17 at timet. The follow-
ing set of equations holds:

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 128 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
128 THE WIRE Chapter 4
r l r l r l r l
Vin x V
out
g c g c g c g c
Figure 4.17 Lossy transmission line.
∂v  ∂i
= – ri – l 
∂x ∂t
(4.22)
∂i  ∂v
= – gv – c 
∂x ∂t
Assuming that the leakage conductanceg equals 0, which is true for most insulating mate-
rials, and eliminating the currenti yields the wave propagation equation, Eq. (4.23).
2 2
∂ v  ∂v  ∂ v
= rc  + lc  (4.23)
∂x2 ∂t ∂t2
where r, c, and l are the resistance, capacitance, and inductance per unit length,
respectively.
To understand the behavior of the transmission line, we will first assume that the
resistance of the line is small. In this case, a simplified capacitive/inductive model, called
the lossless transmission line, is appropriate. This model is applicable for wires at the
printed-circuit board level. Due to the high conductivity of the Copper interconnect mate-
rial used there, the resistance of the transmission line can be ignored. On the other hand,
resistance plays an important role in integrated circuits, and a more complex model, called
the lossy transmission line should be considered. The lossy model is only discussed briefly
at the end.
The Lossless Transmission Line
For the lossless line, Eq. (4.23) simplifies to theideal wave equation:
2 2 2
∂ v  ∂ v 1 ∂ v
= lc  = -----  (4.24)
∂x2 ∂t2 ν2∂t2
A step input applied to a lossless transmission line propagates along the line with a
speed ν, given by Eq. (4.11) and repeated below.
1 1 c0
ν = -------- = ---------- = -------------- (4.25)
lc εμ εrμr
Even though the values of both l and c depend on the geometric shape of the wire, their
product is a constant and is only a function of the surrounding media. The propagation
delay per unit wire length(tp) of a transmission line is the inverse of the speed:

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 129 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 129
tp = lc (4.26)
Let us now analyze how a wave propagates along a lossless transmission line. Suppose
that a voltage step V has been applied at the input and has propagated to pointx of the line
(Figure 4.18). All currents are equal to 0 at the right side ofx, while the voltage over the
line equals V at the left side. An additional capacitancecdx must be charged for the wave
to propagate over an additional distancedx. This requires the following current:
dQ  dx c
I = = c  V = cνV = --V (4.27)
dt dt l
dx
V
Wire
I
Substrate
x
Figure 4.18 Propagation of
voltage step along a lossless
Direction of propagation transmission line.
since the propagation speed of the signal dx/dt equals ν. This means that the signal sees
the remainder of the line as areal impedance,
V l εμ 1
Z0 = --- = -- = ---------- = ------ . (4.28)
I c c cν
This impedance, called the characteristic impedance of the line, is a function of the
dielectric medium and the geometry of the conducting wire and isolator (Eq. (4.28)), and
is independent of the length of the wire and the frequency. That a line of arbitrary length
has a constant, real impedance is a great feature as it simplifies the design of the driver cir-
cuitry. Typical values of the characteristic impedance of wires in semiconductor circuits
range from 10 to 200 Ω.
Example 4.10 Propagation Speeds of Signal Waveforms
The information of Table 4.6 shows that it takes 1.5 nsec for a signal wave to propagate from
source-to-destination on a 20 cm wire deposited on an epoxy printed-circuit board. If trans-
mission line effects were an issue on silicon integrated circuits, it would take 0.67 nsec for the
signal to reach the end of a 10 cm wire.
WARNING: The characteristic impedance of a wire is a function of the overall intercon-
nect topology. The electro-magnetic fields in complex interconnect structures tend to be
irregular, and are strongly influenced by issues such as the current return path. Providing a
general answer to the latter problem has so far proven to be illusive, and no closed-formed

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 130 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
130 THE WIRE Chapter 4
analytical solutions are typically available. Hence, accurate inductance and characteristic
impedance extraction is still an active research topic. For some simplified structures,
approximative expressions have been derived. For instance, the characteristic impedances
of a triplate strip-line (a wire embedded in between two ground planes) and a semiconduc-
tor micro strip-line (wire above a semiconductor substrate) are approximated byEq. (4.29)
and Eq. (4.30), respectively.
μr 2t + W
 
Z0 ( triplate) ≈ 94Ω ----- ln ---------------- (4.29)
εr  H + W
and
μr 4t
 
Z0 ( microstrip) ≈ 60Ω ----------------------------------- ln ---------------------------------------- (4.30)
0.475εr + 0.67  0.536W + 0.67 H
Termination
The behavior of the transmission line is strongly influenced by the termination of the line.
The termination determines how much of the wave is reflected upon arrival at the wire
end. This is expressed by the reflection coefficient ρ that determines the relationship
between the voltages and currents of the incident and reflected waveforms.
Vrefl Irefl R – Z0
ρ = ---------- = --------- = --------------- (4.31)
Vinc Iinc R + Zo
where R is the value of the termination resistance. The total voltages and currents at the
termination end are the sum of incident and reflected waveforms.
V = Vinc ( 1 + ρ)
(4.32)
I = Iinc ( 1 – ρ)
Three interesting cases can be distinguished, as illustrated in Figure 4.19. In case
(a) the terminating resistance is equal to the characteristic impedance of the line. The ter-
mination appears as an infinite extension of the line, and no waveform is reflected. This
is also demonstrated by the value ofρ, which equals 0. In case (b), the line termination is
an open circuit (R = ∞), and ρ = 1. The total voltage waveform after reflection is twice
the incident one as predicted by Eq. (4.32). Finally, in case (c) where the line termination
is a short circuit, R = 0, and ρ = –1. The total voltage waveform after reflection equals
zero.
The transient behavior of a complete transmission line can now be examined. It is
influenced by the characteristic impedance of the line, the series impedance of the source
ZS, and the loading impedance ZL at the destination end, as shown in Figure 4.20.
Consider first the case where the wire is open at the destination end, orZL = ∞, and
ρL = 1. An incoming wave is completely reflected without phase reversal. Under the
assumption that the source impedance is resistive, three possible scenarios are sketched in
Figure 4.21: RS = 5 Z0, RS = Z0, and RS = 1/5 Z0.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 131 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 131
Incident wave
Z0 V
Reflected wave
Z0
(a) Matched termination
Z0 L x
V
(b) Open-circuit termination
L x
Z0
V
L x
(c) Short-circuit termination
Figure 4.19 Behavior of various transmission line terminations.
ZS
Z0 Z
L Figure 4.20 Transmission line
with terminating impedances.
1. Large source resistance—RS = 5 Z0 (Figure 4.21a)
Only a small fraction of the incoming signalVin is injected into the transmission
line. The amount injected is determined by the resistive divider formed by the source
resistance and the characteristic impedanceZ0.
Vsource = (Z0 / (Z0 + RS)) Vin = 1/6 × 5 V = 0.83 V (4.33)
This signal reaches the end of the line afterL/ν sec, where L stands for the length of
the wire and is fully reflected, which effectively doubles the amplitude of the wave
(Vdest = 1.67 V). The time it takes for the wave to propagate from one end of the wire to
the other is called the time-of-flight, tflight = L/ν. Approximately the same happens when
the wave reaches the source node again. The incident waveform is reflected with an ampli-
tude determined by the source reflection coefficient, which equals 2/3 for this particular
case.
5Z0 – Z0 2
ρS = --------------------- = --- (4.34)
5Z0 + Z0 3
The voltage amplitude at source and destination nodes gradually reaches its final value of
Vin. The overall rise time is, however, many timesL/ν.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 132 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
132 THE WIRE Chapter 4
5
4
3 Vdest
V
Vsource
2
1
(a) RS = 5Z0, RL = ×
0
4
3
V
2
1
(b) RS = Z0, RL = ×
0
8
6
V
4
2
(c) RS = Z0/5, RL = ×
0
0 5 10 15
t (in tflight)
Figure 4.21 Transient response of transmission line.
When multiple reflections are present, as in the above case, keeping track of waves
on the line and total voltage levels rapidly becomes cumbersome. Therefore a graphical
construction called the lattice diagram is often used to keep track of the data (Figure
4.22). The diagram contains the values of the voltages at the source and destination ends,
as well as the values of the incident and reflected wave forms. The line voltage at a termi-
nation point equals the sum of the previous voltage, the incident, and reflected waves.
2. Small source resistance—RS = Z0/5 (Figure 4.21c)
A large portion of the input is injected in the line. Its value is doubled at the destina-
tion end, which causes a severe overshoot. At the source end, the phase of the signal is
reversed (ρS = −2/3). The signal bounces back and forth and exhibits severe ringing. It
takes multiple L/ν before it settles.
3. Matched source resistance—RS = Z0 (Figure 4.21b)
Half of the input signal is injected at the source. The reflection at the destination end
doubles the signal, so that the final value is reached immediately. It is obvious that this is

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 133 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 133
Vsource Vdest
0.8333 V
+ 0.8333
1.6666 V
+ 0.8333
2.2222 V
+ 0.5556
+ 0.5556 2.7778 V
t 3.1482 V + 0.3704
+ 0.3704 3.5186 V
3.7655 V + 0.2469
4.0124 V
+ 0.2469
...
Figure 4.22 Lattice diagram forRS =
L/ν 5 Z0 and RL = ∞. Vstep = 5 V, (as in
Figure 4.21a).
the most effective case. Matching the line impedance at the source end is calledseries ter-
mination.
Note that the above analysis is an ideal one, as it is assumed that the input signal has
a zero rise time. In real conditions the signals are substantially smoother, as demonstrated
in the simulated response of Figure 4.23 (forRS = Z0/5 and tr = tflight).
10
Vdest
8
V Vsource
in
6
 (V)
V
4
2
Figure 4.23 Simulated transient
response of lossless transmission line
0
0 100 200 300 400 500 for finite input rise times (RS = Z0/5,
t (psec) tr = tflight).
Problem 4.1 Transmission Line Response
Derive the lattice diagram of the above transmission line forRS = Z0/5, RL = ∞, and Vstep = 5
V. Also try the reverse picture— assume that the series resistance of the source equals zero,
and consider different load impedances.
Similar considerations are valid when the termination is provided at the destination end,
called parallel termination. Matching the load impedance to the characteristic impedance
of the line once again results in the fastest response. This leads to the following conclusion.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 134 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
134 THE WIRE Chapter 4
To avoid potentially disastrous transmission line effects such as ringing or slow
propagation delays, the transmission line should be terminated, either at the
source (series termination), or at the destination (parallel termination) with a
resistance equal to the characteristic impedanceZ0 of the transmission line.
Example 4.11 Capacitive Termination
Loads in MOS digital circuits tend to be of a capacitive nature. One might wonder how this
influences the transmission line behavior and when the load capacitance should be taken into
account.
The characteristic impedance of the transmission line determines the current that can be
supplied to charge capacitive load CL. From the load’s point of the view, the line behaves as a
resistance with value Z0. The transient response at the capacitor node, therefore, displays a
time constant Z0CL. This is illustrated in Figure 4.24, which shows the simulated transient
response of a series-terminated transmission line with a characteristic impedance of 50Ω
loaded by a capacitance of 2 pF. The response shows how the output rises to its final value
with a time-constant of 100 psec (= 50 Ω × 2 pF) after a delay equal to the time-of-flight of
the line.
This asymptotic response causes some interesting artifacts. After 2tflight, an unexpected
voltage dip occurs at the source node that can be explained as follows. Upon reaching the des-
tination node, the incident wave is reflected. This reflected wave also approaches its final
value asymptotically. Since Vdest equals 0 initially instead of the expected jump to 5 V, the
reflection equals −2.5 V rather than the expected 2.5 V. This forces the transmission line tem-
porarily to 0 V, as shown in the simulation. This effect gradually disappears as the output
node converges to its final value.
5.0
Vdest
4.0
3.0
V V
source
2.0
1.0
Figure 4.24 Capacitively terminated
0.0 transmission line: RS = 50 Ω, RL = ∞, CL
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 = 2 pF, Z = 50 Ω, t = 50 psec.
0  flight 
time (nsec)
The propagation delay of the line equals the sum of the time-of-flight of the line (= 50
psec) and the time it takes to charge the capacitance (= 0.69Z0 CL = 69 psec). This is exactly
what the simulation yields. In general, we can say that the capacitive load should only be con-
sidered in the analysis when its value is comparable to or larger than the total capacitance of
the transmission line [Bakoglu90].

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 135 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.4 Electrical Wire Models 135
Lossy Transmission Line
While board and module wires are thick and wide enough to be treated as lossless trans-
mission lines, the same is not entirely true for on-chip interconnect where the resistance of
the wire is an important factor. The lossy transmission-line model should be applied
instead. Going into detail about the behavior of a lossy line would lead us to far astray. We
therefore only discuss the effects of resistive loss on the transmission line behavior in a
qualitative fashion.
The response of a lossy RLC line to a unit step combines wave propagation with a
diffusive component. This is demonstrated in Figure 4.25, which plots the response of the
RLC transmission line as a function of distance from the source. The step input still propa-
gates as a wave through the line. However, the amplitude of this traveling wave is attenu-
ated along the line:
r
–--------- x
Vstep ( )x 2Z0
------------------- = e (4.35)
Vstep ( 0)
The arrival of the wave is followed by a diffusive relaxation to the steady-state value
at point x. The farther it is from the source, the more the response resembles the behavior
of a distributed RC line. In fact, the resistive effect becomes dominant, and the line
behaves as a distributed RC line when R ( = rL, the total resistance of the line) >> 2Z0.
When R = 5 Z0, only 8% of the original step reaches the end of the line. At that point, the
line is more appropriately modeled as a distributedrc line.
Transmission line
Source Dest
x = 0 x = x1 x = x2 x = x3 x = L x
t t t
t t
Figure 4.25 Step response of lossy transmission line.
Be aware that the actual wires on chips, boards, or substrates behave in a far more
complex way than predicted by the above analysis. For instance, branches on wires, often
called transmission line taps, cause extra reflections and can affect both signal shape and
delay. Since the analysis of these effects is very involved, the only meaningful approach is
to use computer analysis and simulation techniques. For a more extensive discussion of
these effects, we would like to refer the reader to [Bakoglu90] and [Dally98].

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 136 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
136 THE WIRE Chapter 4
Design Rules of Thumb
Once again, we have to ask ourselves the question when it is appropriate to consider
transmission line effects. From the above discussion, we can derive two important constraints:
• Transmission line effects should be considered when the rise or fall time of the
input signal (tr, tf) is smaller than the time-of-flight of the transmission line (tflight).
This leads to the following rule of thumb, which determines when transmission line
effects should be considered:
L
tr ( tf) < 2.5tflight = 2.5--- (4.36)
ν
For on-chip wires with a maximum length of 1 cm, one should only worry about trans-
mission line effects when tr < 150 psec. At the board level, where wires can reach a length of
up to 50 cm, we should account for the delay of the transmission line whentr < 8 nsec. This
condition is easily achieved with state-of-the-art processes and packaging technologies. Ignor-
ing the inductive component of the propagation delay can easily result in overly optimistic
delay predictions.
• Transmission line effects should only be considered when the total resistance of the
wire is limited:
R < 5Z0 (4.37)
If this is not the case, the distributed RC model is more appropriate.
Both constraints can be summarized in the following set of bounds on the wire length:
tr 1 5 l
------- -------- < L < --- -- (4.38)
2.5 lc r c
• The transmission line is considered lossless when the total resistance is substantially
smaller than the characteristic impedance, or
Z0
R < ----- (4.39)
2
Example 4.12 When to Consider Transmission Line Effects
Consider again our Al1 wire. Using the data from Example 4.4 and Eq. (4.28), we can
approximate the value of Z0 for various wire widths:
W = 0.1 μm: c = 92 aF/μm; Z0 = 74 Ω
W = 1.0 μm: c = 110 aF/μm; Z0 = 60 Ω
W = 10 μm: c = 380 aF/μm; Z0 = 17 Ω

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 137 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.5 SPICE Wire Models 137
Using tFor a wire with a width of 1μm, we can derive thech maximum length of the
wire for which we should consider transmission line effects using Eq. (4.37):
5Z0 5 × 60Ω
Lmax = --------- = ------------------------------ = 4000 μm
r 0.075Ω ⁄ μm
From Eq. (4.36), we find a corresponding maximum rise (or fall) time of the input signal
equal to
trmax = 2.5 × (4000 μm)/(15 cm/nsec) = 67 psec
This is hard to accomplish in current technologies. For these wires, a lumped capacitance
model is more appropriate. Transmission line effects are more plausible in wider wires. For a
10 μm wide wire, we find a maximum length of 11.3 mm, which corresponds to a maximum
rise time of 188 psec.
Assume now a Copper wire, implemented on level 5, with a characteristic impedance
of 200 Ω and a resistance of 0.025 Ω/μm. The resulting maximum wire length equals 40 mm.
Rise times smaller than 670 psec will cause transmission line effects to occur.
Be aware however that the values for Z0, derived in this example, are only approxima-
tions. In actual designs, more complex expressions or empirical data should be used.
Example 4.13 Simulation of Transmission Line Effects
Show SPICE simulation
4.5 SPICE Wire Models
In previous sections, we have discussed the
4.5.1 Distributed rc Lines in SPICE
Because of the importance of the distributedrc-line in todays design, most circuit simula-
tors have built-in distributed rc-models of high accuracy. For instance, the Berkeley
SPICE3 simulator supports a uniform-distributed rc-line model (URC). This model
approximates the rc-line as a network of lumped RC segments with internally generated
nodes. Parameters include the length of the wireL and (optionally) the number of seg-
ments used in the model.
Example 4.14 SPICE3 URC Model
A typical example of a SPICE3 instantiation of a distributed rc-line is shown below. N1 and
N2 represent the terminal nodes of the line, while N3 is the node the capacitances are con-
nected to. RPERL and CPERL stand for the resistance and capacitance per meter.
U1 N1=1 N2=2 N3=0 URCMOD L=50m N=6
.MODEL URCMOD URC(RPERL=75K CPERL=100pF)

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 138 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
138 THE WIRE Chapter 4
If your simulator does not support a distributedrc-model, or if the computational
complexity of these models slows down your simulation too much, you can construct a
simple yet accurate model yourself by approximating the distributedrc by a lumped RC
network with a limited number of elements. Figure 4.26 shows some of these approxima-
tions ordered along increasing precision and complexity. The accuracy of the model is
determined by the number of stages. For instance, the error of theπ3 model is less than
3%, which is generally sufficient.
R R/2 R/2
C/2 C/2 C
π T
R/2 R/2 R/4 R/2 R/4
C/4 C/2 C/4 C/2 C/2
π2 T2
R/3 R/3 R/3 R/6 R/3 R/3 R/6
C/6 C/3 C/3 C/6 C/3 C/3 C/3
π3 T3
Figure 4.26 Simulation models for distributedRC line.
4.5.2 Transmission Line Models in SPICE
SPICE supports a lossless transmission line model. The line characteristics are defined by
the characteristic impedance Z0, while the length of the line can be defined in either of two
forms. A first approach is to directly define thetransmission delay TD, which is equiva-
lent to the time-of-flight. Alternatively, a frequencyF may be given together withNL, the
dimensionless, normalized electrical length of the transmission line, which is measured
with respect to the wavelength in the line at the frequencyF. The following relation is
valid.
NL = F ⋅ TD (4.40)

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 139 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.6 Perspective: A Look into the Future 139
No lossy transmission line model is currently provided. When necessary, loss can be
added by breaking up a long transmission line into shorter sections and adding a small
series resistance in each section to model the transmission line loss. Be careful when using
this approximation. First of all, the accuracy is still limited. Secondly, the simulation
speed might be severely effected, since SPICE chooses a time step that is less than or
equal to half of the value ofTD. For small transmission lines, this time step might be much
smaller than what is needed for transistor analysis.
4.6 Perspective: A Look into the Future
Similar to the approach we followed for the MOS transistor, it is worthwhile to explore
how the wire parameters will evolve with further scaling of the technology. As transistor
dimensions are reduced, the interconnect dimensions must also be reduced to take full
advantage of the scaling process.
A straightforward approach is to scale all dimensions of the wire by the same factor
S as the transistors (ideal scaling). This might not be possible for at least one dimension of
the wire, being the length. It can be surmised that the length oflocal interconnections —
wires that connect closely grouped transistors — scales in the same way as these transis-
tors. On the other hand, global interconnections, that provide the connectivity between
large modules and the input-output circuitry, display a different scaling behavior. Exam-
ples of such wires are clock signals, and data and instruction buses.Figure 4.27 contains a
histogram showing the distribution of the wire lengths in an actual microprocessor design,
containing approximately 90,000 gate) [Davis98]. While most of the wires tend to be only
a couple of gate pitches long, a substantial number of them are much longer and can reach
lengths up to 500 gate pitches.
Figure 4.27 Distribution of wire
lengths in an advanced
microprocessor as a function of the
gate pitch.
The average length of these long wires is proportional to the die size (or complexity)
of the circuit. An interesting trend is that while transistor dimensions have continued to
shrink over the last decades, the chip sizes have gradually increased. In fact, the size of the
typical die (which is the square root of the die area) is increasing by 6% per year, doubling
about every decade. Chips have scaled from 2 mm× 2 mm in the early 1960s to approxi-
mately 2 cm × 2 cm in 2000. They are projected to reach 4 cm on the side by 2010!

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 140 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
140 THE WIRE Chapter 4
This argues that when studying the scaling behavior of the wire length, we have to
differentiate between local and global wires. In our subsequent analysis, we will therefore
consider three models: local wires (SL = S > 1), constant length wires (SL = 1), and global
wires (SL = SC < 1).
Assume now that all other wire dimensions of the interconnect structure (W, H, t)
scale with the technology factor S. This leads to the scaling behavior illustrated in Table
4.8. Be aware that this is only a first-order analysis, intended to look at overall trends.
Effects such a fringing capacitance are ignored, and breakthroughs in semiconductor tech-
nology such as new interconnect and dielectric materials are also not considered.
Table 4.8 Ideal Scaling of Wire Properties
Parameter Relation Local Wire Constant Lenght Global Wire
W, H, t 1/S 1/S 1/S
L 1/S 1 1/SC
C LW/t 1/S 1 1/SC
2  2
R L/WH S S S /SC
2 2  2 2
CR L /Ht 1 S S /SC
The eye-catching conclusion of this exercise is that scaling of the technology does
not reduce wire delay (as personified by theRC time-constant). A constant delay is pre-
dicted for local wires, while the delay of the global wires goes up with 50% per year (forS
= 1.15 and SC = 0.94). This is in great contrast with the gate delay, which reduces from
year to year. This explains why wire delays are starting to play a predominant role in
todays digital integrated circuit design.
The ideal scaling approach clearly has problems, as it causes a rapid increase in wire
resistance. This explains why other interconnect scaling techniques are attractive. One
option is to scale the wire thickness at a different rate. The “constant resistance” model of
Table 4.9 explores the impact of not scaling the wire thickness at all. While this approach
seemingly has a positive impact on the performance, it causes the fringing and interwire
capacitance components to come to the foreground. We therefore introduce an extra
capacitance scaling factor εc (> 1), that captures the increasingly horizontal nature of the
capacitance when wire widths and pitches are shrunk while the height is kept constant.
Table 4.9 “Constant Resistance” Scaling of Wire Properties
Parameter Relation Local Wire Constant Lenght Global Wire
W, t 1/S 1/S 1/S
H 1 1 1
L 1/S 1 1/SC
C εcLW/t εc/S εc εc/SC

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 141 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.7 Summary 141
Table 4.9 “Constant Resistance” Scaling of Wire Properties
Parameter Relation Local Wire Constant Lenght Global Wire
R L/WH 1 S S/SC
2 2
CR L /Ht εc/S εcS εcS/SC
This scaling scenario offers a slightly more optimistic perspective, assuming of
course that εc < S. Yet, delay is bound to increase substantially for intermediate and long
wires, independent of the scaling scenario. To keep these delays from becoming exces-
sive, interconnect technology has to be drastically improved. One option is to use better
interconnect (Cu) and insulation materials (polymers and air). The other option is to dif-
ferentiate between local and global wires. In the former, density and low-capacitance are
crucial, while keeping the resistance under control is crucial in the latter. To address these
conflicting demands, modern interconnect topologies combine a dense and thin wiring
grid at the lower metal layers with fat, widely spaced wires at the higher levels, as is illus-
trated in Figure 4.28. Even with these advances, it is obvious that interconnect will play a
dominant role in bothg high-performance and low-energy circuits for years to come.
M6
Global
M5
M4
intermodule
M3
M2
Intercell
M1 Figure 4.28 Interconnect hierarchy of 0.25 μm
poly Intracell CMOS process, drawn to scale.
substrate
4.7 Summary
This chapter has presented a careful and in-depth analysis of the role and the behavior of
the interconnect wire in modern semiconductor technology. The main goal is to identify
the dominant parameters that set the values of the wire parasitics (being capacitance, resis-
tance, and inductance), and to present adequate wire models that will aid us in the further
analysis and optimization of complex digital circuits.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 142 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
142 THE WIRE Chapter 4
4.8 To Probe Further
Interconnect and its modeling is a hotly debated topic, that receives major attention in
journals and conferences. A number of textbooks and reprint volumes have been pub-
lished. [Bakoglu90], [Tewksbury94], and [Dally98] present an in-depth coverage of inter-
connect issues, and are a valuable resource for further browsing.
REFERENCES
[Antognetti88] P. Antognetti and G. Masobrio (eds.),Semiconductor Device Modeling with SPICE,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Banzhaf92] W. Bhanzhaf, Computer Aided Analysis Using PSPICE, 2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1992.
[Chen90] J. Chen, CMOS Devices and Technology for VLSI , Prentice Hall, 1990.
[Getreu76] I. Getreu, “Modeling the Bipolar Transistor,” Tektronix Inc., 1976.
[Gray69] P. Gray and C. Searle, Electronic Principles, John Wiley and Sons, 1969.
[Gray93] P. Gray and R. Meyer, Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits, 3rd ed., John
Wiley and Sons, 1993.
[Haznedar91] H. Haznedar, Digital Microelectronics, Benjamin/Cummings, 1991.
[Hodges88] D. Hodges and H. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, 2nd ed.,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Howe95] R. Howe and S. Sodini, Microelectronics: An Integrated Approach, forthcoming, Prentice
Hall, 1995.
[Hu92] C. Hu, “IC Reliability Simulation,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.
241–246, March 1992.
[Hu93] C. Hu, “Future CMOS Scaling and Reliability,” IEEE Proceedings, vol. 81, no. 5, May
1993.
[Jensen91] G. Jensen et al., “Monte Carlo Simulation of Semiconductor Devices,”Computer Phys-
ics Communications, 67, pp. 1–61, August 1991.
[Ko89] P. Ko, “Approaches to Scaling,” in VLSI Electronics: Microstructure Science, vol. 18, chap-
ter 1, pp. 1–37, Academic Press, 1989.
[Muller86] R. Muller and T. Kamins, Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits, 2nd ed., John
Wiley and Sons, 1986.
[Nagel75] L. Nagel, “SPICE2: a Computer Program to Simulate Semiconductor Circuits,” Memo
ERL-M520, Dept. Elect. and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley, 1975.
[Sedra87] A. Sedra and K. Smith, Microelectronic Circuits, 2nd ed., Holt, Rinehart and Winston,
1987.
[Sheu87] B. Sheu, D. Scharfetter, P. Ko, and M. Jeng, “BSIM: Berkeley Short-Channel IGFET
Model for MOS Transistors,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-22, no. 4, pp.
558–565, August 1987.
[Sze81] S. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2nd ed., John Wiley and Sons, 1981.
[Thorpe92] T. Thorpe, Computerized Circuit Analysis with SPICE, John Wiley and Sons, 1992.
[Toh88] K. Toh, P. Koh, and R. Meyer, “An Engineering Model for Short-Channel MOS Devices,”
IEEE Journal of Solid-Sate Circuits, vol. 23. no. 4, pp 950–957, August 1988.

--- Page Break ---

chapter4.fm Page 143 Monday, September 6, 1999 1:44 PM
Section 4.9 Exercises and Design Problems 143
[Tsividis87] Y. Tsividis, Operation and Modeling of the MOS Transistor, McGraw-Hill, 1987.
[Yamaguchi88] T. Yamaguchi et al., “Process and Device Performance of a High-Speed Double
Poly-Si Bipolar Technology Using Borsenic-Poly Process with Coupling-Base Implant,”IEEE
Trans. Electron. Devices, vol. 35, no 8, pp. 1247–1255, August 1988.
[Weste93] N. Weste and K. Eshragian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems Perspective,
Addison-Wesley, 1993.
4.9 Exercises and Design Problems

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 144 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
C H A P T E R
5
T H E C M O S I N V E R T E R
Quantification of integrity, performance, and energy metrics of an inverter
Optimization of an inverter design
5.1 Introduction 5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order
Analysis
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive
5.4.3 Propagation Delay Revisited
Perspective
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS
Inverter: The Static Behavior 5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
5.3.1 Switching Threshold 5.5.2 Static Consumption
5.3.2 Noise Margins 5.5.3 Putting It All Together
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited 5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using
SPICE
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic
Behavior 5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its
Impact on the Inverter Metrics
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
144

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 145 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.1 Introduction 145
5.1 Introduction
The inverter is truly the nucleus of all digital designs. Once its operation and properties are
clearly understood, designing more intricate structures such as NAND gates, adders, mul-
tipliers, and microprocessors is greatly simplified. The electrical behavior of these com-
plex circuits can be almost completely derived by extrapolating the results obtained for
inverters. The analysis of inverters can be extended to explain the behavior of more com-
plex gates such as NAND, NOR, or XOR, which in turn form the building blocks for mod-
ules such as multipliers and processors.
In this chapter, we focus on one single incarnation of the inverter gate, being the
static CMOS inverter — or the CMOS inverter, in short. This is certainly the most popular
at present, and therefore deserves our special attention. We analyze the gate with respect
to the different design metrics that were outlined in Chapter 1:
• cost, expressed by the complexity and area
• integrity and robustness, expressed by the static (or steady-state) behavior
• performance, determined by the dynamic (or transient) response
• energy efficiency, set by the energy and power consumption
From this analysis arises a model of the gate that will help us to identify the parame-
ters of the gate and to choose their values so that the resulting design meets desired speci-
fications. While each of these parameters can be easily quantified for a given technology,
we also discuss how they are affected byscaling of the technology.
While this Chapter focuses uniquely on the CMOS inverter, we will see in the fol-
lowing Chapter that the same methodology also applies to other gate topologies.
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective
Figure 5.1 shows the circuit diagram of a static CMOS inverter. Its operation is readily
understood with the aid of the simple switch model of the MOS transistor, introduced in
Chapter 3 (Figure 3.25): the transistor is nothing more than a switch with an infinite off-
resistance (for |VGS| < |VT|), and a finite on-resistance (for |VGS| > |VT|). This leads to the
VDD
Vin 
Vout
CL
Figure 5.1 Static CMOS inverter. VDD stands for the
supply voltage.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 146 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
146 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
following interpretation of the inverter. WhenVin is high and equal to VDD, the NMOS
transistor is on, while the PMOS is off. This yields the equivalent circuit of Figure 5.2a. A
direct path exists between Vout and the ground node, resulting in a steady-state value of 0
V. On the other hand, when the input voltage is low (0 V), NMOS and PMOS transistors
are off and on, respectively. The equivalent circuit of Figure 5.2b shows that a path exists
between VDD and Vout, yielding a high output voltage. The gate clearly functions as an
inverter.
VDD VDD
Rp
V
Vout out
Rn
Vin = VDD Vin = 0
Figure 5.2 Switch models of CMOS
(a) Model for high input (b) Model for low input inverter.
A number of other important properties of static CMOS can be derived from this switch-
level view:
• The high and low output levels equal VDD and GND, respectively; in other words,
the voltage swing is equal to the supply voltage. This results in high noise margins.
• The logic levels are not dependent upon the relative device sizes, so that the transis-
tors can be minimum size. Gates with this property are calledratioless. This is in
contrast with ratioed logic, where logic levels are determined by the relative dimen-
sions of the composing transistors.
• In steady state, there always exists a path with finite resistance between the output
and either VDD or GND. A well-designed CMOS inverter, therefore, has alow out-
put impedance, which makes it less sensitive to noise and disturbances. Typical val-
ues of the output resistance are in kΩ range.
• The input resistance of the CMOS inverter is extremely high, as the gate of an MOS
transistor is a virtually perfect insulator and draws no dc input current. Since the
input node of the inverter only connects to transistor gates, the steady-state input
current is nearly zero. A single inverter can theoretically drive an infinite number of
gates (or have an infinite fan-out) and still be functionally operational; however,
increasing the fan-out also increases the propagation delay, as will become clear
below. So, although fan-out does not have any effect on the steady-state behavior, it
degrades the transient response.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 147 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective 147
• No direct path exists between the supply and ground rails under steady-state operat-
ing conditions (this is, when the input and outputs remain constant). The absence of
current flow (ignoring leakage currents) means that the gate does not consume any
static power.
SIDELINE: The above observation, while seemingly obvious, is of crucial importance,
and is one of the primary reasons CMOS is the digital technology of choice at present. The
situation was very different in the 1970s and early 1980s. All early microprocessors, such
as the Intel 4004, were implemented in a pure NMOS technology. The lack of comple-
mentary devices (such as the NMOS and PMOS transistor) in such a technology makes
the realization of inverters with zero static power non-trivial. The resulting static power
consumption puts a firm upper bound on the number of gates that can be integrated on a
single die; hence the forced move to CMOS in the 1980s, when scaling of the technology
allowed for higher integration densities.
The nature and the form of the voltage-transfer characteristic (VTC) can be graphi-
cally deduced by superimposing the current characteristics of the NMOS and the PMOS
devices. Such a graphical construction is traditionally calleda load-line plot. It requires
that the I-V curves of the NMOS and PMOS devices are transformed onto a common coor-
dinate set. We have selected the input voltageVin, the output voltage Vout and the NMOS
drain current IDN as the variables of choice. The PMOSI-V relations can be translated into
this variable space by the following relations (the subscriptsn and p denote the NMOS
and PMOS devices, respectively):
IDSp = –IDSn
VGSn = Vin ; VGSp = Vin – VDD (5.1)
VDSn = Vout ; VDSp = Vout – VDD
The load-line curves of the PMOS device are obtained by a mirroring around thex-
axis and a horizontal shift over VDD. This procedure is outlined in Figure 5.3, where the
subsequent steps to adjust the original PMOSI-V curves to the common coordinate setVin,
Vout and IDn are illustrated.
IDp IDn IDn
Vin = 0 Vin = 0
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1.5
VDSp VDSp Vout
VGSp = –1
VGSp = –2.5
Vin = VDD + VGSp V = V + V
out  DD  DSp
IDn = –I Dp
Figure 5.3 Transforming PMOS I-V characteristic to a common coordinate set
(assuming VDD = 2.5 V).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 148 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
148 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
IDn
Vin = 0 Vin = 2.5
PMOS Vin = 0.5 Vin = 2 NMOS
Vin = 1 Vin = 1.5
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1
Vin = 2 Vin = 0.5
Vin = 2.5 Vin = 0
Vout
Figure 5.4 Load curves for NMOS and PMOS transistors of the static CMOS inverter (VDD = 2.5 V). The dots
represent the dc operation points for various input voltages.
The resulting load lines are plotted in Figure 5.4. For a dc operating points to be
valid, the currents through the NMOS and PMOS devices must be equal. Graphically, this
means that the dc points must be located at the intersection of corresponding load lines. A
number of those points (for Vin = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5 V) are marked on the graph. As
can be observed, all operating points are located either at the high or low output levels.
The VTC of the inverter hence exhibits a very narrow transition zone. This results from
the high gain during the switching transient, when both NMOS and PMOS are simulta-
neously on, and in saturation. In that operation region, a small change in the input voltage
results in a large output variation. All these observations translate into the VTC of Figure
5.5.
Vout
NMOS off
PMOS res
2.5
NMOS sat
PMOS res
 
2
  NMOS sat
1.5 PMOS sat
 
1
NMOS res Figure 5.5 VTC of static CMOS inverter,
  PMOS sat
NMOS res derived from Figure 5.4 (V = 2.5 V). For each
0.5 DD 
PMOS off
operation region, the modes of the transistors are
annotated — off, res(istive), or sat(urated).
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 Vin
Before going into the analytical details of the operation of the CMOS inverter, a
qualitative analysis of the transient behavior of the gate is appropriate as well. This
response is dominated mainly by the output capacitance of the gate,CL, which is com-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 149 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 149
VDD VDD
Rp
Vout
Vout
C
L CL
Rn
Figure 5.6 Switch model of
Vin = 0 Vin = VDD
dynamic behavior of static CMOS
inverter.
(a) Low-to-high (b) High-to-low
posed of the drain diffusion capacitances of the NMOS and PMOS transistors, the capaci-
tance of the connecting wires, and the input capacitance of the fan-out gates. Assuming
temporarily that the transistors switch instantaneously, we can get an approximate idea of
the transient response by using the simplified switch model again (Figure 5.6). Let us con-
sider the low-to-high transition first (Figure 5.6a). The gate response time is simply deter-
mined by the time it takes to charge the capacitorCL through the resistor Rp. In Example
4.5, we learned that the propagation delay of such a network is proportional to the its time-
constant RpCL. Hence, a fast gate is built either by keeping the output capacitance
small or by decreasing the on-resistance of the transistor. The latter is achieved by
increasing the W/L ratio of the device. Similar considerations are valid for the high-to-low
transition (Figure 5.6b), which is dominated by theRnCL time-constant. The reader should
be aware that the on-resistance of the NMOS and PMOS transistor is not constant, but is a
nonlinear function of the voltage across the transistor. This complicates the exact determi-
nation of the propagation delay. An in-depth analysis of how to analyze and optimize the
performance of the static CMOS inverter is offered in Section 5.4.
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior
In the qualitative discussion above, the overall shape of the voltage-transfer characteristic
of the static CMOS inverter was derived, as were the values ofVOH and VOL (VDD and
GND, respectively). It remains to determine the precise values ofVM, VIH, and VIL as well
as the noise margins.
5.3.1 Switching Threshold
The switching threshold, VM, is defined as the point where Vin = Vout. Its value can be
obtained graphically from the intersection of the VTC with the line given byVin = Vout
(see Figure 5.5). In this region, both PMOS and NMOS are always saturated, sinceVDS =
VGS. An analytical expression forVM is obtained by equating the currents through the tran-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 150 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
150 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
sistors. We solve the case where the supply voltage is high so that the devices can be
assumed to be velocity-saturated (orVDSAT < VM - VT). We furthermore ignore the channel-
length modulation effects.
VDSATn VDSATp
    
knVDSATn VM – VTn – -----------------+ kpVDSATp VM – VDD –VTp – ----------------- = 0 (5.2)
 2   2 
Solving for VM yields
VDSATn VDSATp
    
VTn + -----------------+ r VDD + V + -----------------
Tp
 2   2  kpVDSATp υsatp Wp
VM = -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------with r = ----------------------= -------------------(5.3)
1 + r knVDSATn υsatn Wn
assuming identical oxide thicknesses for PMOS and NMOS transistors. For large values
of VDD (compared to threshold and saturation voltages), Eq. (5.3) can be simplified:
rVDD
VM ≈ ------------ (5.4)
1 + r
Eq. (5.4) states that the switching threshold is set by the ratior, which compares the rela-
tive driving strengths of the PMOS and NMOS transistors. It is generally considered to be
desirable for VM to be located around the middle of the available voltage swing (or at
VDD/2), since this results in comparable values for the low and high noise margins. This
requires r to be approximately 1, which is equivalent to sizing the PMOS device so that
(W/L)p = (W/L)n × (VDSATnk′n )/(VDSATnk′p ). To move VM upwards, a larger value of r is
required, which means making the PMOS wider. Increasing the strength of the NMOS, on
the other hand, moves the switching threshold closer to GND.
From Eq. (5.2), we can derive the required ratio of PMOS versus NMOS transistor
sizes such that the switching threshold is set to a desired valueVM. When using this
expression, please make sure that the assumption that both devices are velocity-saturated
still holds for the chosen operation point.
( W ⁄ L)p k′nVDSATn ( VM – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2)
-------------------= --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (5.5)
( W ⁄ L)n k′pV ( VDD – V + VTp + VDSATp ⁄ 2)
DSATp  M 
Problem 5.1 Inverter switching threshold for long-channel devices, or low supply-volt-
ages.
The above expressions were derived under the assumption that the transistors are velocity-
saturated. When the PMOS and NMOS are long-channel devices, or when the supply volt-
age is low, velocity saturation does not occur (VM-VT < VDSAT). Under these circumstances,
Eq. (5.6) holds for VM. Derive.
VTn + r V( DD + V ) –k
Tp p
VM = -----------------------------------------------with r = -------- (5.6)
1 + r kn

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 151 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 151
Design Technique — Maximizing the noise margins
When designing static CMOS circuits, it is advisable to balance the driving strengths of the
transistors by making the PMOS section wider than the NMOS section, if one wants to maxi-
mize the noise margins and obtain symmetrical characteristics. The required ratio is given by
Eq. (5.5).
Example 5.1 Switching threshold of CMOS inverter
We derive the sizes of PMOS and NMOS transistors such that the switching threshold of a
CMOS inverter, implemented in our generic 0.25μm CMOS process, is located in the middle
between the supply rails. We use the process parameters presented in Example 3.7, and
assume a supply voltage of 2.5 V. The minimum size device has a width/length ratio of 1.5.
With the aid of Eq. (5.5), we find
–6
( W ⁄ L)p 115 ×10  0.63 ( 1.25 –0.43 –0.63 ⁄2)
-------------------=  ------------------------- × ----------× ------------------------------------------------------= -3.5
( W ⁄ L)n –6 1.0 ( 1.25 – 0.4 – 1.0 ⁄2)
30 × 10 
Figure 5.7 plots the values of switching threshold as a function of the PMOS/NMOS
ratio, as obtained by circuit simulation. The simulated PMOS/NMOS ratio of 3.4 for a 1.25 V
switching threshold confirms the value predicted by Eq. (5.5).
An analysis of the curve of Figure 5.7 produces some interesting observations:
1. VM is relatively insensitive to variations in the device ratio. This means that small
variations of the ratio (e.g., making it 3 or 2.5) do not disturb the transfer character-
istic that much. It is therefore an accepted practice in industrial designs to set the
width of the PMOS transistor to values smaller than those required for exact sym-
metry. For the above example, setting the ratio to 3, 2.5, and 2 yields switching
thresholds of 1.22 V, 1.18 V, and 1.13 V, respectively.
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
(V) 1.3
M
V
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
Figure 5.7 Simulated inverter switching
0.8 0 1 threshold versus PMOS/NMOS ratio (0.25 μm
10  10 
W  /W  CMOS, VDD = 2.5 V)
p  n

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 152 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
152 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
V in
Vmb
V in  V out
V ma
t
Vout V out
t b) Response of inverter with t
(a) Response of standard
inverter modified threshold
Figure 5.8 Changing the inverter threshold can improve the circuit reliability.
2. The effect of changing the Wp/Wn ratio is to shift the transient region of the VTC.
Increasing the width of the PMOS or the NMOS moves VM towards VDD or GND
respectively. This property can be very useful, as asymmetrical transfer characteris-
tics are actually desirable in some designs. This is demonstrated by the example of
Figure 5.8. The incoming signal Vin has a very noisy zero value. Passing this signal
through a symmetrical inverter would lead to erroneous values (Figure 5.8a). This
can be addressed by raising the threshold of the inverter, which results in a correct
response (Figure 5.8b). Further in the text, we will see other circuit instances where
inverters with asymetrical switching thresholds are desirable.
Changing the switching threshold by a considerable amount is however not easy,
especially when the ratio of supply voltage to transistor threshold is relatively small
(2.5/0.4 = 6 for our particular example). To move the threshold to 1.5 V requires a
transistor ratio of 11, and further increases are prohibitively expensive. Observe that
Figure 5.7 is plotted in a semilog format.
5.3.2 Noise Margins
dVout 
By definition, VIH and VIL are the operational points of the inverter where = –1 . In
dVin
the terminology of the analog circuit designer, these are the points where the gaing of the
amplifier, formed by the inverter, is equal to−1. While it is indeed possible to derive ana-
lytical expressions forVIH and VIL, these tend to be unwieldy and provide little insight in
what parameters are instrumental in setting the noise margins.
A simpler approach is to use a piecewise linear approximation for the VTC, as
shown in Figure 5.9. The transition region is approximated by a straight line, the gain of
which equals the gain g at the switching threshold VM. The crossover with the VOH and the
VOL lines is used to define VIH and VIL points. The error introduced is small and well

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 153 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 153
Vout
VOH
VM
Figure 5.9 A piece-wise linear
approximation of the VTC simplifies the
Vin
derivation of VIL and VIH.
VOL
VIL  VIH
within the range of what is required for an initial design. This approach yields the follow-
ing expressions for the width of the transition regionVIH - VIL, VIH, VIL, and the noise mar-
gins NMH and NML.
( VOH – VOL) –VDD
VIH – VIL = – ------------------------------= -------------
g g
VM VDD – VM (5.7)
VIH = VM – ------- VIL = VM + -----------------------
g g
NMH = VDD – VIH NML = VIL
These expressions make it increasingly clear that a high gain in the transition region is
very desirable. In the extreme case of an infinite gain, the noise margins simplify toVOH -
VM and VM - VOL for NMH and NML, respectively, and span the complete voltage swing.
Remains us to determine the midpoint gain of the static CMOS inverter. We assume
once again that both PMOS and NMOS are velocity-saturated. It is apparent from Figure
5.4 that the gain is a strong function of the slopes of the currents in the saturation region.
The channel-length modulation factor hence cannot be ignored in this analysis — doing so
would lead to an infinite gain. The gain can now be derived by differentiating the current
equation (5.8), valid around the switching threshold, with respect toVin.
VDSATn
  
knVDSATn Vin – VTn – -----------------( 1 + λnVout) +
 2 
(5.8)
VDSATp
  
kpVDSATp Vin – VDD –VTp – -----------------( 1 + λpVout – λpVDD) = 0
 2 
Differentiation and solving fordVout/dVin yields
dVout knVDSATn ( 1 + λnVout) + kpVDSATp ( 1 + λp Vout – λpVDD)
= –------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(5.9)
dVin λnk VDSATn ( Vin – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2) +λ p k V ( Vin – VDD –VTp – VDSATp ⁄ 2)
n  p DSATp 
Ignoring some second-order terms, and settingVin = VM results in the gain expression,

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 154 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
154 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
1 knVDSATn + kpVDSATp
g = – --------------------------------------------------------------------
ID ( VM) λn – λp
(5.10)
1 + r
≈ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
( VM – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2) λ(  n – λp)
with ID(VM) the current flowing through the inverter for Vin = VM. The gain is almost
purely determined by technology parameters, especially the channel length modulation. It
can only in a minor way be influenced by the designer through the choice of supply and
switching threshold voltages.
Example 5.2 Voltage transfer characteristic and noise margins of CMOS Inverter
Assume an inverter in the generic 0.25μm CMOS technology designed with a PMOS/NMOS
ratio of 3.4 and with the NMOS transistor minimum size (W = 0.375 μm, L = 0.25 μm, W/L =
1.5). We first compute the gain atVM (= 1.25 V),
–6 –6
ID(  VM) = 1.5 × 115 ×10  × 0.63 × ( 1.25 – 0.43 –0.63 ⁄2) × ( 1 + 0.06 × 1.25) = 59 × 10  A
–6 –6
1 1.5 × 115 × 10  × 0.63 + 1.5 × 3.4 ×30 × 10  × 1.0
g = – ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------= –27.5 (Eq. 5.10)-
–6
59 × 10  0.06 + 0.1
This yields the following values forVIL, VIH, NML, NMH:
VIL = 1.2 V, VIH = 1.3 V, NML = NMH = 1.2.
Figure 5.10 plots the simulated VTC of the inverter, as well as its derivative, the gain. A close
to ideal characteristic is obtained. The actual values ofVIL and VIH are 1.03 V and 1.45 V,
respectively, which leads to noise margins of 1.03 V and 1.05 V. These values are lower than
those predicted for two reasons:
• Eq. (5.10) overestimates the gain. As observed in Figure 5.10b, the maximum gain (at
VM) equals only 17. This reduced gain would yield values forVIL and VIH of 1.17 V, and 1.33
V, respectively.
• The most important deviation is due to the piecewise linear approximation of the
VTC, which is optimistic with respect to the actual noise margins.
The obtained expressions are however perfectly useful as first-order estimations as
well as means of identifying the relevant parameters and their impact.
To conclude this example, we also extracted from simulations the output resistance of
the inverter in the low- and high-output states. Low values of 2.4 kΩ and 3.3 kΩ were
observed, respectively. The output resistance is a good measure of the sensitivity of the gate
in respect to noise induced at the output, and is preferably as low as possible.
SIDELINE: Surprisingly (or not so surprisingly), the static CMOS inverter can also be
used as an analog amplifier, as it has a fairly high gain in its transition region. This region
is very narrow however, as is apparent in the graph of Figure 5.10b. It also receives poor
marks on other amplifier properties such as supply noise rejection. Yet, this observation
can be used to demonstrate one of the major differences between analog and digital
design. Where the analog designer would bias the amplifier in the middle of the transient
region, so that a maximum linearity is obtained, the digital designer will operate the

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 155 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 155
2.5 0
-2
2
-4
-6
1.5
-8
(V) 
out gain
V -10
1
-12
-14
0.5
-16
0 -18
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
V (V) V (V)
in  in 
(a) 
(b)
Figure 5.10 Simulated Voltage Transfer Characteristic (a) and voltage gain (b) of CMOS inverter (0.25μm CMOS, VDD
= 2.5 V).
device in the regions of extreme nonlinearity, resulting in well-defined and well-separated
high and low signals.
Problem 5.2 Inverter noise margins for long-channel devices
Derive expressions for the gain and noise margins assuming that PMOS and NMOS are
long-channel devices (or that the supply voltage is low), so that velocity saturation does
not occur.
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited
Device Variations
While we design a gate for nominal operation conditions and typical device parameters,
we should always be aware that the actual operating temperature might very over a large
range, and that the device parameters after fabrication probably will deviate from the nom-
inal values we used in our design optimization process. Fortunately, the dc-characteristics
of the static CMOS inverter turn out to be rather insensitive to these variations, and the
gate remains functional over a wide range of operating conditions. This already became
apparent in Figure 5.7, which shows that variations in the device sizes have only a minor
impact on the switching threshold of the inverter. To further confirm the assumed robust-
ness of the gate, we have re-simulated the voltage transfer characteristic by replacing the
nominal devices by their worst- or best-case incarnations. Two corner-cases are plotted in
Figure 5.11: a better-than-expected NMOS combined with an inferior PMOS, and the
opposite scenario. Comparing the resulting curves with the nominal response shows that
the variations mostly cause a shift in the switching threshold, but that the operation of the

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 156 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
156 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
2.5
2 Good PMOS
Bad NMOS
1.5
(V)  Nominal
out
V
1
Good NMOS Figure 5.11 Impact of device variations on static CMOS
Bad PMOS
0.5 inverter VTC. The “good” device has a smaller oxide
thickness (- 3nm), a smaller length (-25 nm), a higher width
(+30 nm), and a smaller threshold (-60 mV). The opposite
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 is true for the “bad” transistor.
V (V)
in 
gate is by no means affected. This robust behavior that ensures functionality of the gate
over a wide range of conditions has contributed in a big way to the popularity of the static
CMOS gate.
Scaling the Supply Voltage
In Chapter 3, we observed that continuing technology scaling forces the supply voltages to
reduce at rates similar to the device dimensions. At the same time, device threshold volt-
ages are virtually kept constant. The reader probably wonders about the impact of this
trend on the integrity parameters of the CMOS inverter. Do inverters keep on working
when the voltages are scaled and are there potential limits to the supply scaling?
A first hint on what might happen was offered in Eq. (5.10), which indicates that the
gain of the inverter in the transition region actually increases with a reduction of the sup-
ply voltage! Note that for a fixed transistor ratior, VM is approximately proportional to
VDD. Plotting the (normalized) VTC for different supply voltages not only confirms this
conjecture, but even shows that the inverter is well and alive for supply voltages close to
the threshold voltage of the composing transistors (Figure 5.12a). At a voltage of 0.5 V —
which is just 100 mV above the threshold of the transistors — the width of the transition
region measures only 10% of the supply voltage (for a maximum gain of 35), while it wid-
ens to 17% for 2.5 V. So, given this improvement in dc characteristics, why do we not
choose to operate all our digital circuits at these low supply voltages? Three important
arguments come to mind:
• In the following sections, we will learn that reducing the supply voltage indiscrimi-
nately has a positive impact on the energy dissipation, but is absolutely detrimental
to the performance on the gate.
• The dc-characteristic becomes increasingly sensitive to variations in the device
parameters such as the transistor threshold, once supply voltages and intrinsic volt-
ages become comparable.
• Scaling the supply voltage means reducing the signal swing. While this typically
helps to reduce the internal noise in the system (such as caused by crosstalk), it
makes the design more sensitive to external noise sources that do not scale.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 157 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 157
2.5 0.2
2
0.15
1.5
(V)  (V) 0.1
out out
V 1 V
0.05
0.5
gain = -1
0 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
Vin (V) V (V)
in 
(a) Reducing VDD improves the gain... (b) but it detoriates for very-low supply voltages.
.
Figure 5.12 VTC of CMOS inverter as a function of supply voltage (0.25μm CMOS technology).
To provide an insight into the question on potential limits to the voltage scaling, we
have plotted in Figure 5.12b the voltage transfer characteristic of the same inverter for the
even-lower supply voltages of 200 mV, 100 mV, and 50 mV (while keeping the transistor
thresholds at the same level). Amazingly enough, we still obtain an inverter characteristic,
this while the supply voltage is not even large enough to turn the transistors on! The expla-
nation can be found in the sub-threshold operation of the transistors. The sub-threshold
currents are sufficient to switch the gate between low and high levels, and provide enough
gain to produce acceptable VTCs. The very low value of the switching currents ensures a
very slow operation but this might be acceptable for some applications (such as watches,
for example).
At around 100 mV, we start observing a major deterioration of the gate characteris-
tic. VOL and VOH are no longer at the supply rails and the transition-region gain approaches
1. The latter turns out to be a fundamental show-stopper. To achieving sufficient gain for
use in a digital circuit, it is necessary that the supply must be at least a couple timesφΤ =
kT/q (=25 mV at room temperature), the thermal voltage introduced in Chapter 3
[Swanson72]. It turns out that below this same voltage, thermal noise becomes an issue as
well, potentially resulting in unreliable operation.
kT
VDDmin > 2…4 ------ (5.11)
q
Eq. (5.11) presents a true lower bound on supply scaling. It suggests that the only way to
get CMOS inverters to operate below 100 mV is to reduce the ambient temperature, or in
other words to cool the circuit.
Problem 5.3 Minimum supply voltage of CMOS inverter
Once the supply voltage drops below the threshold voltage, the transistors operate the sub-
threshold region, and display an exponential current-voltage relationship (as expressed in
Eq. (3.40)). Derive an expression for the gain of the inverter under these circumstances

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 158 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
158 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
(assume symmetrical NMOS and PMOS transistors, and a maximum gain atVM = VDD/2).
The resulting expression demonstrates that the minimum voltage is a function of the slope
factor n of the transistor.
 1   VDD ⁄ 2φT
g = – --- ( e – 1) (5.12)
 n
According to this expression, the gain drops to -1 atVDD = 48 mV (for n = 1.5 and φT = 25
mV).
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior
The qualitative analysis presented earlier concluded that the propagation delay of the
CMOS inverter is determined by the time it takes to charge and discharge the load capaci-
tor CL through the PMOS and NMOS transistors, respectively. This observation suggests
that getting CL as small as possible is crucial to the realization of high-performance
CMOS circuits. It is hence worthwhile to first study the major components of the load
capacitance before embarking onto an in-depth analysis of the propagation delay of the
gate. In addition to this detailed analysis, the section also presents a summary of tech-
niques that a designer might use to optimize the performance of the inverter.
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
Manual analysis of MOS circuits where each capacitor is considered individually is virtu-
ally impossible and is exacerbated by the many nonlinear capacitances in the MOS tran-
sistor model. To make the analysis tractable, we assume that all capacitances are lumped
together into one single capacitorCL, located between Vout and GND. Be aware that this is
a considerable simplification of the actual situation, even in the case of a simple inverter.
VDD VDD
M2
M4
Cdb2 Cg4
Cgd12
Vin Vout Vout2
Cdb1 Cw Cg3
M3
M1
Figure 5.13 Parasitic capacitances, influencing the transient behavior of the cascaded inverter pair.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 159 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 159
Figure 5.13 shows the schematic of a cascaded inverter pair. It includes all the
capacitances influencing the transient response of nodeVout. It is initially assumed that the
input Vin is driven by an ideal voltage source with zero rise and fall times. Accounting
only for capacitances connected to the output node,CL breaks down into the following
components.
Gate-Drain Capacitance Cgd12
M1 and M2 are either in cut-off or in the saturation mode during the first half (up to 50%
point) of the output transient. Under these circumstances, the only contributions toCgd12
are the overlap capacitances of both M1 and M2. The channel capacitance of the MOS
transistors does not play a role here, as it is located either completely between gate and
bulk (cut-off) or gate and source (saturation) (see Chapter 3).
The lumped capacitor model now requires that this floating gate-drain capacitor be
replaced by a capacitance-to-ground. This is accomplished by taking the so-called Miller
effect into account. During a low-high or high-low transition, the terminals of the gate-
drain capacitor are moving in opposite directions (Figure 5.14). The voltage change over
the floating capacitor is hence twice the actual output voltage swing. To present an identi-
cal load to the output node, the capacitance-to-ground must have a value that is twice as
large as the floating capacitance.
We use the following equation for the gate-drain capacitors:Cgd = 2 CGD0W (with
CGD0 the overlap capacitance per unit width as used in the SPICE model). For an in-depth
discussion of the Miller effect, please refer to textbooks such as Sedra and Smith
1
([Sedra87], p. 57).
Cgd1  V
out 
∆V Vout ∆V
∆V
Vin 2C
gd1
M1
M1 ∆V
Vin
Figure 5.14 The Miller effect— A capacitor experiencing identical but opposite voltage swings at both
its terminals can be replaced by a capacitor to ground, whose value is two times the original value.
Diffusion Capacitances Cdb1 and Cdb2
The capacitance between drain and bulk is due to the reverse-biasedpn-junction. Such a
capacitor is, unfortunately, quite nonlinear and depends heavily on the applied voltage.
We argued in Chapter 3 that the best approach towards simplifying the analysis is to
replace the nonlinear capacitor by a linear one with the same change in charge for the volt-
age range of interest. A multiplication factorKeq is introduced to relate the linearized
capacitor to the value of the junction capacitance under zero-bias conditions.
1 
The Miller effect discussed in this context is a simplified version of the general analog case. In a digital
inverter, the large scale gain between input and output always equals -1.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 160 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
160 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Ceq = Keq Cj0 (5.13)
with Cj0 the junction capacitance per unit area under zero-bias conditions. An expression
for Keq was derived in Eq. (3.11) and is repeated here for convenience
–φ0m
Keq = ---------------------------------------------------[ ( φ0- – Vhigh)1 – m – ( φ0 – Vlow)1 –m] (5.14)
( Vhigh – Vlow) ( 1 – m)
with φ0 the built-in junction potential and m the grading coefficient of the junction.
Observe that the junction voltage is defined to be negative for reverse-biased junctions.
Example 5.3 Keq for a 2.5 V CMOS Inverter
Consider the inverter of Figure 5.13 designed in the generic 0.25μm CMOS technology. The
relevant capacitance parameters for this process were summarized in Table 3.5.
Let us first analyze the NMOS transistor (Cdb1 in Figure 5.13). The propagation delay
is defined by the time between the 50% transitions of the input and the output. For the CMOS
inverter, this is the time-instance whereVout reaches 1.25 V, as the output voltage swing goes
from rail to rail or equals 2.5 V. We, therefore, linearize the junction capacitance over the
interval {2.5 V, 1.25 V} for the high-to-low transition, and {0, 1.25 V} for the low-to-high
transition.
During the high-to-low transition at the output,Vout initially equals 2.5 V. Because the
bulk of the NMOS device is connected toGND, this translates into a reverse voltage of 2.5 V
over the drain junction or Vhigh = −2.5 V. At the 50% point, Vout = 1.25 V or Vlow = −1.25 V.
Evaluating Eq. (5.14) for the bottom plate and sidewall components of the diffusion capaci-
tance yields
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.5, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.57,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.44, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.61
During the low-to-high transition,Vlow and Vhigh equal 0 V and −1.25 V, respectively,
resulting in higher values forKeq,
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.5, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.79,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.44, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.81
The PMOS transistor displays a reverse behavior, as its substrate is connected to 2.5 V.
Hence, for the high-to-low transition (Vlow = 0, Vhigh = −1.25 V),
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.48, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.79,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.32, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.86
and for the low-to-high transition (Vlow = −1.25 V, Vhigh = −2.5 V)
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.48, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.59,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.32, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.7
Using this approach, the junction capacitance can be replaced by a linear component
and treated as any other device capacitance. The result of the linearization is a minor dis-
tortion of the voltage waveforms. The logic delays are not significantly influenced by this
simplification.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 161 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 161
Wiring Capacitance Cw
The capacitance due to the wiring depends upon the length and width of the connecting
wires, and is a function of the distance of the fanout from the driving gate and the number
of fanout gates. As argued in Chapter 4, this component is growing in importance with the
scaling of the technology.
Gate Capacitance of Fanout Cg3 and Cg4
We assume that the fanout capacitance equals the total gate capacitance of the loading
gates M3 and M4. Hence,
Cfanout = Cgate ( NMOS) + Cgate ( PMOS)
(5.15)
= ( CGSOn + CGDOn + WnLnCox) + ( CGSOp + CGDOp + WpLpCox)
This expression simplifies the actual situation in two ways:
• It assumes that all components of the gate capacitance are connected betweenVout
and GND (or VDD), and ignores the Miller effect on the gate-drain capacitances. This
has a relatively minor effect on the accuracy, since we can safely assume that the
connecting gate does not switch before the 50% point is reached, andVout2, there-
fore, remains constant in the interval of interest.
• A second approximation is that the channel capacitance of the connecting gate is
constant over the interval of interest. This is not exactly the case as we discovered in
Chapter 3. The total channel capacitance is a function of the operation mode of the
device, and varies from approximately 1/3 ofWLCox (cut-off) over 2/3 WLCox (satu-
ration) to the full WLCox (linear). During the first half of the transient, it may be
assumed that one of the load devices is always in linear mode, while the other tran-
sistor evolves from the off-mode to saturation. Ignoring the capacitance variation
results in a pessimistic estimation with an error of approximately 10%, which is
acceptable for a first order analysis.
Example 5.4 Capacitances of a 0.25 μm CMOS Inverter
A minimum-size, symmetrical CMOS inverter has been designed in the 0.25μm CMOS tech-
nology. The layout is shown in Figure 5.15. The supply voltageVDD is set to 2.5 V. From the
layout, we derive the transistor sizes, diffusion areas, and perimeters. This data is summarized
in Table 5.1. As an example, we will derive the drain area and perimeter for the NMOS tran-
2
sistor. The drain area is formed by the metal-diffusion contact, which has an area of 4× 4 λ ,
2
and the rectangle between contact and gate, which has an area of 3× 1 λ . This results in a
2 2 
total area of 19 λ , or 0.30 μm (as λ = 0.125 μm). The perimeter of the drain area is rather
involved and consists of the following components (going counterclockwise): 5 + 4 + 4 + 1 +
1 = 15 λ or PD = 15 × 0.125 = 1.875 μm. Notice that the gate side of the drain perimeter is not
included, as this is not considered a part of the side-wall. The drain area and perimeter of the
PMOS transistor are derived similarly (the rectangular shape makes the exercise considerably
2  2 2
simpler): AD = 5 × 9 λ = 45 λ , or 0.7 μm ; PD = 5 + 9 + 5 = 19 λ, or 2.375 μm.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 162 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
162 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
VDD
PMOS
(9λ/2λ)
0.25 μm = 2λ
Out
In
Metal 1
Polysilicon
NMOS
(3λ/2λ)
GND
Figure 5.15 Layout of two chained, minimum-size inverters using SCMOS Design Rules (see also
Color-plate 6).
Table 5.1 Inverter transistor data.
2 2
W/L AD (μm ) PD (μm) AS (μm ) PS (μm)
2 2
NMOS 0.375/0.25 0.3 (19 λ ) 1.875 (15λ) 0.3 (19 λ ) 1.875 (15λ)
2 2
PMOS 1.125/0.25 0.7 (45 λ ) 2.375 (19λ) 0.7 (45 λ ) 2.375 (19λ)
This physical information can be combined with the approximations derived above to
come up with an estimation of CL. The capacitor parameters for our generic process were
summarized in Table 3.5, and repeated here for convenience:
Overlap capacitance: CGD0(NMOS) = 0.31 fF/μm; CGDO(PMOS) = 0.27 fF/μm
2 2
Bottom junction capacitance: CJ(NMOS) = 2 fF/μm ; CJ(PMOS) = 1.9 fF/μm
Side-wall junction capacitance: CJSW(NMOS) = 0.28 fF/μm; CJSW(PMOS) = 0.22
fF/μm
2
Gate capacitance: Cox(NMOS) = Cox(PMOS) = 6 fF/μm
Finally, we should also consider the capacitance contributed by the wire, connecting
the gates and implemented in metal 1 and polysilicon. A layout extraction program typically

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 163 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 163
will deliver us precise values for this parasitic capacitance. Inspection of the layout helps us
to form a first-order estimate and yields that the metal-1 and polsyilicon areas of the wire, that
2  2
are not over active diffusion, equal 42λ and 72 λ , respectively. With the aid of the intercon-
nect parameters of Table 4.2, we find the wire capacitance — observe that we ignore the
fringing capacitance in this simple exercise. Due to the short length of the wire, this contribu-
tion is ignorable compared to the other parasitics.
2  2  2  2  2  2 
Cwire = 42/8 μm × 30 aF/μm + 72/8 μm × 88 aF/μm = 0.12 fF
Bringing all the components together results in Table 5.2. We use the values ofKeq
derived in Example 5.3 for the computation of the diffusion capacitances. Notice that the load
capacitance is almost evenly split between its two major components: the intrinsic capaci-
tance, composed of diffusion and overlap capacitances, and the extrinsic load capacitance,
contributed by wire and connecting gate.
Table 5.2 Components of CL (for high-to-low and low-to-high transitions).
Capacitor Expression Value (fF) (H→L) Value (fF) (L→H)
Cgd1 2 CGD0n Wn 0.23 0.23
Cgd2 2 CGD0p Wp 0.61 0.61
Cdb1 Keqn ADn CJ + Keqswn PDn CJSW 0.66 0.90
Cdb2 Keqp ADp CJ + Keqswp PDp CJSW) 1.5 1.15
Cg3 (CGD0n+CGSOn) Wn + Cox Wn Ln 0.76 0.76
Cg4 (CGD0p+CGSOp) Wp + Cox Wp Lp 2.28 2.28
Cw From Extraction 0.12 0.12
CL ∑ 6.1 6.0
5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order Analysis
One way to compute the propagation delay of the inverter is to integrate the capacitor
(dis)charge current. This results in the expression of Eq. (5.16).
v2
CL ( )v
tp = --------------d v (5.16)
∫ i v( )
v1
with i the (dis)charging current, v the voltage over the capacitor, andv1 and v2 the initial
and final voltage. An exact computation of this equation is untractable, as bothCL(v) and
i(v) are nonlinear functions of v. We rather fall back to the simplified switch-model of the
inverter introduced in Figure 5.6 to derive a reasonable approximation of the propagation
delay adequate for manual analysis. The voltage-dependencies of the on-resistance and the
load capacitor are addressed by replacing both by a constant linear element with a value
averaged over the interval of interest. The preceding section derived precisely this value

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 164 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
164 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
for the load capacitance. An expression for the average on-resistance of the MOS transis-
tor was already derived in Example 3.8, and is repeated here for convenience.
VDD
1 V 3 VDD  7 
Req = ----------------- ----------------------------------dV- ≈ --- -------------1 – ---λVDD
VDD ⁄ 2 ∫ IDSAT ( 1 + λV) 4IDSAT 9 
VDD ⁄2 (5.17)
2
W VDSAT
with IDSAT = k'----- ( VDD – VT)VDSAT – --------------
L  2 
Deriving the propagation delay of the resulting circuit is now straightforward, and is
nothing more than the analysis of a first-order linearRC-network, identical to the exercise
of Example 4.5. There, we learned that the propagation delay of such a network for a volt-
age step at the input is proportional to the time-constant of the network, formed by pull-
down resistor and load capacitance. Hence,
tpHL = ln 2( )Reqn CL = 0.69 Reqn CL (5.18)
Similarly, we can obtain the propagation delay for the low-to-high transition,
tpLH = 0.69Reqp CL (5.19)
with Reqp the equivalent on-resistance of the PMOS transistor over the interval of interest.
This analysis assumes that the equivalent load-capacitance is identical for both the high-
to-low and low-to-high transitions. This has been shown to be approximately the case in
the example of the previous section. The overall propagation delay of the inverter is
defined as the average of the two values, or
tpHL + tpLH Reqn + Reqp
 
tp = --------------------------= 0.69CL --------------------------- (5.20)
2  2 
Very often, it is desirable for a gate to have identical propagation delays for both rising
and falling inputs. This condition can be achieved by making the on-resistance of the
NMOS and PMOS approximately equal. Remember that this condition is identical to the
requirement for a symmetrical VTC.
Example 5.5 Propagation Delay of a 0.25 μm CMOS Inverter
To derive the propagation delays of the CMOS inverter of Figure 5.15, we make use of Eq.
(5.18) and Eq. (5.19). The load capacitance CL was already computed in Example 5.4, while
the equivalent on-resistances of the transistors for the generic 0.25μm CMOS process were
derived in Table 3.3. For a supply voltage of 2.5 V, the normalized on-resistances of NMOS
and PMOS transistors equal 13 kΩ and 31 kΩ, respectively. From the layout, we determine
the (W/L) ratioes of the transistors to be 1.5 for the NMOS , and 4.5 for the PMOS. We
assume that the difference between drawn and effective dimensions is small enough to be
ignorable. This leads to the following values for the delays:

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 165 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 165
3
Vin
2.5
Vout
2
1.5
(V) 
out t pHL  t 
V 1 pLH
0.5
Figure 5.16 Simulated transient
response of the inverter of Figure
0
5.15.
-0.5
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
t (sec) -10
x 10
 13k Ω
tpHL = 0.69 × -------------- × 6.1fF = 36 psec
 1.5 
 31k Ω
tpLH = 0.69 × -------------- × 6.0fF = 29 psec
 4.5 
and
 36 + 29 
tp = ------------------ = 32.5 psec
 2 
The accuracy of this analysis is checked by performing a SPICE transient simulation
on the circuit schematic, extracted from the layout of Figure 5.15. The computed transient
response of the circuit is plotted in Figure 5.16, and determines the propagation delays to be
39.9 psec and 31.7 for the HL and LH transitions, respectively. The manual results are good
considering the many simplifications made during their derivation. Notice especially the
overshoots on the simulated output signals . These are caused by the gate-drain capacitances
of the inverter transistors, which couple the steep voltage step at the input node directly to the
output before the transistors can even start to react to the changes at the input. These over-
shoots clearly have a negative impact on the performance of the gate, and explain why the
simulated delays are larger than the estimations.
WARNING: This example might give the impression that manual analysis always leads
to close approximations of the actual response. This is not necessarily the case. Large
deviations can often be observed between first- and higher-order models. The purpose of
the manual analysis is to get a basic insight in the behavior of the circuit and to determine
the dominant parameters. A detailed simulation is indispensable when quantitative data is
required. Consider the example above a stroke of good luck.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 166 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
166 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
The obvious question a designer asks herself at this point is how she can manipulate
and/or optimize the delay of a gate. To provide an answer to this question, it is necessary
to make the parameters governing the delay explicit by expandingReq in the delay equa-
tion. Combining Eq. (5.18) and Eq. (5.17), and assuming for the time being that the chan-
nel-length modulation factor λ is ignorable, yields the following expression fortpHL (a
similar analysis holds fortpLH)
3CLVDD CLVDD
tpHL = 0.69--------------------= 0.52 --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------(5.21)
4 IDSATn ( W ⁄ L)nk′ VDSATn ( VDD – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2)
n
In the majority of designs, the supply voltage is chosen high enough so thatVDD >> VTn +
VDSATn/2. Under these conditions, the delay becomes virtually independent of the supply
voltage (Eq. (5.22)). Observe that this is a first-order approximation, and that increasing
the supply voltage yields an observable, albeit small, improvement in performance due to
a non-zero channel-length modulation factor.
CL
tpHL ≈ 0.52 -------------------------------------------- (5.22)
( W ⁄ L)nk′nVDSATn
This analysis is confirmed in Figure 5.17, which plots the propagation delay of the
inverter as a function of the supply voltage. It comes as no surprise that this curve is virtu-
ally identical in shape to the one of Figure 3.27, which charts the equivalent on-resistance
of the MOS transistor as a function of VDD. While the delay is relative insensitive to sup-
ply variations for higher values ofVDD, a sharp increase can be observed starting around
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
Figure 5.17 Propagation delay of CMOS
3
(normalized) inverter as a function of supply voltage (
p
t 2.5 normalized with respect to the delay at 2.5
V). The dots indicate the delay values
2
predicted by Eq. (5.21). Observe that this
1.5 equation is only valid when the devices are
velocity-saturated. Hence, the deviation at
1 low supply voltages.
0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
V (V)
DD
≈2VT. This operation region should clearly be avoided if achieving high performance is a
premier design goal.
Design Techniques
From the above, we deduce that the propagation delay of a gate can be minimized in the fol-
lowing ways:

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 167 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 167
• Reduce CL. Remember that three major factors contribute to the load capacitance: the
internal diffusion capacitance of the gate itself, the interconnect capacitance, and the fan-
out. Careful layout helps to reduce the diffusion and interconnect capacitances.Good
design practice requires keeping the drain diffusion areas as small as possible.
• Increase the W/L ratio of the transistors. This is the most powerful and effective perfor-
mance optimization tool in the hands of the designer. Proceed however with caution
when applying this approach. Increasing the transistor size also raises the diffusion
capacitance and hence CL. In fact, once the intrinsic capacitance (i.e. the diffusion capac-
itance) starts to dominate the extrinsic load formed by wiring and fanout, increasing the
gate size does not longer help in reducing the delay, and only makes the gate larger in
area. This effect is called “self-loading”. In addition, wide transistors have a larger gate
capacitance, which increases the fan-out factor of the driving gate and adversely affects
its speed.
• Increase VDD. As illustrated in Figure 5.17, the delay of a gate can be modulated by
modifying the supply voltage. This flexibility allows the designer to trade-off energy dis-
sipation for performance, as we will see in a later section. However, increasing the sup-
ply voltage above a certain level yields only very minimal improvement and hence
should be avoided. Also, reliability concerns (oxide breakdown, hot-electron effects)
enforce firm upper-bounds on the supply voltage in deep sub-micron processes.
Example 5.6 Device sizing for performance
Let us explore the performance improvement that can be obtained by device sizing in the
design of Example 5.5. We assume the wire and fanout capacitance to be unaffected by the
resizing. An insight in the potential improvement can be obtained by partitioning the load
capacitance into an intrinsic (diffusion and miller) and an extrinsic (wiring and fanout) com-
ponent, or
CL = Cint + Cext = Cint ( 1 + α) (5.23)
with α the ratio between extrinsic and intrinsic capacitance. Widening both NMOS and
PMOS of the driving inverter with a factorS reduces their equivalent resistance by an identi-
cal factor, but also raises the intrinsic capacitance of the gate by approximately the same ratio.
The propagation delay of the redesigned gate can be estimated
Reqn + Reqp α
    
tp = 0.69 ( S + α)Cint ---------------------------= 1 + --- tp0 (5.24)
 2S   S
with tp0 the intrinsic delay of the gate (this is, no extrinsic load, orα = 0). Making S infini-
tially large yields the maximum obtainable performance gain, equal to 1/(1+α). Yet, any siz-
ing factor S that is sufficiently larger thanα will produce similar results at a substantial gain
in silicon area.
For the example in question, we find from Table 5.2 thatα ≈ 1.05 (Cint = 3.0 fF, Cext =
3.15 fF). This would predict a maximum performance gain of 2.05. A scaling factor of 10
allows us to get within 10% of this optimal performance, while larger device sizes only yield
ignorable performance gains.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 168 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
168 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
This is confirmed by simulation results, which predict a maximum obtainable perfor-
-11
x 10
3.8 
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
(sec)p
t 2.8
2.6
2.4
Figure 5.18 Increasing inverter performance by
2.2 sizing the NMOS and PMOS transistor with an
identical factor S for a fixed fanout (inverter of
2
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Figure 5.15).
S
mance improvement of 1.9 (tp0 = 19.3 psec). From the graph of Figure 5.18, we observe that
the bulk of the improvement is already obtained forS = 5, and that sizing factors larger than
10 barely yield any extra gain.
Problem 5.4 Propagation Delay as a Function of (dis)charge Current
So far, we have expressed the propagation delay as a function of the equivalent resistance of
the transistors. Another approach would be replace the transistor by a current source with
value equal to the average (dis)charge current over the interval of interest. Derive an expres-
sion of the propagation delay using this alternative approach.
5.4.3 Propagation Delay Revisited
A detailed analysis of the transient response of the complementary MOS inverter yields
some extra observations and design trade-off’s, worth analyzing.
Impact of Fanout
Eq. (5.23) states that the load capacitance of the inverter can be divided into an intrinsic
and an extrinsic component. The latter factor is an obvious function of the fanout of the
gate: the larger the fanout, the larger the external load. Assuming that each fanout gate
2
presents an identical load, and that the wiring capacitance is proportional to the fanout,
we can rewrite the delay equation as a function of the fanoutN.
tp ( N) = tp0 ( 1 + αN) (5.25)
2 
The linear relationship between fanout and wiring capacitance has been confirmed by a number of heu-
ristic studies [REF].

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 169 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 169
A linear dependence can be observed. Large fanout factors should hence be avoided if per-
formance is an issue. From the preceding discussions, it is furthermore apparent that
increasing the sizing factor S of the driving inverter is appropriate and recommendable in
the presence of fanout.
NMOS/PMOS Ratio
So far, we have consistently widened the PMOS transistor so that its resistance matches
that of the pull-down NMOS device. This typically requires a ratio of 3 to 3.5 between
PMOS and NMOS width. The motivation behind this approach is to create an inverter
with a symmetrical VTC, and to equate the high-to-low and low-to-high propagation
delays. However, this does not imply that this ratio also yields the minimum overall prop-
agation delay. If symmetry and reduced noise margins are not of prime concern, it is actu-
ally possible to speed up the inverter by reducing the width of the PMOS device!
The reasoning behind this statement is that, while widening the PMOS improves the
tpLH of the inverter by increasing the charging current, it also degrades thetpHL by cause of
a larger parasitic capacitance. When two contradictory effects are present, there must exist
a transistor ratio that optimizes the propagation delay of the inverter.
This optimum ratio can be derived through the following simple analysis. Consider
two identical, cascaded CMOS inverters. The load capacitance of the first gate equals
approximately
CL = ( Cdp 1 + Cdn 1) + ( Cgp 2 + Cgn 2) + CW (5.26)
where Cdp1 and Cdn1 are the equivalent drain diffusion capacitances of PMOS and NMOS
transistors of the first inverter, whileCgp2 and Cgn2 are the gate capacitances of the second
gate. CW represents the wiring capacitance.
When the PMOS devices are madeβ times larger than the NMOS ones (β = (W/L)p /
(W/L)n), all transistor capacitances will scale in approximately the same way, orCdp1 ≈ β
Cdn1, and Cgp2 ≈ β Cgn2. Eq. (5.26) can then be rewritten:
CL = ( 1 + β) ( Cdn 1 + Cgn 2) + CW (5.27)
An expression for the propagation delay can be derived, based on Eq. (5.20).
0.69  Reqp
tp = ---------- 1( (  + β) ( Cdn 1 + Cgn 2) + CW) Reqn + ----------
2  β 
(5.28)
 r
= 0.345 ( ( 1 + β) ( Cdn 1 + Cgn 2) + CW)Reqn 1 + ---
 β
r (= Reqp/Reqn) represents the resistance ratio of identically-sized PMOS and NMOS tran-
∂tp
sistors. The optimal value ofβ can be found by setting to 0, which yields
∂β
Cw
 
βopt = r 1 + ---------------------------- (5.29)
 Cdn 1 + Cgn 2

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 170 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
170 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
This means that when the wiring capacitance is negligible (Cdn1+Cgn2 >> CW), βopt
equals r , in contrast to the factor r normally used in the noncascaded case. If the wiring
capacitance dominates, larger values ofβ should be used. The surprising result of this
analysis is that smaller device sizes (and hence smaller design area) yield a faster design at
the expense of symmetry and noise margin.
Example 5.7 Sizing of CMOS Inverter Loaded by an Identical Gate
Consider again our standard design example. From the values of the equivalent resitances
(Table 3.3), we find that a ratio β of 2.4 (= 31 kΩ / 13 kΩ) would yield a symmetrical tran-
sient response. Eq. (5.29) now predicts that the device ratio for an optimal performance
should equal 1.6. These results are verified in Figure 5.19, which plots the simulated propaga-
tion delay as a function of the transistor ratioβ. The graph clearly illustrates how a changing
β trades off between tpLH and tpHL. The optimum point occurs around β = 1.9, which is some-
what higher than predicted. Observe also that the rising and falling delays are identical at the
predicted point of β equal to 2.4.
-11
x 10
5 
tpLH tpHL
4.5
t
4 p
(sec)
tp
3.5
Figure 5.19 Propagation delay of CMOS inverter as a
3
1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 function of the PMOS/NMOS transistor ratioβ.
β
.
The rise/fall time of the input signal
All the above expressions were derived under the assumption that the input signal to the
inverter abruptly changed from 0 toVDD or vice-versa. Only one of the devices is assumed
to be on during the (dis)charging process. In reality, the input signal changes gradually
and, temporarily, PMOS and NMOS transistors conduct simultaneously. This affects the
total current available for (dis)charging and impacts the propagation delay. Figure 5.20
plots the propagation delay of a minimum-size inverter as a function of the input signal
slope— as obtained from SPICE. It can be observed thattp increases (approximately) lin-
early with increasing input slope, oncets > tp(ts=0).
While it is possible to derive an analytical expression describing the relationship
between input signal slope and propagation delay, the result tends to be complex and of
limited value. From a design perspective, it is more valuable to relate the impact of the
finite slope on the performance directly to its cause, which is the limited driving capability
of the preceding gate. If the latter would be infinitely strong, its output slope would be
zero, and the performance of the gate under examination would be unaffected. The major

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 171 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 171
-11
x 1 0
5.4 
5.2
5
4.8
4.6
(sec)
t p 4.4
4.2
4
Figure 5.20 tp as a function of the
3.8 input signal slope (10-90% rise or
fall time) for minimum-size
3.6
0 2 4 6 8 inverter with fan-out of a single
-11
ts(sec) x 1 0 gate.
advantage of this approach is that it realizes that a gate is never designed in isolation, and
that its performance is both affected by the fanout, and the driving strength of the gate(s)
feeding into its inputs. This leads to a revised expression for the propagation delay of an
inverter i in a chain of inverters [Hedenstierna87]:
i  i  i –1
tp = tstep + ηtstep (5.30)
Eq. (5.30) states that the propagation delay of inverteri equals the sum of the delay of the
i
same gate for a step input (tstep ) (i.e. zero input slope) augmented with a fraction of the
step-input delay of the preceding gate (i-1). The fraction η is an empirical constant. This
expression has the advantage of being very simple, yet it exposes all relationships neces-
sary for global delay computations of complex circuits.
Example 5.8 Delay of Inverter embedded in Network
Consider for instance the circuit of . All inverters in this example are assumed to be identical,
and to have an intrinsic propagation delaytp0. With the aid of Eq. (5.30) and Eq. (5.25), we
can derive an expression for the delay of inverteri.
i 
tp = tp0 ( 1 + αN) +η tp0 ( 1 + αM)
(5.31)
= tp0 ( 1 + η + α ( N + ηM))
with N and M the fanout factors of inverters i and i-1, respectively. Typical values for the
parameters α and η are around 1 and 0.25, respectively. Experiments have demonstrated that
the model of Eq. (5.31) forms a good approximation of the actual dependencies, although
some important deviations can be observed for small values ofN and M.
Design Challenge

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 172 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
172 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
…M … N
Figure 5.21 Inverter (in shaded box) embedded in network
of identical inverters.M and N denote the fanout factors of
inverter i-1 and i, respectively.
i-1 i i+1
It is advantageous to keep the signal rise times smaller than or equal to the gate propagation
delays. This proves to be true not only for performance, but also for power consumption con-
siderations as will be discussed later. Keeping the rise and fall times of the signals small and of
approximately equal values is one of the major challenges in high-performance design, and is
often called ‘slope engineering’.
Problem 5.5 Impact of input slope
Determine if reducing the supply voltage increases or decreases the influence of the input
signal slope on the propagation delay. Explain your answer.
Delay in the Presence of (Long) Interconnect Wires
The interconnect wire has played a minimal role in our analysis so far. When gates get far-
ther apart, the wire capacitance and resistance can no longer be ignored, and may even
dominate the transient response. Earlier delay expressions can be adjusted to accomodate
these extra contributions by employing the wire modeling techniques introduced in the
previous Chapter. The analysis detailed in Example 4.9 is directly applicable to the por-
blem at hand. Consider the circuit of Figure 5.22, where an inverter drives a single fanout
through a wire of length L. The driver is represented by a single resistanceRdr, wich is the
average between Reqn and Reqp. Cint and Cfan account for the intrinsic capacitance of the
driver, and the input capacitance of the fanout gate, respectively.
(rw,cw,L)
Vout Vout
Cint  C
fan
Figure 5.22 Inverter driving single fanout through wire of
length L.
The propagation delay of the circuit can be obtained by applying the Ellmore delay
expression.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 173 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 173
tp = 0.69Rdr Cint + ( 0.69Rdr + 0.38 Rw)Cw + 0.69 ( Rdr + Rw)Cfan
(5.32)
2
= 0.69Rdr ( Cint + Cfan) + 0.69 ( Rdr cw + rwCfan)L + 0.38rwcwL
The 0.38 factor accounts for the fact that the wire represents a distributed delay. Cw and
Rw stand for the total capacitance and resistance of the wire, respectively. The delay
expressions contains a component that is linear with the wire length, as well a quadratic
one. It is the latter that causes the wire delay to rapidly become the dominant factor in the
delay budget for longer wires.
Example 5.9 Inverter delay in presence of interconnect
Consider the circuit of Figure 5.22, and assume the device parameters of Example 5.5:Cint =
3 fF, Cfan = 3 fF, and Rdr = 0.5(13/1.5 + 31/4.5) = 7.8 kΩ. The wire is implemented in metal1
and has a width of 0.4 μm— the minimum allowed. This yields the following parameters:cw =
92 aF/μm, and rw = 0.19 Ω/μm (Example 4.4). With the aid of Eq. (5.32), we can compute at
what wire length the delay of the interconnect becomes equal to the intrinsic delay caused
purely by device parasitics. Solving the following quadratic equation yields a single useful
solution.
–18 2  – 12 –12
6.6 × 10  L + 0.5 ×10  L = 32.29 ×10 
or
L = 65 μm
Observe that the extra delay is solely due to the linear factor in the equation, and more specif-
ically due to the extra capacitance introduced by the wire. The quadratic factor (this is, the
distributed wire delay) only becomes dominant at much larger wire lengths (> 7 cm). This is
due to the high resistance of the (minimum-size) driver transistors. A different balance
emerges when wider transistors are used. Analyze, for instance, the same problem with the
driver transistors 100 times wider, as is typical in high-speed, large fan-out drivers.
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
So far, we have seen that the static CMOS inverter with its almost ideal VTC— symmetri-
cal shape, full logic swing, and high noise margins— offers a superior robustness, which
simplifies the design process considerably and opens the door for design automation.
Another major attractor for static CMOS is the almost complete absence of power con-
sumption in steady-state operation mode. It is this combination of robustness and low
static power that has made static CMOS the technology of choice of most contemporary
digital designs. The power dissipation of a CMOS circuit is instead dominated by the
dynamic dissipation resulting from charging and discharging capacitances.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 174 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
174 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
Dynamic Dissipation due to Charging and Discharging Capacitances
Each time the capacitor CL gets charged through the PMOS transistor, its voltage rises
from 0 to VDD, and a certain amount of energy is drawn from the power supply. Part of this
energy is dissipated in the PMOS device, while the remainder is stored on the load capac-
itor. During the high-to-low transition, this capacitor is discharged, and the stored energy
3
is dissipated in the NMOS transistor.
A precise measure for this energy consump- VDD
tion can be derived. Let us first consider the low-to-
high transition. We assume, initially, that the input
i
waveform has zero rise and fall times, or, in other VDD
words, that the NMOS and PMOS devices are never
on simultaneously. Therefore, the equivalent circuit vout
of Figure 5.23 is valid. The values of the energy
EVDD, taken from the supply during the transition, as C
L
well as the energy EC, stored on the capacitor at the
end of the transition, can be derived by integrating
the instantaneous power over the period of interest. Figure 5.23 Equivalent circuit
during the low-to-high transition.
The corresponding waveforms of vout(t) and iVDD(t)
are pictured in Figure 5.24.
∞ ∞ VDD
dvout
EVDD = iVDD ( )t VDDdt = VDD CL------------dt = CLV dv out = CLVDD2 (5.33)
∫ ∫ dt DD ∫ 
0 0 0
∞ ∞ VDD
dvout CLVDD2
EC = iVDD ( )t voutdt = CL------------vout dt = CL vout dvout = ----------------- (5.34)
∫ ∫ dt ∫  2
0 0 0
These results can also be derived by observing that during the low-to-high transi-
tion, CL is loaded with a charge CLVDD. Providing this charge requires an energy from the
2  2
supply equal to CLVDD (= Q × VDD). The energy stored on the capacitor equalsCLVDD /2.
This means that only half of the energy supplied by the power source is stored onCL. The
other half has been dissipated by the PMOS transistor. Notice that this energy dissipation
is independent of the size (and hence the resistance) of the PMOS device! During the dis-
charge phase, the charge is removed from the capacitor, and its energy is dissipated in the
NMOS device. Once again, there is no dependence on the size of the device. In summary,
each switching cycle (consisting of an L→H and an H→L transition) takes a fixed amount
2
of energy, equal to CLVDD . In order to compute the power consumption, we have to take
3 
Observe that this model is a simplification of the actual circuit. In reality, the load capacitance consists
of multiple components some of which are located between the output node and GND, others between output
node and VDD. The latter experience a charge-discharge cycle that is out of phase with the capacitances to GND,
i.e. they get charged when Vout goes low and discharged when Vout rises. While this distributes the energy deliv-
ery by the supply over the two phases, it does not impact the overall dissipation, and the results presented in this
section are still valid.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 175 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 175
out
v
t
iVDD
Charge Discharge t Figure 5.24 Output voltages and supply
current during (dis)charge ofCL.
into account how often the device is switched. If the gate is switchedon and off f0→1 times
per second, the power consumption equals
2 
Pdyn = CLVDDf0 →1 (5.35)
f0→1 represents the frequency of energy-consuming transitions, this is 0→ 1 transitions
for static CMOS.
Advances in technology result in ever-higher of values off0→1 (as tp decreases). At
the same time, the total capacitance on the chip (CL) increases as more and more gates are
placed on a single die. Consider for instance a 0.25μm CMOS chip with a clock rate of
500 Mhz and an average load capacitance of 15 fF/gate, assuming a fanout of 4. The
power consumption per gate for a 2.5 V supply then equals approximately 50μW. For a
design with 1 million gates and assuming that a transition occurs at every clock edge, this
would result in a power consumption of 50 W! This evaluation presents, fortunately, a
pessimistic perspective. In reality, not all gates in the complete IC switch at the full rate of
500 Mhz. The actual activity in the circuit is substantially lower.
Example 5.10 Capacitive power dissipation of inverter
The capacitive dissipation of the CMOS inverter of Example 5.4 is now easily computed. In
Table 5.2, the value of the load capacaitance was determined to equal 6 fF. For a supply volt-
age of 2.5 V, the amount of energy needed to charge and discharge that capacitance equals
2 
Edyn = CLVDD = 37.5 fJ
Assume that the inverter is switched at the maximum possible rate (T = 1/f = tpLH +
tpHL = 2 tp). For a tp of 32.5 psec (Example 5.5), we find that the dynamic power dissipation of
the circuit is
Pdyn = Edyn ⁄ ( 2tp) = 580 μW
Of course, an inverter in an actual circuit is rarely switched at this maximum rate, and
even if done so, the output does not swing from rail-to-rail. The power dissipation will hence
be substantially lower. For a rate of 4 GHz (T = 250 psec), the dissipation reduces to 150μW.
This is confirmed by simulations, which yield a power consumption of 155μW.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 176 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
176 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Computing the dissipation of a complex circuit is complicated by thef0→1 factor,
also called the switching activity. While the switching activity is easily computed for an
inverter, it turns out to be far more complex in the case of higher-order gates and circuits.
One concern is that the switching activity of a network is a function of the nature and the
statistics of the input signals: If the input signals remain unchanged, no switching hap-
pens, and the dynamic power consumption is zero! On the other hand, rapidly changing
signals provoke plenty of switching and hence dissipation. Other factors influencing the
activity are the overall network topology and the function to be implemented. We can
accomodate this by another rewrite of the equation, or
2  2  2 
Pdyn = CLVDDf0 → 1 = CLVDDP0 → 1f = CEFF VDDf (5.36)
where f now presents the maximum possible event rate of the inputs (which is often the
clock rate) and P0→1 the probability that a clock event resultsin a 0 → 1 (or power-con-
suming) event at the output of the gate. CEFF = P0→1CL is called the effective capacitance
and represents the average capacitance switched every clock cycle. For our example, an
activity factor of 10% (P0→1 = 0.1) reduces the average consumption to 5 W.
Example 5.11 Switching activity
Consider the waveforms on the
right where the upper waveform
represents the idealized clock sig- Clock
nal , and the botttom one shows
the signal at the output of the gate.
Power consuming transitions Output signal
occur 2 out of 8 times, which is
equaivalent to a transition proba- Figure 5.25 Clock and signal waverforms
bility of 0.25 (or 25%).
Low Energy/Power Design Techniques
With the increasing complexity of the digital integrated circuits, it is anticipated that the power
problem will only worsen in future technologies. This is one of the reasons that lower supply
voltages are becoming more and more attractive.Reducing VDD has a quadratic effect on
Pdyn. For instance, reducingVDD from 2.5 V to 1.25 V for our example drops the power dissipa-
tion from 5 W to 1.25 W. This assumes that the same clock rate can be sustained. Figure 5.17
demonstrates that this assumption is not that unrealistic as long as the supply voltage is sub-
stantially higher than the threshold voltage. An important performance penalty occurs once
VDD approaches 2 VT.
When a lower bound on the supply voltage is set by external constraints (as often hap-
pens in real-world designs), or when the performance degradation due to lowering the supply
voltage is intolerable, the only means of reducing the dissipation is by lowering the effective
capacitance. This can be achieved by addressing both of its components: the physical capaci-
tance and the switching activity.
A reduction in the switching activity can only be accomplished at the logic and architec-
tural abstraction levels, and will be discussed in more detail in later Chapters.Lowering the

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 177 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 177
physical capacitance is an overall worthwhile goal, which also helps to improve the perfor-
mance of the circuit. As most of the capacitance in a combinational logic circuit is due to tran-
sistor capacitances (gate and diffusion), it makes sense to keep those contributions to a
minimum when designing for low power. This means that transistors should be kept tominimal
size whenever possible or reasonable. This definitely affects the performance of the circuit, but
the effect can be offset by using logic or architectural speed-up techniques. The only instances
where transistors should be sized up is when the load capacitance is dominated by extrinsic
capacitances (such as fan-out or wiring capacitance). This is contrary to common design prac-
tices used in cell libraries, where transistors are generally made large to accommodate a range
of loading and performance requirements.
The above observations lead to an interesting design challenge. Assume we have to min-
imize the energy dissipation of a circuit with a specified lower-bound on the performance. The
obvious approach is to lower the supply voltage as much as possible, and to compensate the
loss in performance by increasing the transistor sizes. Yet, the latter causes the capacitance to
increase. It may be foreseen that at a low enough supply voltage, the latter factor may start to
dominate and cause energy to increase with a further drop in the supply voltage.
To analyze the transistor-sizing for minimum energy problem, let us analyze the simple
case of a static CMOS inverter driving a load capacitance consisting of an intrinsic (Cint) and
an extrinsic component (Cext) (Figure 5.26a). While the former represents the diffusion capaci-
tances, the latter stands for wiring capacitance and fan-out. It is assumed that the ratio between
PMOS and NMOS transistors is constant. The factor S stands for the inverter sizing factor,
where S is equal to 1 for an inverter constructed of minimum-size devices. We can see that the
intrinsic capacitance of the scaled device is proportional toS (or Cint(scaled) = SCint). Figure
5.26b plots the normalized energy (per transition) as a function of the scaling factorS with the
ratio between the extrinsic and intrinsic capacitance as a parameter:α = Cext /Cint. The speed of
all implementations is kept constant by appropriately adjusting the supply voltage: larger val-
ues of S normally mean lower values of the supply voltage.
5
4
S 3
α=0
CL = Cext + SCint
2
Normalized Energy
α=5
1 α=2 
α=1 
0
1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Scaling Factor S
(a) 
(b)
Figure 5.26 Normalized energy of a MOS inverter with load capacitanceCL, as a function of the inverter
size S and the ratio between the extrinsic and intrinsic capacitanceα (= Cext/Cint). (assuming a reference
supply voltage of 2.5 V).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 178 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
178 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
When α = 0 (or the load capacitance is zero), the lowest energy consumption is obtained
when using minimum-size devices. Only when the extrinsic capacitances dominate (α ≥ 1)
does it make sense to widen the devices. This result should come as no surprise: transistor siz-
ing to increase performance— and reduce the energy by lowering the supply voltage— only
makes sense as long as performance is dominated by the extrinsic capacitance. Once the intrin-
sic capacitance becomes the primary factor, further increases in the device sizes only raise the
energy consumption while no longer lowering the propagation delay. For example, a sizing
factor S of 3.75 minimizes the energy for a load ofα = 5. The energy-reduction— with a factor
of 4 with respect to the circuit instance with minimum-size devices— requires that the supply
voltage be reduced to 1.03 V.
Example 5.12 Transistor Sizing for Inverter
We derive a simplified expression for the normalized energy of the inverter of Figure 5.26 as
a function of S and α. The energy is normalized with respect to the case forS = 1, which is
called the reference.
An expression for the propagation delay of the gate was already derived in Eq. (5.24),
and is repeated here for convenience.
Reqn + Reqp α
    
tp = 0.69 ( S + α)Cint ---------------------------= 1 + --- tp0
 2S   S
tpo stands for the intrinsic delay of the gate at the reference voltageVDD. Its dependence upon
VDD is approximated by the following expression, derived from Eq. (5.21).
VDD 1
tp0 ∼ -------------------------= -------------------------------- (5.37)
VDD – VTE 1 – VTE ⁄ VDD
with VTE = VT + VDSAT/2 (assume a value averaged over NMOS and PMOS).
Keeping the propagation delay of the scaled inverter constant with respect to the refer-
ence case means lowering the supply voltage:
VDD′ S ( 1 + α)
------------ = --------------------------------------------------------------------------
VTE α ( S – 1) + ( S + α) ( VTE ⁄ VDD)
where V′DD and VDD are the supply voltages of the scaled and reference inverters, respec-
tively. The (normalized) dissipated energy of the scaled inverter is now derived:
2 2 
E′ ( S + α)Cint ( VDD′ ) ( S + α)S ( 1 + α)
--------- = ---------------------------------------------=  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Eref 2 2
( 1 + α)Cint ( VDD) ( α ( S – 1) ( VDD ⁄ VTE) + ( S + α))
The charts for VDD = 2.5 V and VTE = 0.75 V are plotted in Figure 5.26. Observe that
for S >> α, the dissipation increases linearly withS. The reader should further be aware that
the presented model is somewhat optimistic, as it ignores the extra energy dissipation related
to the increased gate capacitance of the driving transistors.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 179 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 179
Dissipation Due to Direct-Path Currents
In actual designs, the assumption of the zero rise and fall times of the input wave forms is
not correct. The finite slope of the input signal causes a direct current path betweenVDD
and GND for a short period of time during switching, while the NMOS and the PMOS
transistors are conducting simultaneously. This is illustrated in Figure 5.27. Under the
(reasonable) assumption that the resulting current spikes can be approximated as triangles
and that the inverter is symmetrical in its rising and falling responses, we can compute the
energy consumed per switching period,
Ipeak tsc Ipeak tsc
Edp = VDD-----------------+  VDD-----------------= tsc V Ipeak (5.38)
DD 
2 2
as well as the average power consumption
2 
Pdp = tsc VDD Ipeak f = Csc VDDf (5.39)
VDD
VDD – V T
vin
VT
Vin Isc Vout
Ipeak t
CL ishort
t
Figure 5.27 Short-circuit currents during transients.
The direct-path power dissipation is proportional to the switching activity, similar to the
capacitive power dissipation.tsc represents the time both devices are conducting. For a lin-
ear input slope, this time is reasonably well approximated by Eq. (5.40) wherets repre-
sents the 0-100% transition time.
VDD – 2VT VDD – 2VT tr f( )
tsc = -------------------------ts ≈ -------------------------× -------- (5.40)
VDD VDD 0.8
Ipeak is determined by the saturation current of the devices and is hence directly pro-
portional to the sizes of the transistors. The peak current is alsoa strong function of the
ratio between input and output slopes. This relationship is best illustrated by the follow-
ing simple analyis: Consider a static CMOS inverter with a 0→ 1 transition at the input.
Assume first that the load capacitance is very large, so that the output fall time is signifi-
cantly larger than the input rise time (Figure 5.28a). Under those circumstances, the input
moves through the transient region before the output starts to change. As the source-drain
voltage of the PMOS device is approximately 0 during that period, the device shuts off
without ever delivering any current. The short-circuit current is close to zero in this case.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 180 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
180 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
VDD VDD
ISC ≈ 0 ISC ≈ IMAX
Vout Vout
Vin Vin
CL CL
(a) Large capacitive load (b) Small capacitive load
Figure 5.28 Impact of load capacitance on short-circuit current.
Consider now the reverse case, where the output capacitance is very small, and the output
fall time is substantially smaller than the input rise time (Figure 5.28b). The drain-source
voltage of the PMOS device equalsVDD for most of the transition period, guaranteeing the
maximal short-circuit current (equal to the saturation current of the PMOS). This clearly
represents the worst-case condition. The conclusions of the above analysis are confirmed
in Figure 5.29, which plots the short-circuit current through the NMOS transistor during a
low-to-high transition as a function of the load capacitance.
-4
x 10
2.5 
C = 20 fF
2 L 
1.5
CL = 100 fF
(A)  1
Isc
CL = 500 fF
0.5
Figure 5.29 CMOS inverter short-circuit current
0 through NMOS transistor as a function of the load
capacitance (for a fixed input slope of 500 psec).
-0.5
0 2 4 6
-10
time (sec) x 10
This analysis leads to the conclusion that the short-circuit dissipation is minimized
by making the output rise/fall time larger than the input rise/fall time. On the other hand,
making the output rise/fall time too large slows down the circuit and can cause short-cir-
cuit currents in the fan-out gates. This presents a perfect example of how local optimiza-
tion and forgetting the global picture can lead to an inferior solution.
Design Techniques
A more practical rule, which optimizes the power consumption in a global way, can be formu-
lated (Veendrick84]):

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 181 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 181
The power dissipation due to short-circuit currents is minimized by matching the rise/fall
times of the input and output signals. At the overall circuit level, this means that rise/fall
times of all signals should be kept constant within a range.
Making the input and output rise times of a gate identical is not the optimum solution for
that particular gate on its own, but keeps the overall short-circuit current within bounds. This is
shown in Figure 5.30, which plots the short-circuit energy dissipation of an inverter (normal-
8
W/L|P = 1.125 μm/0.25 μm
7
W/L|N = 0.375 μm/0.25 μm
6 VDD = 3.3 V C = 30 fF
L 
5
norm4
P
3
Figure 5.30 Power dissipation of a static CMOS
2 VDD = 2.5 V inverter as a function of the ratio between input
and output rise/fall times. The power is
1
VDD = 1.5 V normalized with respect to zero input rise-time
0 dissipation. At low values of the slope ratio, input-
0 1 2 3 4 5 output coupling leads to some extra dissipation.
t /t
sin sout
ized with respect to the zero-input rise time dissipation) as a function of the ratior between
input and output rise/fall times. When the load capacitance is too small for a given inverter size
(r > 2…3 for VDD = 5 V), the power is dominated by the short-circuit current. For very large
capacitance values, all power dissipation is devoted to charging and discharging the load
capacitance. When the rise/fall times of inputs and outputs are equalized, most power dissipa-
tion is associated with the dynamic power and only a minor fraction (< 10%) is devoted to
short-circuit currents.
Observe also that the impact of short-circuit current is reduced when we lower the
supply voltage, as is apparent from Eq. (5.40). In the extreme case, when VDD < VTn + |VTp|,
short-circuit dissipation is completely eliminated, because both devices are never on
simultaneously. With threshold voltages scaling at a slower rate than the supply voltage, short-
circuit power dissipation is becoming of a lesser importance in deep-submicron technologies.
At a supply voltage of 2.5 V and thresholds around 0.5 V, an input/output slope ratio of 2 is
needed to cause a 10% degradation in dissipation.
Finally, its is worth observing that the short-circuit power dissipation can be mod-
eled by adding a load capacitanceCsc = tscIpeak/VDD in parallel with CL, as is apparent in
Eq. (5.39). The value of this short-circuit capacitance is a function ofVDD, the transistor
sizes, and the input-output slope ratio.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 182 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
182 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
5.5.2 Static Consumption
The static (or steady-state) power dissipation of a circuit is is expressed by Eq. (5.41),
where Istat is the current that flows between the supply rails in the absence of switching
activity
Pstat = Istat VDD (5.41)
Ideally, the static current of the CMOS inverter is equal to zero, as the PMOS and
NMOS devices are never on simultaneously in steady-state operation. There is, unfortu-
nately, a leakage current flowing through the reverse-biased diode junctions of the transis-
tors, located between the source or drain and the substrate as shown in Figure 5.31. This
contribution is, in general, very small and can be ignored. For the device sizes under con-
sideration, the leakage current per unit drain area typically ranges between 10-100
2 
pA/μm at room temperature. For a die with 1 million gates, each with a drain area of 0.5
2 
μm and operated at a supply voltage of 2.5 V, the worst-case power consumption due to
diode leakage equals 0.125 mW, which is clearly not much of an issue.
VDD
VDD
Vout = VDD
Drain Leakage
Current
Subthreshold current Figure 5.31 Sources of leakage currents in
CMOS inverter (for Vin = 0 V).
However, be aware that the junction leakage currents are caused by thermally gener-
ated carriers. Their value increases with increasing junction temperature, and this occurs
in an exponential fashion. At 85°C (a common junction temperature limit for commercial
hardware), the leakage currents increase by a factor of 60 over their room-temperature val-
ues. Keeping the overall operation temperature of a circuit low is consequently a desirable
goal. As the temperature is a strong function of the dissipated heat and its removal mecha-
nisms, this can only be accomplished by limiting the power dissipation of the circuit
and/or by using chip packages that support efficient heat removal.
An emerging source of leakage current is the subthreshold current of the transistors.
As discussed in Chapter 3, an MOS transistor can experience a drain-source current, even
when VGS is smaller than the threshold voltage (Figure 5.32). The closer the threshold
voltage is to zero volts, the larger the leakage current atVGS = 0 V and the larger the static
power consumption. To offset this effect, the threshold voltage of the device has generally
been kept high enough. Standard processes feature VT values that are never smaller than
0.5-0.6V and that in some cases are even substantially higher (~ 0.75V).
This approach is being challenged by the reduction in supply voltages that typically
goes with deep-submicron technology scaling as became apparent in Figure 3.40. We con-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 183 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 183
cluded earlier (Figure 5.17) that scaling the supply voltages while keeping the threshold
voltage constant results in an important loss in performance, especially whenVDD
approaches 2 VT . One approach to address this performance issue is to scale the device
thresholds down as well. This moves the curve of Figure 5.17 to the left, which means that
the performance penalty for lowering the supply voltage is reduced. Unfortunately, the
threshold voltages are lower-bounded by the amount of allowable subthreshold leakage
current, as demonstrated in Figure 5.32. The choice of the threshold voltage hence repre-
sents a trade-off between performance and static power dissipation. The continued scaling
of the supply voltage predicted for the next generations of CMOS technologies will how-
ever force the threshold voltages ever downwards, and will make subthreshold conduction
a dominant source of power dissipation. Process technologies that contain devices with
ID
Figure 5.32 Decreasing the threshold
increases the subthreshold current atVGS =
VT = 0.2 VT = 0.6 V 0.
GS
sharper turn-off characteristic will therefore become more attractive. An example of the
latter is the SOI (Silicon-on-Insulator) technology whose MOS transistors have slope-fac-
tors that are close to the ideal 60 mV/decade.
Example 5.13 Impact of threshold reduction on performance and static power dissipation
Consider a minimum size NMOS transistor in the 0.25μm CMOS technology. In Chapter 3,
we derived that the slope factor S for this device equals 90 mV/decade. The off-current (at
-11
VGS = 0) of the transistor for aVT of approximately 0.5V equals 10 A (Figure 3.22). Reduc-
ing the threshold with 200 mV to 0.3 V multiplies the off-current of the transistors with a fac-
tor of 170! Assuming a million gate design with a supply voltage of 1.5 V, this translates into
6  -11
a static power dissipation of 10 ×170×10 ×1.5 = 2.6 mW. A further reduction of the thresh-
old to 100 mV results in an unacceptable dissipation of almost 0.5 W! At that supply voltage,
the threshold reductions correspond to a performance improvement of 25% and 40%, respec-
tively.
This lower bound on the thresholds is in some sense artificial. The idea that the leak-
age current in a static CMOS circuit has to be zero is a preconception. Certainly, the pres-
ence of leakage currents degrades the noise margins, because the logic levels are no longer
equal to the supply rails. As long as the noise margins are within range, this is not a com-
pelling issue. The leakage currents, of course, cause an increase in static power dissipa-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 184 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
184 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
tion. This is offset by the drop in supply voltage, that is enabled by the reduced thresholds
at no cost in performance, and results in a quadratic reduction in dynamic power. For a
0.25 μm CMOS process, the following circuit configurations obtain the same perfor-
mance: 3 V supply–0.7 V VT; and 0.45 V supply–0.1 V VT. The dynamic power consump-
tion of the latter is, however, 45 times smaller [Liu93]! Choosing the correct values of
supply and threshold voltages once again requires a trade-off. The optimal operation point
depends upon the activity of the circuit. In the presence of a sizable static power dissipa-
tion, it is essential that non-active modules arepowered down, lest static power dissipation
would become dominant. Power-down (also calledstandby) can be accomplished by dis-
connecting the unit from the supply rails, or by lowering the supply voltage.
5.5.3 Putting It All Together
The total power consumption of the CMOS inverter is now expressed as the sum of its
three components:
Ptot = Pdyn + Pdp + P = ( CLVDD2 + VDD Ipeak ts)f0 → 1 + VDD Ileak (5.42)
stat 
In typical CMOS circuits, the capacitive dissipation is by far the dominant factor. The
direct-path consumption can be kept within bounds by careful design, and should hence
not be an issue. Leakage is ignorable at present, but this might change in the not too dis-
tant future.
The Power-Delay Product, or Energy per Operation
In Chapter 1, we introduced the power-delay product (PDP) as a quality measure for a
logic gate.
PDP = Pav tp (5.43)
The PDP presents a measure of energy, as is apparent from the units (Wsec = Joule).
Assuming that the gate is switched at its maximum possible rate offmax = 1/(2tp), and
ignoring the contributions of the static and direct-path currents to the power consumption,
we find
2
2  CLVDD
PDP = CLVDDfmax tp = ----------------- (5.44)
2
The PDP stands for the average energy consumed per switching event (this is, for a
0→1, or a 1→0 transition). Remember that earlier we had definedEav as the average
energy per switching cycle (or per energy-consuming event). As each inverter cycle con-
tains a 0→1, and a 1→0 transition, Eav hence is twice the PDP.
Energy-Delay Product
The validity of the PDP as a quality metric for a process technology or gate topology is
questionable. It measures the energy needed to switch the gate, which is an important

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 185 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 185
property for sure. Yet for a given structure, this number can be made arbitrarily low by
reducing the supply voltage. From this perspective, the optimum voltage to run the circuit
at would be the lowest possible value that still ensures functionality. This comes at the
major expense in performance, at discussed earlier. A more relevant metric should com-
bine a measure of performance and energy. The energy-delay product (EDP) does exactly
that.
2
2 CLVDD
EDP = PDP × tp = P tp = ----------------t-p (5.45)
av 
2
It is worth analyzing the voltage dependence of the EDP. Higher supply voltages reduce
delay, but harm the energy, and the opposite is true for low voltages. An optimum opera-
tion point should hence exist. Assuming that NMOS and PMOS transistors have compari-
ble threshold and saturation voltages, we can simplify the propagation delay expression
Eq. (5.21).
αCLVDD
tp ≈ ------------------------ (5.46)
VDD – VTe
where VTe = VT + VDSAT/2, and α technology parameter. Combining Eq. (5.45) and Eq.
4
(5.46), 
2  3
αCLVDD
EDP = --------------------------------- (5.47)
2 ( VDD – VTE)
The optimum supply voltage can be obtained by taking the derivative of Eq. (5.47) with
respect to VDD, and equating the result to 0.
3
VDDopt = ---VTE (5.48)
2
The remarkable outcome from this analysis is the low value of the supply voltage
that simultaneously optimizes performance and energy. For sub-micron technologies with
thresholds in the range of 0.5 V, the optimum supply is situated around 1 V.
Example 5.14 Optimum supply voltage for 0.25 μm CMOS inverter
From the technology parameters for our generic CMOS process presented in Chapter 3, the
value of VTE can be derived.
VTn = 0.43 V, VDsatn = 0.63 V, VTEn = 0.74 V.
VTp = -0.4 V, VDsatp = -1 V, VTEp = -0.9 V.
VTE ≈ (VTEn+|VTEp|)/2 = 0.8 V
Hence, VDDopt = (3/2) × 0.8 V = 1.2 V. The simulated graphs of Figure 5.33, plotting normal-
ized delay, energy, and energy-delay product, confirm this result. The optimum supply volt-
4 
This equation is only accurate as long as the devices remain in velocity saturation, which is probably
not the case for the lower supply voltages. This introduces some inaccurarcy in the analysis, but will not distort
the overall result.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 186 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
186 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
age is predicted to equal 1.1 V. The charts clearly illustrate the trade-off between delay and
energy.
15
Energy-Delay
10
Energy
Delay
5
Energy-Delay (norm)
Figure 5.33 Normalized delay, energy,
and energy-delay plots for CMOS inverter in
0 0.25 μm CMOS technology.
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
V (V)
DD
WARNING: While the above example demonstrates that there exists a supply voltage
that minimizes the energy-delay product of a gate, this voltage does not necessarily repre-
sent the optimum voltage for a given design problem. For instance, some designs require a
minimum performance, which requires a higher voltage at the expense of energy. Simi-
larly, a lower-energy design is possible by operating by circuit at a lower voltage and by
obtaining the overall system performance through the use of architectural techniques such
as pipelining or concurrency.
5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using SPICE
A definition of the average power consumption of a circuit was provided in Chapter 1, and
is repeated here for the sake of convenience.
T T
1 VDD
Pav = --- p t( )dt = ---------- iDD ( )t dt (5.49)
T∫  T ∫
0 0
with T the period of interest, and VDD and iDD the supply voltage and current, respectively.
Some implementations of SPICE provide built-in functions to measure the average value
of a circuit signal. For instance, the HSPICE.MEASURE TRAN I(VDD) AVG command
computes the area under a computed transient response (I(VDD)) and divides it by the
period of interest. This is identical to the definition given in Eq. (5.49). Other implementa-
tions of SPICE are, unfortunately, not as extensive. This is not as bad as it seems, as long
as one realizes that SPICE is actually a differential equation solver. A small circuit can
easily be conceived that acts as an integrator and whose output signal is nothing but the
average power.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 187 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 187
Consider, for instance, the circuit of Figure 5.34. The current delivered by the power
supply is measured by the current-controlled current source and integrated on the capaci-
tor C. The resistance R is only provided for DC-convergence reasons and should be cho-
sen as high as possible to minimize leakage. A clever choice of the element parameter
ensures that the output voltage Pav equals the average power consumption. The operation
of the circuit is summarized in Eq. (5.50) under the assumption that the initial voltage on
the capacitor C is zero.
dPav 
C  = kiDD
dt
or
(5.50)
T
k
Pav = ---- iDD dt
C∫
0
Equating Eq. (5.49) and Eq. (5.50) yields the necessary conditions for the equivalent
circuit parameters: k/C = VDD/T. Under these circumstances, the equivalent circuit shown
presents a convenient means of tracking the average power in a digital circuit.
VDD P
av
C
+
Circuit k i R
iDD DD
under test
–
Figure 5.34 Equivalent circuit to measure average power in SPICE.
Example 5.15 Average Power of Inverter
The average power consumption of the inverter of Example 5.4 is analyzed using the above
technique for a toggle period of 250 psec (T = 250 psec, k = 1, VDD = 2.5 V, hence C = 100
pF). The resulting power consumption is plotted in Figure 5.35, showing an average power
consumption of approximately 157.3 μW. The .MEAS AVG command yields a value of
160.32 μW, which demonstrates the approximate equivalence of both methods. These num-
beres are equivalent to an energy of 39 fJ (which is close to the 37.5 fJ derived inExample
5.10). Observe the slightly negative dip during the high-to-low transition. This is due to the
injection of current into the supply, when the output briefly overshootsVDD as a result of the
capacitive coupling between input and output (as is apparent from in the transient response of
Figure 5.16).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 188 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
188 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
-4
x 10
1.8 
Average Power
1.6
(over one cycle)
1.4
1.2
Vin: 0→1
1
0.8
power (W)
0.6
0.4
0.2
0 Figure 5.35 Deriving the power
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 consumption using SPICE.
-10
t (sec) x 10
5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter
Metrics
In section 3.5, we have explored the impact of the scaling of technology on the some of
the important design parameters such as area, delay, and power. For the sake of clarity, we
repeat here some of the most important entries in the resulting scaling table (Table 3.8).
Table 5.3 Scaling scenarios for short-channel devices (S and U represent the technology and voltage
scaling parameters, respectively).
Parameter Relation Full Scaling General Scaling Fixed-Voltage Scaling
2  2  2
Area/Device WL 1/S 1/S 1/S
Intrinsic Delay RonCgate 1/S 1/S 1/S
2  3  2 
Intrinsic Energy CgateV 1/S 1/SU 1/S
2  2 
Intrinsic Power Energy/Delay 1/S 1/U 1
2 2  2
Power Density P/Area 1 S /U S

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 189 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter Metrics 189
To validity of these theoretical projections can
be verified by looking back and observing the
trends during the past decades. From , we can
derive that the gate delay indeed decreases
exponentially at a rate of 13%/year, or halving
every five years. This rate is on course with
the prediction of Table 5.3, since S averages
approximately 1.15 as we had already
observed in Figure 3.39. The delay of a 2-
input NAND gate with a fanout of four has
gone from tens of nanoseconds in the 1960s to
a tenth of a nanosecond in the year 2000, and
Figure 5.36 Scaling of the gate delay (from
[Dally98]). is projected to be a few tens of picoseconds by
2010.
Reducing power dissipation has only been a second-order priority until recently.
Hence, statistics on dissipation-per-gate or design are only marginally available. An inter-
esting chart is shown in Figure 5.37, which plots the power density measured over a large
number of designs produced between 1980 and 1995. Although the variation is
large— even for a fixed technology— it shows the power density to increase approximately
2
with S . This is in correspondence with the fixed-voltage scaling scenario presented in
Table 5.3. For more recent years, we expect a scenario more in line with the the full-scal-
ing model— which predicts a constant power density— due to the accelerated supply-volt-
age scaling and the increased attention to power-reducing design techniques. Even under
these circumstances, power dissipation-per-chip will continue to increase due to the ever-
larger die sizes.
2
∝ S
Figure 5.37 Evolution of power-density in
micro- and DSP processors, as a function of
the scaling factor S ([Sakurai]).S is
normalized to 1 for a 4 μm process.
S
The presented scaling model has one fatal flaw however: the performance and
power predictions produce purely “intrinsic” numbers that take only device parameters
into account. In Chapter 4, it was concluded that the interconnect wires exhibit a different
scaling behavior, and that wire parasitics may come to dominate the overall performance.
Similarly, charging and discharging the wire capacitances may dominate the energy bud-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 190 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
190 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
get. To get a crisper perspective, one has to construct a combined model that considers
device and wire scaling models simultaneously. The impact of the wire capacitance and its
scaling behavior is summarized in Table 5.4. We adopt the fixed-resistance model intro-
duced in Chapter 4. We furthermore assume that the resistance of the driver dominates the
wire resistance, which is definitely the case for short to medium-long wires.
Table 5.4 Scaling scenarios for wire capacitance.S and U represent the technology and voltage scaling
parameters, respectively, whileSL stands for the wire-length scaling factor.εc represents the impact of fringing
and interwire capacitances.
Parameter Relation General Scaling
Wire Capacitance WL/t εc/SL
Wire Delay RonCint εc/SL
2  2
Wire Energy CintV εc/SLU
Wire Delay / Intrinsic Delay εcS/SL
Wire Energy / Intrinsic Energy εcS/SL
The model predicts that the interconnect-caused delay (and energy) gain in impor-
tance with the scaling of technology. This impact is limited to an increase withεc for short
wires (S = SL), but it becomes increasingly more outspoken for medium-range and long
wires (SL < S). These conclusions have been confirmed by a number of studies, an exam-
ple of which is shown in Figure 5.38. How the ratio of wire over intrinsic contributions
Figure 5.38 Evolution of wire delay / gate delay ratio
with respect to technology (from [Fisher98]).
will actually evolve is debatable, as it depends upon a wide range of independent parame-
ters such as system architecture, design methodology, transistor sizing, and interconnect
materials. The doomday scenario that interconnect may cause CMOS performance to sat-
urate in the very near future hence may be exagerated. Yet, it is clear to that increased
attention to interconnect is an absolute necessity, and may change the way the next-gener-
ation circuits are designed and optimized (e.g. Sylvester99]).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 191 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
Section 5.7 Summary 191
5.7 Summary
This chapter presented a rigourous and in-depth analysis of the static CMOS inverter. The
key characteristics of the gate are summarized:
• The static CMOS inverter combines a pull-up PMOS section with a pull-down
NMOS device. The PMOS is normally made wider than the NMOS due to its infe-
rior current-driving capabilities.
• The gate has an almost ideal voltage-transfer characteristic. The logic swing is equal
to the supply voltage and is not a function of the transistor sizes. The noise margins
of a symmetrical inverter (where PMOS and NMOS transistor have equal current-
driving strength) approach VDD/2. The steady-state response is not affected by fan-
out.
• Its propagation delay is dominated by the time it takes to charge or discharge the
load capacitor CL. To a first order, it can be approximated as
Reqn + Reqp
 
tp = 0.69 CL ---------------------------
 2 
Keeping the load capacitance small is the most effective means of implementing
high-performance circuits. Transistor sizing may help to improve performance as
long as the delay is dominated by the extrinsic (or load) capacitance of fanout and
wiring.
• The power dissipation is dominated by the dynamic power consumed in charging
2
and discharging the load capacitor. It is given byP0→1 CLVDD f. The dissipation is
proportional to the activity in the network. The dissipation due to the direct-path
currents occuring during switching can be limited by careful tailoring of the signal
slopes. The static dissipation can usually be ignored but might become a major fac-
tor in the future as a result of subthreshold currents.
• Scaling the technology is an effective means of reducing the area, propagation delay
and power consumption of a gate. The impact is even more striking if the supply
voltage is scaled simultaneously.
• The interconnect component is gradually taking a larger fraction of the delay and
performance budget.
5.8 To Probe Further
The operation of the CMOS inverter has been the topic of numerous publications and text-
books. Virtually every book on digital design devotes a substantial number of pages to the
analysis of the basic inverter gate. An extensive list of references was presented in Chapter
1. Some references of particular interest that were explicitly quoted in this chapter are
given below.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 192 Monday, September 6, 1999 11:41 AM
192 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
REFERENCES
[Baccarani84] G. Baccarani, M. Wordeman, and R. Dennard, “Generalized Scaling Theory and Its
Application to 1/4 Micrometer MOSFET Design,”IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, ED-31(4):
p. 452, 1984.
[Brews89] J. Brews et al., “The Submicrometer Silicon MOSFET,” in [Watts89].
[De Man87] De Man H., Computer Aided Design of Digital Integrated Circuits, Lecture Notes,
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Belgium.
[Dennard74] R. Dennard et al., “Design of Ion-Implanted MOSFETS with Very Small Physical
Dimensions,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, SC-9, pp. 256–258, 1974.
[Embabi93] S. Embabi, A. Bellaouar, M. Elmasry,Digital BiCMOS Integrated Circuit Design,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1993.
[Hodges88] D. Hodges and H. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Jouppi93] N. Jouppi et al., “A 300 MHz 115W 32b Bipolar ECL Microprocessor with On-Chip
Caches,” Proc. IEEE ISSCC Conf., pp. 84–85, February 1993.
[Kakumu90] M. Kakumu and M. Kinugawa, “Power-Supply Voltage Impact on Circuit Perfor-
mance for Half and Lower Submicrometer CMOS LSI,”IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits,
vol. 37, no. 8, pp. 1900–1908, August 1990.
[Lohstroh81] J. Lohstroh, “Devices and Circuits for Bipolar (V)LSI,”Proceedings of the IEEE, vol.
69, pp. 812–826, July 1981.
[Masaki92] A. Masaki, “Deep-Submicron CMOS Warms Up to High-Speed Logic,”IEEE Circuits
and Devices Magazine, pp. 18–24, November 1992.
[Schutz94] J. Schutz, “A 3.3V 0.6 mm BiCMOS Superscaler Microprocessor,” ISSCC Digest of
Technical Papers, pp. 202–203, February 1994.
[Sedra87] Sedra and Smith, MicroElectronic Circuits, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1987.
[Shoji88] Shoji, M., CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice Hall, 1988.
[Tang89] D. Tang, “Scaling the Silicon Bipolar Transistor,” in [Watts89].
[Veendrick84] H. Veendrick, “Short-Circuit Dissipation of Static CMOS Circuitry and its Impact on
the Design of Buffer Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-19, no. 4,
pp. 468–473, 1984.
[Watts89] Watts R., ed., SubMicron Integrated Circuits, Wiley, 1989.
5.9 Exercises and Design Problems
For all problems, use the device parameters provided in Chapter3 (as well as the inside back cover),
unless otherwise mentioned.
1. [M, SPICE, 3.3.2] The layout of a static CMOS inverter is given in Figure 5.39. (1λ = 0.6
μm).
a. Determine the sizes of the NMOS and PMOS transistor.
b. Derive the VTC and its parameters (VOH, VOL, VM, VIH, and VIL).
c. Is the VTC affected when the output of the gates is connected to the inputs of 4 similar
gates?

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 176 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
C H A P T E R
5
T H E C M O S I N V E R T E R
Quantification of integrity, performance, and energy metrics of an inverter
Optimization of an inverter design
5.1 Introduction 5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order
Analysis
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive
5.4.3 Propagation Delay from a Design
Perspective
Perspective
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
Inverter: The Static Behavior
5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
5.3.1 Switching Threshold
5.5.2 Static Consumption
5.3.2 Noise Margins
5.5.3 Putting It All Together
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited
5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic
SPICE
Behavior
5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
Impact on the Inverter Metrics
176

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 177 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.1 Introduction 177
5.1 Introduction
The inverter is truly the nucleus of all digital designs. Once its operation and properties are
clearly understood, designing more intricate structures such as NAND gates, adders, mul-
tipliers, and microprocessors is greatly simplified. The electrical behavior of these com-
plex circuits can be almost completely derived by extrapolating the results obtained for
inverters. The analysis of inverters can be extended to explain the behavior of more com-
plex gates such as NAND, NOR, or XOR, which in turn form the building blocks for mod-
ules such as multipliers and processors.
In this chapter, we focus on one single incarnation of the inverter gate, being the
static CMOS inverter — or the CMOS inverter, in short. This is certainly the most popular
at present, and therefore deserves our special attention. We analyze the gate with respect
to the different design metrics that were outlined in Chapter 1:
• cost, expressed by the complexity and area
• integrity and robustness, expressed by the static (or steady-state) behavior
• performance, determined by the dynamic (or transient) response
• energy efficiency, set by the energy and power consumption
From this analysis arises a model of the gate that will help us to identify the parame-
ters of the gate and to choose their values so that the resulting design meets desired speci-
fications. While each of these parameters can be easily quantified for a given technology,
we also discuss how they are affected by scaling of the technology.
While this Chapter focuses uniquely on the CMOS inverter, we will see in the fol-
lowing Chapter that the same methodology also applies to other gate topologies.
5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective
Figure 5.1 shows the circuit diagram of a static CMOS inverter. Its operation is readily
understood with the aid of the simple switch model of the MOS transistor, introduced in
Chapter 3 (Figure 3.25): the transistor is nothing more than a switch with an infinite off-
resistance (for |VGS| < |VT|), and a finite on-resistance (for |VGS| > |VT|). This leads to the
VDD
Vin 
Vout
CL
Figure 5.1 Static CMOS inverter. VDD stands for the
supply voltage.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 178 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
178 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
following interpretation of the inverter. When Vin is high and equal to VDD, the NMOS
transistor is on, while the PMOS is off. This yields the equivalent circuit of Figure 5.2a. A
direct path exists between Vout and the ground node, resulting in a steady-state value of 0
V. On the other hand, when the input voltage is low (0 V), NMOS and PMOS transistors
are off and on, respectively. The equivalent circuit of Figure 5.2b shows that a path exists
between VDD and Vout, yielding a high output voltage. The gate clearly functions as an
inverter.
VDD VDD
Rp
V
Vout out
Rn
Vin = VDD Vin = 0
Figure 5.2 Switch models of CMOS
(a) Model for high input (b) Model for low input inverter.
A number of other important properties of static CMOS can be derived from this switch-
level view:
• The high and low output levels equal VDD and GND, respectively; in other words,
the voltage swing is equal to the supply voltage. This results in high noise margins.
• The logic levels are not dependent upon the relative device sizes, so that the transis-
tors can be minimum size. Gates with this property are called ratioless. This is in
contrast with ratioed logic, where logic levels are determined by the relative dimen-
sions of the composing transistors.
• In steady state, there always exists a path with finite resistance between the output
and either VDD or GND. A well-designed CMOS inverter, therefore, has a low out-
put impedance, which makes it less sensitive to noise and disturbances. Typical val-
ues of the output resistance are in kΩ range.
• The input resistance of the CMOS inverter is extremely high, as the gate of an MOS
transistor is a virtually perfect insulator and draws no dc input current. Since the
input node of the inverter only connects to transistor gates, the steady-state input
current is nearly zero. A single inverter can theoretically drive an infinite number of
gates (or have an infinite fan-out) and still be functionally operational; however,
increasing the fan-out also increases the propagation delay, as will become clear
below. So, although fan-out does not have any effect on the steady-state behavior, it
degrades the transient response.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 179 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.2 The Static CMOS Inverter — An Intuitive Perspective 179
• No direct path exists between the supply and ground rails under steady-state operat-
ing conditions (this is, when the input and outputs remain constant). The absence of
current flow (ignoring leakage currents) means that the gate does not consume any
static power.
SIDELINE: The above observation, while seemingly obvious, is of crucial importance,
and is one of the primary reasons CMOS is the digital technology of choice at present. The
situation was very different in the 1970s and early 1980s. All early microprocessors, such
as the Intel 4004, were implemented in a pure NMOS technology. The lack of comple-
mentary devices (such as the NMOS and PMOS transistor) in such a technology makes
the realization of inverters with zero static power non-trivial. The resulting static power
consumption puts a firm upper bound on the number of gates that can be integrated on a
single die; hence the forced move to CMOS in the 1980s, when scaling of the technology
allowed for higher integration densities.
The nature and the form of the voltage-transfer characteristic (VTC) can be graphi-
cally deduced by superimposing the current characteristics of the NMOS and the PMOS
devices. Such a graphical construction is traditionally called a load-line plot. It requires
that the I-V curves of the NMOS and PMOS devices are transformed onto a common coor-
dinate set. We have selected the input voltage Vin, the output voltage Vout and the NMOS
drain current IDN as the variables of choice. The PMOS I-V relations can be translated into
this variable space by the following relations (the subscripts n and p denote the NMOS
and PMOS devices, respectively):
IDSp = –IDSn
VGSn = Vin ; VGSp = Vin – VDD (5.1)
VDSn = Vout ; VDSp = Vout – VDD
The load-line curves of the PMOS device are obtained by a mirroring around the x-
axis and a horizontal shift over VDD. This procedure is outlined in Figure 5.3, where the
subsequent steps to adjust the original PMOS I-V curves to the common coordinate set Vin,
Vout and IDn are illustrated.
IDp IDn IDn
Vin = 0 Vin = 0
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1.5
VDSp VDSp Vout
VGSp = –1
VGSp = –2.5
Vin = VDD + VGSp V = V + V
out  DD  DSp
IDn = –IDp
Figure 5.3 Transforming PMOS I-V characteristic to a common coordinate set
(assuming VDD = 2.5 V).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 180 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
180 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
IDn
Vin = 0 Vin = 2.5
PMOS Vin = 0.5 Vin = 2 NMOS
Vin = 1 Vin = 1.5
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1
Vin = 1.5 Vin = 1
Vin = 2 Vin = 0.5
Vin = 2.5 Vin = 0
Vout
Figure 5.4 Load curves for NMOS and PMOS transistors of the static CMOS inverter (VDD = 2.5 V). The dots
represent the dc operation points for various input voltages.
The resulting load lines are plotted in Figure 5.4. For a dc operating points to be
valid, the currents through the NMOS and PMOS devices must be equal. Graphically, this
means that the dc points must be located at the intersection of corresponding load lines. A
number of those points (for Vin = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, and 2.5 V) are marked on the graph. As
can be observed, all operating points are located either at the high or low output levels.
The VTC of the inverter hence exhibits a very narrow transition zone. This results from
the high gain during the switching transient, when both NMOS and PMOS are simulta-
neously on, and in saturation. In that operation region, a small change in the input voltage
results in a large output variation. All these observations translate into the VTC of Figure
5.5.
Vout
NMOS off
PMOS res
2.5 NMOS sat
PMOS res
 
2
  NMOS sat
1.5 PMOS sat
 
1
NMOS res Figure 5.5 VTC of static CMOS inverter,
  PMOS sat
NMOS res derived from Figure 5.4 (V = 2.5 V). For each
0.5 DD 
PMOS off
operation region, the modes of the transistors are
annotated — off, res(istive), or sat(urated).
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 Vin
Before going into the analytical details of the operation of the CMOS inverter, a
qualitative analysis of the transient behavior of the gate is appropriate as well. This
response is dominated mainly by the output capacitance of the gate, CL, which is com-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 181 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 181
VDD VDD
Rp
Vout
Vout
C
L CL
Rn
Figure 5.6 Switch model of
Vin = 0 Vin = VDD
dynamic behavior of static CMOS
inverter.
(a) Low-to-high (b) High-to-low
posed of the drain diffusion capacitances of the NMOS and PMOS transistors, the capaci-
tance of the connecting wires, and the input capacitance of the fan-out gates. Assuming
temporarily that the transistors switch instantaneously, we can get an approximate idea of
the transient response by using the simplified switch model again (Figure 5.6). Let us con-
sider the low-to-high transition first (Figure 5.6a). The gate response time is simply deter-
mined by the time it takes to charge the capacitor CL through the resistor Rp. In Example
4.5, we learned that the propagation delay of such a network is proportional to the its time
constant RpCL. Hence, a fast gate is built either by keeping the output capacitance
small or by decreasing the on-resistance of the transistor. The latter is achieved by
increasing the W/L ratio of the device. Similar considerations are valid for the high-to-low
transition (Figure 5.6b), which is dominated by the RnCL time-constant. The reader should
be aware that the on-resistance of the NMOS and PMOS transistor is not constant, but is a
nonlinear function of the voltage across the transistor. This complicates the exact determi-
nation of the propagation delay. An in-depth analysis of how to analyze and optimize the
performance of the static CMOS inverter is offered in Section 5.4.
5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior
In the qualitative discussion above, the overall shape of the voltage-transfer characteristic
of the static CMOS inverter was derived, as were the values of VOH and VOL (VDD and
GND, respectively). It remains to determine the precise values of VM, VIH, and VIL as well
as the noise margins.
5.3.1 Switching Threshold
The switching threshold, VM, is defined as the point where Vin = Vout. Its value can be
obtained graphically from the intersection of the VTC with the line given by Vin = Vout
(see Figure 5.5). In this region, both PMOS and NMOS are always saturated, since VDS =
VGS. An analytical expression for VM is obtained by equating the currents through the tran-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 182 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
182 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
sistors. We solve the case where the supply voltage is high so that the devices can be
assumed to be velocity-saturated (or VDSAT < VM - VT). We furthermore ignore the channel-
length modulation effects.
VDSATn VDSATp
    
knVDSATn VM – VTn – ----------------- + kpVDSATp VM – VDD –VTp – ----------------- = 0 (5.2)
 2   2 
Solving for VM yields
VDSATn VDSATp
    
VTn + ----------------- + r VDD + V + -----------------
Tp
 2   2  kpVDSATp υsatpWp
VM = ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- with r = ---------------------- = ------------------- (5.3)
1 + r knVDSATn υsatnWn
assuming identical oxide thicknesses for PMOS and NMOS transistors. For large values
of VDD (compared to threshold and saturation voltages), Eq. (5.3) can be simplified:
rVDD
VM ≈ ------------ (5.4)
1 + r
Eq. (5.4) states that the switching threshold is set by the ratio r, which compares the rela-
tive driving strengths of the PMOS and NMOS transistors. It is generally considered to be
desirable for VM to be located around the middle of the available voltage swing (or at
VDD/2), since this results in comparable values for the low and high noise margins. This
requires r to be approximately 1, which is equivalent to sizing the PMOS device so that
(W/L)p = (W/L)n × (VDSATnk′n )/(VDSATnk′p ). To move VM upwards, a larger value of r is
required, which means making the PMOS wider. Increasing the strength of the NMOS, on
the other hand, moves the switching threshold closer to GND.
From Eq. (5.2), we can derive the required ratio of PMOS versus NMOS transistor
sizes such that the switching threshold is set to a desired value VM. When using this
expression, please make sure that the assumption that both devices are velocity-saturated
still holds for the chosen operation point.
( W ⁄ L)p k′nVDSATn ( VM – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2)
------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (5.5)
( W ⁄ L)n k′pV ( VDD – V + VTp + VDSATp ⁄ 2)
DSATp  M 
Problem 5.1 Inverter switching threshold for long-channel devices, or low supply-volt-
ages.
The above expressions were derived under the assumption that the transistors are velocity-
saturated. When the PMOS and NMOS are long-channel devices, or when the supply volt-
age is low, velocity saturation does not occur (VM-VT < VDSAT). Under these circumstances,
Eq. (5.6) holds for VM. Derive.
VTn + r V( DD + V ) –k
Tp p
VM = ----------------------------------------------- with r = -------- (5.6)
1 + r kn

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 183 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 183
Design Technique — Maximizing the noise margins
When designing static CMOS circuits, it is advisable to balance the driving strengths of the
transistors by making the PMOS section wider than the NMOS section, if one wants to maxi-
mize the noise margins and obtain symmetrical characteristics. The required ratio is given by
Eq. (5.5).
Example 5.1 Switching threshold of CMOS inverter
We derive the sizes of PMOS and NMOS transistors such that the switching threshold of a
CMOS inverter, implemented in our generic 0.25 μm CMOS process, is located in the middle
between the supply rails. We use the process parameters presented in Example 3.7, and
assume a supply voltage of 2.5 V. The minimum size device has a width/length ratio of 1.5.
With the aid of Eq. (5.5), we find
–6
( W ⁄ L)p 115 × 10  0.63 ( 1.25 – 0.43 – 0.63 ⁄ 2)
------------------- = ------------------------- × ---------- × ------------------------------------------------------- = 3.5
( W ⁄ L)n 30 × 10 –6 1.0 ( 1.25 – 0.4 – 1.0 ⁄ 2)
Figure 5.7 plots the values of switching threshold as a function of the PMOS/NMOS
ratio, as obtained by circuit simulation. The simulated PMOS/NMOS ratio of 3.4 for a 1.25 V
switching threshold confirms the value predicted by Eq. (5.5).
An analysis of the curve of Figure 5.7 produces some interesting observations:
1. VM is relatively insensitive to variations in the device ratio. This means that small
variations of the ratio (e.g., making it 3 or 2.5) do not disturb the transfer character-
istic that much. It is therefore an accepted practice in industrial designs to set the
width of the PMOS transistor to values smaller than those required for exact sym-
metry. For the above example, setting the ratio to 3, 2.5, and 2 yields switching
thresholds of 1.22 V, 1.18 V, and 1.13 V, respectively.
1.8
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.4
(V) 1.3
M
V
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
Figure 5.7 Simulated inverter switching
0.8 0 1 threshold versus PMOS/NMOS ratio (0.25 μm
1 0  1 0 
W  /W  CMOS, VDD = 2.5 V)
p  n

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 184 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
184 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Vin
V mb
Vin  Vout
V ma
t
V out Vout
(a) Response of standard t b) Response of inverter with t
inverter modified threshold
Figure 5.8 Changing the inverter threshold can improve the circuit reliability.
2. The effect of changing the Wp/Wn ratio is to shift the transient region of the VTC.
Increasing the width of the PMOS or the NMOS moves VM towards VDD or GND
respectively. This property can be very useful, as asymmetrical transfer characteris-
tics are actually desirable in some designs. This is demonstrated by the example of
Figure 5.8. The incoming signal Vin has a very noisy zero value. Passing this signal
through a symmetrical inverter would lead to erroneous values (Figure 5.8a). This
can be addressed by raising the threshold of the inverter, which results in a correct
response (Figure 5.8b). Further in the text, we will see other circuit instances where
inverters with asymmetrical switching thresholds are desirable.
Changing the switching threshold by a considerable amount is however not easy,
especially when the ratio of supply voltage to transistor threshold is relatively small
(2.5/0.4 = 6 for our particular example). To move the threshold to 1.5 V requires a
transistor ratio of 11, and further increases are prohibitively expensive. Observe that
Figure 5.7 is plotted in a semi-log format.
5.3.2 Noise Margins
dVout 
By definition, VIH and VIL are the operational points of the inverter where = –1 . In
dVin
the terminology of the analog circuit designer, these are the points where the gain g of the
amplifier, formed by the inverter, is equal to −1. While it is indeed possible to derive ana-
lytical expressions for VIH and VIL, these tend to be unwieldy and provide little insight in
what parameters are instrumental in setting the noise margins.
A simpler approach is to use a piece wise linear approximation for the VTC, as
shown in Figure 5.9. The transition region is approximated by a straight line, the gain of
which equals the gain g at the switching threshold VM. The crossover with the VOH and the
VOL lines is used to define VIH and VIL points. The error introduced is small and well

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 185 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 185
Vout
VOH
VM
Figure 5.9 A piece-wise linear
approximation of the VTC simplifies the
Vin
derivation of VIL and VIH.
VOL
VIL VIH
within the range of what is required for an initial design. This approach yields the follow-
ing expressions for the width of the transition region VIH - VIL, VIH, VIL, and the noise mar-
gins NMH and NML.
( VOH – VOL) –VDD
VIH – VIL = – ------------------------------ = -------------
g g
VM VDD – VM (5.7)
VIH = VM – ------- VIL = VM + -----------------------
g g
NMH = VDD – VIH NML = VIL
These expressions make it increasingly clear that a high gain in the transition region is
very desirable. In the extreme case of an infinite gain, the noise margins simplify to VOH -
VM and VM - VOL for NMH and NML, respectively, and span the complete voltage swing.
Remains us to determine the midpoint gain of the static CMOS inverter. We assume
once again that both PMOS and NMOS are velocity-saturated. It is apparent from Figure
5.4 that the gain is a strong function of the slopes of the currents in the saturation region.
The channel-length modulation factor hence cannot be ignored in this analysis — doing so
would lead to an infinite gain. The gain can now be derived by differentiating the current
equation (5.8), valid around the switching threshold, with respect to Vin.
VDSATn
  
knVDSATn Vin – VTn – ----------------- ( 1 + λnVout) +
 2 
(5.8)
VDSATp
  
kpVDSATp Vin – VDD –VTp – ----------------- ( 1 + λpVout – λpVDD) = 0
 2 
Differentiation and solving for dVout/dVin yields
dVout knVDSATn ( 1 + λnVout) + kpVDSATp ( 1 + λpVout – λpVDD)
= –------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ (5.9)
dVin λnk VDSATn ( Vin – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2) + λpk V ( Vin – VDD –VTp – VDSATp ⁄ 2)
n p DSATp 
Ignoring some second-order terms, and setting Vin = VM results in the gain expression,

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 186 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
186 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
1 knVDSATn + kpVDSATp
g = – --------------------------------------------------------------------
ID ( VM) λn – λp
(5.10)
1 + r
≈ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
( VM – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2) λ( n – λp)
with ID(VM) the current flowing through the inverter for Vin = VM. The gain is almost
purely determined by technology parameters, especially the channel length modulation. It
can only in a minor way be influenced by the designer through the choice of supply and
switching threshold voltages.
Example 5.2 Voltage transfer characteristic and noise margins of CMOS Inverter
Assume an inverter in the generic 0.25 μm CMOS technology designed with a PMOS/NMOS
ratio of 3.4 and with the NMOS transistor minimum size (W = 0.375 μm, L = 0.25 μm, W/L =
1.5). We first compute the gain at VM (= 1.25 V),
–6 –6
ID ( VM) = 1.5 × 115 × 10  × 0.63 × ( 1.25 – 0.43 – 0.63 ⁄ 2) × ( 1 + 0.06 × 1.25) = 59 × 10  A
–6 –6
1 1.5 × 115 × 10  × 0.63 + 1.5 × 3.4 × 30 × 10  × 1.0
g = – ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- = –27.5 (Eq. 5.10)
–6
59 × 10  0.06 + 0.1
This yields the following values for VIL, VIH, NML, NMH:
VIL = 1.2 V, VIH = 1.3 V, NML = NMH = 1.2.
Figure 5.10 plots the simulated VTC of the inverter, as well as its derivative, the gain. A close
to ideal characteristic is obtained. The actual values of VIL and VIH are 1.03 V and 1.45 V,
respectively, which leads to noise margins of 1.03 V and 1.05 V. These values are lower than
those predicted for two reasons:
• Eq. (5.10) overestimates the gain. As observed in Figure 5.10b, the maximum gain (at
VM) equals only 17. This reduced gain would yield values for VIL and VIH of 1.17 V, and 1.33
V, respectively.
• The most important deviation is due to the piecewise linear approximation of the
VTC, which is optimistic with respect to the actual noise margins.
The obtained expressions are however perfectly useful as first-order estimations as
well as means of identifying the relevant parameters and their impact.
To conclude this example, we also extracted from simulations the output resistance of
the inverter in the low- and high-output states. Low values of 2.4 kΩ and 3.3 kΩ were
observed, respectively. The output resistance is a good measure of the sensitivity of the gate
in respect to noise induced at the output, and is preferably as low as possible.
SIDELINE: Surprisingly (or not so surprisingly), the static CMOS inverter can also be
used as an analog amplifier, as it has a fairly high gain in its transition region. This region
is very narrow however, as is apparent in the graph of Figure 5.10b. It also receives poor
marks on other amplifier properties such as supply noise rejection. Yet, this observation
can be used to demonstrate one of the major differences between analog and digital
design. Where the analog designer would bias the amplifier in the middle of the transient
region, so that a maximum linearity is obtained, the digital designer will operate the

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 187 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 187
2.5 0
-2
2
-4
-6
1.5
-8
(V)
out gain
V -10
1
-12
-14
0.5
-16
0 -18
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
V (V) V (V)
in  in 
(a) 
(b)
Figure 5.10 Simulated Voltage Transfer Characteristic (a) and voltage gain (b) of CMOS inverter (0.25 μm CMOS, VDD
= 2.5 V).
device in the regions of extreme nonlinearity, resulting in well-defined and well-separated
high and low signals.
Problem 5.2 Inverter noise margins for long-channel devices
Derive expressions for the gain and noise margins assuming that PMOS and NMOS are
long-channel devices (or that the supply voltage is low), so that velocity saturation does
not occur.
5.3.3 Robustness Revisited
Device Variations
While we design a gate for nominal operation conditions and typical device parameters,
we should always be aware that the actual operating temperature might very over a large
range, and that the device parameters after fabrication probably will deviate from the nom-
inal values we used in our design optimization process. Fortunately, the dc-characteristics
of the static CMOS inverter turn out to be rather insensitive to these variations, and the
gate remains functional over a wide range of operating conditions. This already became
apparent in Figure 5.7, which shows that variations in the device sizes have only a minor
impact on the switching threshold of the inverter. To further confirm the assumed robust-
ness of the gate, we have re-simulated the voltage transfer characteristic by replacing the
nominal devices by their worst- or best-case incarnations. Two corner-cases are plotted in
Figure 5.11: a better-than-expected NMOS combined with an inferior PMOS, and the
opposite scenario. Comparing the resulting curves with the nominal response shows that
the variations mostly cause a shift in the switching threshold, but that the operation of the

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 188 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
188 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
2.5
2 Good PMOS
Bad NMOS
1.5
(V) Nominal
out
V
1
Good NMOS Figure 5.11 Impact of device variations on static CMOS
Bad PMOS
0.5 inverter VTC. The “good” device has a smaller oxide
thickness (- 3nm), a smaller length (-25 nm), a higher width
(+30 nm), and a smaller threshold (-60 mV). The opposite
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 is true for the “bad” transistor.
V (V)
in 
gate is by no means affected. This robust behavior that ensures functionality of the gate
over a wide range of conditions has contributed in a big way to the popularity of the static
CMOS gate.
Scaling the Supply Voltage
In Chapter 3, we observed that continuing technology scaling forces the supply voltages to
reduce at rates similar to the device dimensions. At the same time, device threshold volt-
ages are virtually kept constant. The reader probably wonders about the impact of this
trend on the integrity parameters of the CMOS inverter. Do inverters keep on working
when the voltages are scaled and are there potential limits to the supply scaling?
A first hint on what might happen was offered in Eq. (5.10), which indicates that the
gain of the inverter in the transition region actually increases with a reduction of the sup-
ply voltage! Note that for a fixed transistor ratio r, VM is approximately proportional to
VDD. Plotting the (normalized) VTC for different supply voltages not only confirms this
conjecture, but even shows that the inverter is well and alive for supply voltages close to
the threshold voltage of the composing transistors (Figure 5.12a). At a voltage of 0.5 V —
which is just 100 mV above the threshold of the transistors — the width of the transition
region measures only 10% of the supply voltage (for a maximum gain of 35), while it wid-
ens to 17% for 2.5 V. So, given this improvement in dc characteristics, why do we not
choose to operate all our digital circuits at these low supply voltages? Three important
arguments come to mind:
• In the following sections, we will learn that reducing the supply voltage indiscrimi-
nately has a positive impact on the energy dissipation, but is absolutely detrimental
to the performance on the gate.
• The dc-characteristic becomes increasingly sensitive to variations in the device
parameters such as the transistor threshold, once supply voltages and intrinsic volt-
ages become comparable.
• Scaling the supply voltage means reducing the signal swing. While this typically
helps to reduce the internal noise in the system (such as caused by crosstalk), it
makes the design more sensitive to external noise sources that do not scale.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 189 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.3 Evaluating the Robustness of the CMOS Inverter: The Static Behavior 189
2.5 0.2
2
0.15
1.5
(V)
(V)  0.1
out out
V 1 V
0.05
0.5
gain = -1
0 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
Vin (V) V (V)
in 
(a) Reducing VDD improves the gain... (b) but it detoriates for very-low supply voltages.
.
Figure 5.12 VTC of CMOS inverter as a function of supply voltage (0.25 μm CMOS technology).
To provide an insight into the question on potential limits to the voltage scaling, we
have plotted in Figure 5.12b the voltage transfer characteristic of the same inverter for the
even-lower supply voltages of 200 mV, 100 mV, and 50 mV (while keeping the transistor
thresholds at the same level). Amazingly enough, we still obtain an inverter characteristic,
this while the supply voltage is not even large enough to turn the transistors on! The expla-
nation can be found in the sub-threshold operation of the transistors. The sub-threshold
currents are sufficient to switch the gate between low and high levels, and provide enough
gain to produce acceptable VTCs. The very low value of the switching currents ensures a
very slow operation but this might be acceptable for some applications (such as watches,
for example).
At around 100 mV, we start observing a major deterioration of the gate characteris-
tic. VOL and VOH are no longer at the supply rails and the transition-region gain approaches
1. The latter turns out to be a fundamental show-stopper. To achieving sufficient gain for
use in a digital circuit, it is necessary that the supply must be at least a couple times φΤ =
kT/q (=25 mV at room temperature), the thermal voltage introduced in Chapter 3
[Swanson72]. It turns out that below this same voltage, thermal noise becomes an issue as
well, potentially resulting in unreliable operation.
kT
VDDmin > 2…4------ (5.11)
q
Eq. (5.11) presents a true lower bound on supply scaling. It suggests that the only way to
get CMOS inverters to operate below 100 mV is to reduce the ambient temperature, or in
other words to cool the circuit.
Problem 5.3 Minimum supply voltage of CMOS inverter
Once the supply voltage drops below the threshold voltage, the transistors operate the sub-
threshold region, and display an exponential current-voltage relationship (as expressed in
Eq. (3.40)). Derive an expression for the gain of the inverter under these circumstances

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 190 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
190 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
(assume symmetrical NMOS and PMOS transistors, and a maximum gain at VM = VDD/2).
The resulting expression demonstrates that the minimum voltage is a function of the slope
factor n of the transistor.
 1   VDD ⁄ 2φT
g = – --- ( e – 1) (5.12)
 n
According to this expression, the gain drops to -1 at VDD = 48 mV (for n = 1.5 and φT = 25
mV).
5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior
The qualitative analysis presented earlier concluded that the propagation delay of the
CMOS inverter is determined by the time it takes to charge and discharge the load capaci-
tor CL through the PMOS and NMOS transistors, respectively. This observation suggests
that getting CL as small as possible is crucial to the realization of high-performance
CMOS circuits. It is hence worthwhile to first study the major components of the load
capacitance before embarking onto an in-depth analysis of the propagation delay of the
gate. In addition to this detailed analysis, the section also presents a summary of tech-
niques that a designer might use to optimize the performance of the inverter.
5.4.1 Computing the Capacitances
Manual analysis of MOS circuits where each capacitor is considered individually is virtu-
ally impossible and is exacerbated by the many nonlinear capacitances in the MOS tran-
sistor model. To make the analysis tractable, we assume that all capacitances are lumped
together into one single capacitor CL, located between Vout and GND. Be aware that this is
a considerable simplification of the actual situation, even in the case of a simple inverter.
VDD VDD
M2
M4
Cdb2 Cg4
Cgd12
Vin Vout Vout2
Cdb1 Cw Cg3
M3
M1
Figure 5.13 Parasitic capacitances, influencing the transient behavior of the cascaded inverter pair.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 191 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 191
Figure 5.13 shows the schematic of a cascaded inverter pair. It includes all the
capacitances influencing the transient response of node Vout. It is initially assumed that the
input Vin is driven by an ideal voltage source with zero rise and fall times. Accounting
only for capacitances connected to the output node, CL breaks down into the following
components.
Gate-Drain Capacitance Cgd12
M1 and M2 are either in cut-off or in the saturation mode during the first half (up to 50%
point) of the output transient. Under these circumstances, the only contributions to Cgd12
are the overlap capacitances of both M1 and M2. The channel capacitance of the MOS
transistors does not play a role here, as it is located either completely between gate and
bulk (cut-off) or gate and source (saturation) (see Chapter 3).
The lumped capacitor model now requires that this floating gate-drain capacitor be
replaced by a capacitance-to-ground. This is accomplished by taking the so-called Miller
effect into account. During a low-high or high-low transition, the terminals of the gate-
drain capacitor are moving in opposite directions (Figure 5.14). The voltage change over
the floating capacitor is hence twice the actual output voltage swing. To present an identi-
cal load to the output node, the capacitance-to-ground must have a value that is twice as
large as the floating capacitance.
We use the following equation for the gate-drain capacitors: Cgd = 2 CGD0W (with
CGD0 the overlap capacitance per unit width as used in the SPICE model). For an in-depth
discussion of the Miller effect, please refer to textbooks such as Sedra and Smith
1
([Sedra87], p. 57).
Cgd1  V
out 
∆V Vout ∆V
∆V
Vin 2C
gd1
M1
M1 ∆V
Vin
Figure 5.14 The Miller effect—A capacitor experiencing identical but opposite voltage swings at both
its terminals can be replaced by a capacitor to ground, whose value is two times the original value.
Diffusion Capacitances Cdb1 and Cdb2
The capacitance between drain and bulk is due to the reverse-biased pn-junction. Such a
capacitor is, unfortunately, quite nonlinear and depends heavily on the applied voltage.
We argued in Chapter 3 that the best approach towards simplifying the analysis is to
replace the nonlinear capacitor by a linear one with the same change in charge for the volt-
age range of interest. A multiplication factor Keq is introduced to relate the linearized
capacitor to the value of the junction capacitance under zero-bias conditions.
1 
The Miller effect discussed in this context is a simplified version of the general analog case. In a digital
inverter, the large scale gain between input and output always equals -1.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 192 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
192 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Ceq = KeqCj0 (5.13)
with Cj0 the junction capacitance per unit area under zero-bias conditions. An expression
for Keq was derived in Eq. (3.11) and is repeated here for convenience
–φ0m
Keq = ---------------------------------------------------- [ ( φ0 – Vhigh)1 – m – ( φ0 – Vlow)1 –m] (5.14)
( Vhigh – Vlow) ( 1 – m)
with φ0 the built-in junction potential and m the grading coefficient of the junction.
Observe that the junction voltage is defined to be negative for reverse-biased junctions.
Example 5.3 Keq for a 2.5 V CMOS Inverter
Consider the inverter of Figure 5.13 designed in the generic 0.25 μm CMOS technology. The
relevant capacitance parameters for this process were summarized in Table 3.5.
Let us first analyze the NMOS transistor (Cdb1 in Figure 5.13). The propagation delay
is defined by the time between the 50% transitions of the input and the output. For the CMOS
inverter, this is the time-instance where Vout reaches 1.25 V, as the output voltage swing goes
from rail to rail or equals 2.5 V. We, therefore, linearize the junction capacitance over the
interval {2.5 V, 1.25 V} for the high-to-low transition, and {0, 1.25 V} for the low-to-high
transition.
During the high-to-low transition at the output, Vout initially equals 2.5 V. Because the
bulk of the NMOS device is connected to GND, this translates into a reverse voltage of 2.5 V
over the drain junction or Vhigh = −2.5 V. At the 50% point, Vout = 1.25 V or Vlow = −1.25 V.
Evaluating Eq. (5.14) for the bottom plate and sidewall components of the diffusion capaci-
tance yields
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.5, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.57,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.44, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.61
During the low-to-high transition, Vlow and Vhigh equal 0 V and −1.25 V, respectively,
resulting in higher values for Keq,
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.5, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.79,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.44, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.81
The PMOS transistor displays a reverse behavior, as its substrate is connected to 2.5 V.
Hence, for the high-to-low transition (Vlow = 0, Vhigh = −1.25 V),
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.48, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.79,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.32, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.86
and for the low-to-high transition (Vlow = −1.25 V, Vhigh = −2.5 V)
Bottom plate: Keq (m = 0.48, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.59,
Sidewall: Keqsw (m = 0.32, φ0 = 0.9) = 0.7
Using this approach, the junction capacitance can be replaced by a linear component
and treated as any other device capacitance. The result of the linearization is a minor dis-
tortion of the voltage waveforms. The logic delays are not significantly influenced by this
simplification.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 193 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 193
Wiring Capacitance Cw
The capacitance due to the wiring depends upon the length and width of the connecting
wires, and is a function of the distance of the fanout from the driving gate and the number
of fanout gates. As argued in Chapter 4, this component is growing in importance with the
scaling of the technology.
Gate Capacitance of Fanout Cg3 and Cg4
We assume that the fanout capacitance equals the total gate capacitance of the loading
gates M3 and M4. Hence,
Cfanout = Cgate ( NMOS) + Cgate ( PMOS)
(5.15)
= ( CGSOn + CGDOn + WnLnCox) + ( CGSOp + CGDOp + WpLpCox)
This expression simplifies the actual situation in two ways:
• It assumes that all components of the gate capacitance are connected between Vout
and GND (or VDD), and ignores the Miller effect on the gate-drain capacitances. This
has a relatively minor effect on the accuracy, since we can safely assume that the
connecting gate does not switch before the 50% point is reached, and Vout2, there-
fore, remains constant in the interval of interest.
• A second approximation is that the channel capacitance of the connecting gate is
constant over the interval of interest. This is not exactly the case as we discovered in
Chapter 3. The total channel capacitance is a function of the operation mode of the
device, and varies from approximately 2/3 WLCox (saturation) to the full WLCox (lin-
ear and cut-off). A drop in overall gate capacitance also occurs just before the tran-
sistor turns on (Figure 3.30). During the first half of the transient, it may be assumed
that one of the load devices is always in linear mode, while the other transistor
evolves from the off-mode to saturation. Ignoring the capacitance variation results
in a pessimistic estimation with an error of approximately 10%, which is acceptable
for a first order analysis.
Example 5.4 Capacitances of a 0.25 μm CMOS Inverter
A minimum-size, symmetrical CMOS inverter has been designed in the 0.25 μm CMOS tech-
nology. The layout is shown in Figure 5.15. The supply voltage VDD is set to 2.5 V. From the
layout, we derive the transistor sizes, diffusion areas, and perimeters. This data is summarized
in Table 5.1. As an example, we will derive the drain area and perimeter for the NMOS tran-
2
sistor. The drain area is formed by the metal-diffusion contact, which has an area of 4 × 4 λ ,
2
and the rectangle between contact and gate, which has an area of 3 × 1 λ . This results in a
2 2 
total area of 19 λ , or 0.30 μm (as λ = 0.125 μm). The perimeter of the drain area is rather
involved and consists of the following components (going counterclockwise): 5 + 4 + 4 + 1 +
1 = 15 λ or PD = 15 × 0.125 = 1.875 μm. Notice that the gate side of the drain perimeter is not
included, as this is not considered a part of the side-wall. The drain area and perimeter of the
PMOS transistor are derived similarly (the rectangular shape makes the exercise considerably
2  2 2
simpler): AD = 5 × 9 λ = 45 λ , or 0.7 μm ; PD = 5 + 9 + 5 = 19 λ, or 2.375 μm.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 194 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
194 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
VDD
PMOS
(9λ/2λ)
0.25 μm = 2λ
Out
In
Metal 1
Polysilicon
NMOS
(3λ/2λ)
GND
Figure 5.15 Layout of two chained, minimum-size inverters using SCMOS Design Rules (see also
Color-plate 6).
Table 5.1 Inverter transistor data.
2 2
W/L AD (μm ) PD (μm) AS (μm ) PS (μm)
2 2
NMOS 0.375/0.25 0.3 (19 λ ) 1.875 (15λ) 0.3 (19 λ ) 1.875 (15λ)
2 2
PMOS 1.125/0.25 0.7 (45 λ ) 2.375 (19λ) 0.7 (45 λ ) 2.375 (19λ)
This physical information can be combined with the approximations derived above to
come up with an estimation of CL. The capacitor parameters for our generic process were
summarized in Table 3.5, and repeated here for convenience:
Overlap capacitance: CGD0(NMOS) = 0.31 fF/μm; CGDO(PMOS) = 0.27 fF/μm
2 2
Bottom junction capacitance: CJ(NMOS) = 2 fF/μm ; CJ(PMOS) = 1.9 fF/μm
Side-wall junction capacitance: CJSW(NMOS) = 0.28 fF/μm; CJSW(PMOS) = 0.22
fF/μm
2
Gate capacitance: Cox(NMOS) = Cox(PMOS) = 6 fF/μm
Finally, we should also consider the capacitance contributed by the wire, connecting
the gates and implemented in metal 1 and polysilicon. A layout extraction program typically

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 195 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 195
will deliver us precise values for this parasitic capacitance. Inspection of the layout helps us
to form a first-order estimate and yields that the metal-1 and polysilicon areas of the wire, that
2  2
are not over active diffusion, equal 42 λ and 72 λ , respectively. With the aid of the intercon-
nect parameters of Table 4.2, we find the wire capacitance — observe that we ignore the
fringing capacitance in this simple exercise. Due to the short length of the wire, this contribu-
tion is ignorable compared to the other parasitics.
2  2  2  2  2  2 
Cwire = 42/8 μm × 30 aF/μm + 72/8 μm × 88 aF/μm = 0.12 fF
Bringing all the components together results in Table 5.2. We use the values of Keq
derived in Example 5.3 for the computation of the diffusion capacitances. Notice that the load
capacitance is almost evenly split between its two major components: the intrinsic capaci-
tance, composed of diffusion and overlap capacitances, and the extrinsic load capacitance,
contributed by wire and connecting gate.
Table 5.2 Components of CL (for high-to-low and low-to-high transitions).
Capacitor Expression Value (fF) (H→L) Value (fF) (L→H)
Cgd1 2 CGD0n Wn 0.23 0.23
Cgd2 2 CGD0p Wp 0.61 0.61
Cdb1 Keqn ADn CJ + Keqswn PDn CJSW 0.66 0.90
Cdb2 Keqp ADp CJ + Keqswp PDp CJSW) 1.5 1.15
Cg3 (CGD0n+CGSOn) Wn + Cox Wn Ln 0.76 0.76
Cg4 (CGD0p+CGSOp) Wp + Cox Wp Lp 2.28 2.28
Cw From Extraction 0.12 0.12
CL ∑ 6.1 6.0
5.4.2 Propagation Delay: First-Order Analysis
One way to compute the propagation delay of the inverter is to integrate the capacitor
(dis)charge current. This results in the expression of Eq. (5.16).
v2
CL ( )v
tp = -------------- dv (5.16)
∫ i v( )
v1
with i the (dis)charging current, v the voltage over the capacitor, and v1 and v2 the initial
and final voltage. An exact computation of this equation is intractable, as both CL(v) and
i(v) are nonlinear functions of v. We rather fall back to the simplified switch-model of the
inverter introduced in Figure 5.6 to derive a reasonable approximation of the propagation
delay adequate for manual analysis. The voltage-dependencies of the on-resistance and the
load capacitor are addressed by replacing both by a constant linear element with a value
averaged over the interval of interest. The preceding section derived precisely this value

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 196 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
196 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
for the load capacitance. An expression for the average on-resistance of the MOS transis-
tor was already derived in Example 3.8, and is repeated here for convenience.
VD D
1 V 3 VDD  7 
Req = ----------------- ----------------------------------- dV ≈ --- ------------- 1 – ---λVDD
VDD ⁄ 2 ∫ IDSAT ( 1 + λV) 4IDSAT 9 
VDD ⁄2 (5.17)
2
W VDSAT
with IDSAT = k'----- ( VDD – VT)VDSAT – --------------
L 2 
Deriving the propagation delay of the resulting circuit is now straightforward, and is
nothing more than the analysis of a first-order linear RC-network, identical to the exercise
of Example 4.5. There, we learned that the propagation delay of such a network for a volt-
age step at the input is proportional to the time-constant of the network, formed by pull-
down resistor and load capacitance. Hence,
tpHL = ln 2( )ReqnCL = 0.69ReqnCL (5.18)
Similarly, we can obtain the propagation delay for the low-to-high transition,
tpLH = 0.69ReqpCL (5.19)
with Reqp the equivalent on-resistance of the PMOS transistor over the interval of interest.
This analysis assumes that the equivalent load-capacitance is identical for both the high-
to-low and low-to-high transitions. This has been shown to be approximately the case in
the example of the previous section. The overall propagation delay of the inverter is
defined as the average of the two values, or
tpHL + tpLH Reqn + Reqp
 
tp = -------------------------- = 0.69CL --------------------------- (5.20)
2  2 
Very often, it is desirable for a gate to have identical propagation delays for both rising
and falling inputs. This condition can be achieved by making the on-resistance of the
NMOS and PMOS approximately equal. Remember that this condition is identical to the
requirement for a symmetrical VTC.
Example 5.5 Propagation Delay of a 0.25 μm CMOS Inverter
To derive the propagation delays of the CMOS inverter of Figure 5.15, we make use of Eq.
(5.18) and Eq. (5.19). The load capacitance CL was already computed in Example 5.4, while
the equivalent on-resistances of the transistors for the generic 0.25 μm CMOS process were
derived in Table 3.3. For a supply voltage of 2.5 V, the normalized on-resistances of NMOS
and PMOS transistors equal 13 kΩ and 31 kΩ, respectively. From the layout, we determine
the (W/L) ratios of the transistors to be 1.5 for the NMOS, and 4.5 for the PMOS. We assume
that the difference between drawn and effective dimensions is small enough to be ignorable.
This leads to the following values for the delays:

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 197 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 197
3
Vin
2.5 V
out
2
1.5
(V)
out tpHL  t 
V 1 pLH
0.5
Figure 5.16 Simulated transient
response of the inverter of Figure
0
5.15.
-0.5
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
t (sec) - 1 0
x 10
 13kΩ
tpHL = 0.69 × -------------- × 6.1fF = 36 psec
 1.5 
 31kΩ
tpLH = 0.69 × -------------- × 6.0fF = 29 psec
 4.5 
and
 36 + 29 
tp = ------------------ = 32.5 psec
 2 
The accuracy of this analysis is checked by performing a SPICE transient simulation
on the circuit schematic, extracted from the layout of Figure 5.15. The computed transient
response of the circuit is plotted in Figure 5.16, and determines the propagation delays to be
39.9 psec and 31.7 for the HL and LH transitions, respectively. The manual results are good
considering the many simplifications made during their derivation. Notice especially the
overshoots on the simulated output signals. These are caused by the gate-drain capacitances of
the inverter transistors, which couple the steep voltage step at the input node directly to the
output before the transistors can even start to react to the changes at the input. These over-
shoots clearly have a negative impact on the performance of the gate, and explain why the
simulated delays are larger than the estimations.
WARNING: This example might give the impression that manual analysis always leads
to close approximations of the actual response. This is not necessarily the case. Large
deviations can often be observed between first- and higher-order models. The purpose of
the manual analysis is to get a basic insight in the behavior of the circuit and to determine
the dominant parameters. A detailed simulation is indispensable when quantitative data is
required. Consider the example above a stroke of good luck.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 198 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
198 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
The obvious question a designer asks herself at this point is how she can manipulate
and/or optimize the delay of a gate. To provide an answer to this question, it is necessary
to make the parameters governing the delay explicit by expanding Req in the delay equa-
tion. Combining Eq. (5.18) and Eq. (5.17), and assuming for the time being that the chan-
nel-length modulation factor λ is ignorable, yields the following expression for tpHL (a
similar analysis holds for tpLH)
3CLVDD CLVDD
tpHL = 0.69--- ----------------- = 0.52 -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- (5.21)
4 IDSATn ( W ⁄ L)nk′ VDSATn ( VDD – VTn – VDSATn ⁄ 2)
n
In the majority of designs, the supply voltage is chosen high enough so that VDD >> VTn +
VDSATn/2. Under these conditions, the delay becomes virtually independent of the supply
voltage (Eq. (5.22)). Observe that this is a first-order approximation, and that increasing
the supply voltage yields an observable, albeit small, improvement in performance due to
a non-zero channel-length modulation factor.
CL
tpHL ≈ 0.52 -------------------------------------------- (5.22)
( W ⁄ L)nk′nVDSATn
This analysis is confirmed in Figure 5.17, which plots the propagation delay of the
inverter as a function of the supply voltage. It comes as no surprise that this curve is virtu-
ally identical in shape to the one of Figure 3.27, which charts the equivalent on-resistance
of the MOS transistor as a function of VDD. While the delay is relative insensitive to sup-
ply variations for higher values of VDD, a sharp increase can be observed starting around
5.5
5
4.5
4
3.5
Figure 5.17 Propagation delay of CMOS
3
(normalized) inverter as a function of supply voltage
p
t 2.5 (normalized with respect to the delay at 2.5
V). The dots indicate the delay values
2
predicted by Eq. (5.21). Observe that this
1.5 equation is only valid when the devices are
velocity-saturated. Hence, the deviation at
1 low supply voltages.
0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2 2.2 2.4
V (V)
DD
≈2VT. This operation region should clearly be avoided if achieving high performance is a
premier design goal.
Design Techniques
From the above, we deduce that the propagation delay of a gate can be minimized in the fol-
lowing ways:

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 199 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 199
• Reduce CL. Remember that three major factors contribute to the load capacitance: the
internal diffusion capacitance of the gate itself, the interconnect capacitance, and the fan-
out. Careful layout helps to reduce the diffusion and interconnect capacitances. Good
design practice requires keeping the drain diffusion areas as small as possible.
• Increase the W/L ratio of the transistors. This is the most powerful and effective perfor-
mance optimization tool in the hands of the designer. Proceed however with caution
when applying this approach. Increasing the transistor size also raises the diffusion
capacitance and hence CL. In fact, once the intrinsic capacitance (i.e. the diffusion capac-
itance) starts to dominate the extrinsic load formed by wiring and fanout, increasing the
gate size does not longer help in reducing the delay, and only makes the gate larger in
area. This effect is called “self-loading”. In addition, wide transistors have a larger gate
capacitance, which increases the fan-out factor of the driving gate and adversely affects
its speed.
• Increase VDD. As illustrated in Figure 5.17, the delay of a gate can be modulated by
modifying the supply voltage. This flexibility allows the designer to trade-off energy dis-
sipation for performance, as we will see in a later section. However, increasing the sup-
ply voltage above a certain level yields only very minimal improvement and hence
should be avoided. Also, reliability concerns (oxide breakdown, hot-electron effects)
enforce firm upper-bounds on the supply voltage in deep sub-micron processes.
Problem 5.4 Propagation Delay as a Function of (dis)charge Current
So far, we have expressed the propagation delay as a function of the equivalent resistance of
the transistors. Another approach would be replace the transistor by a current source with
value equal to the average (dis)charge current over the interval of interest. Derive an expres-
sion of the propagation delay using this alternative approach.
5.4.3 Propagation Delay from a Design Perspective
Some interesting design considerations and trade-off’s can be derived from the delay
expressions we have derived so far. Most importantly, they lead to a general approach
towards transistor sizing that will prove to be extremely useful.
NMOS/PMOS Ratio
So far, we have consistently widened the PMOS transistor so that its resistance matches
that of the pull-down NMOS device. This typically requires a ratio of 3 to 3.5 between
PMOS and NMOS width. The motivation behind this approach is to create an inverter
with a symmetrical VTC, and to equate the high-to-low and low-to-high propagation
delays. However, this does not imply that this ratio also yields the minimum overall prop-
agation delay. If symmetry and reduced noise margins are not of prime concern, it is actu-
ally possible to speed up the inverter by reducing the width of the PMOS device!

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 200 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
200 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
The reasoning behind this statement is that, while widening the PMOS improves the
tpLH of the inverter by increasing the charging current, it also degrades the tpHL by cause of
a larger parasitic capacitance. When two contradictory effects are present, there must exist
a transistor ratio that optimizes the propagation delay of the inverter.
This optimum ratio can be derived through the following simple analysis. Consider
two identical, cascaded CMOS inverters. The load capacitance of the first gate equals
approximately
CL = ( Cdp1 + Cdn1) + ( Cgp2 + Cgn2) + CW (5.23)
where Cdp1 and Cdn1 are the equivalent drain diffusion capacitances of PMOS and NMOS
transistors of the first inverter, while Cgp2 and Cgn2 are the gate capacitances of the second
gate. CW represents the wiring capacitance.
When the PMOS devices are made β times larger than the NMOS ones (β = (W/L)p /
(W/L)n), all transistor capacitances will scale in approximately the same way, or Cdp1 ≈ β
Cdn1, and Cgp2 ≈ β Cgn2. Eq. (5.23) can then be rewritten:
CL = ( 1 + β) ( Cdn1 + Cgn2) + CW (5.24)
An expression for the propagation delay can be derived, based on Eq. (5.20).
0.69  Reqp
tp = ---------- ( ( 1 + β) ( Cdn1 + Cgn2) + CW) Reqn + ----------
2  β 
(5.25)
 r
= 0.345 ( ( 1 + β) ( Cdn1 + Cgn2) + CW)Reqn 1 + ---
 β
r (= Reqp/Reqn) represents the resistance ratio of identically-sized PMOS and NMOS tran-
∂tp
sistors. The optimal value of β can be found by setting to 0, which yields
∂β
 Cw 
βopt = r 1 + ---------------------------- (5.26)
 Cdn1 + Cgn2
This means that when the wiring capacitance is negligible (Cdn1+Cgn2 >> CW), βopt
equals r, in contrast to the factor r normally used in the noncascaded case. If the wiring
capacitance dominates, larger values of β should be used. The surprising result of this
analysis is that smaller device sizes (and hence smaller design area) yield a faster design at
the expense of symmetry and noise margin.
Example 5.6 Sizing of CMOS Inverter Loaded by an Identical Gate
Consider again our standard design example. From the values of the equivalent resistances
(Table 3.3), we find that a ratio β of 2.4 (= 31 kΩ / 13 kΩ) would yield a symmetrical tran-
sient response. Eq. (5.26) now predicts that the device ratio for an optimal performance
should equal 1.6. These results are verified in Figure 5.18, which plots the simulated propaga-
tion delay as a function of the transistor ratio β. The graph clearly illustrates how a changing
β trades off between tpLH and tpHL. The optimum point occurs around β = 1.9, which is some-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 201 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 201
what higher than predicted. Observe also that the rising and falling delays are identical at the
predicted point of β equal to 2.4.
-11
x 10
5 
tpLH tpHL
4.5
t
4 p
(sec)
tp
3.5
Figure 5.18 Propagation delay of CMOS inverter as a
3
1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 function of the PMOS/NMOS transistor ratio β.
β
Sizing Inverters for Performance
In this analysis, we assume a symmetrical inverter, this is an inverter where PMOS and
NMOS are sized such that the rise and fall delays are identical. The load capacitance of the
inverter can be divided into an intrinsic and an extrinsic component, or CL = Cint + Cext.
Cint represents the self-loading or intrinsic output capacitance of the inverter, and is associ-
ated with the diffusion capacitances of the NMOS and PMOS transistors as well as the
gate-drain overlap (Miller) capacitances. Cext is the extrinsic load capacitance, attributable
to fanout and wiring capacitance. Assuming that Req stands for the equivalent resistance of
the gate, we can express the propagation delay as follows
tp = 0.69Req ( Cint + Cext)
(5.27)
= 0.69ReqCint ( 1 + Cext ⁄ Cint) = tp0 ( 1 + Cext ⁄ Cint)
tp0 = 0.69 ReqCint represents the delay of the inverter only loaded by its own intrinsic
capacitance (Cext = 0), and is called the intrinsic or unloaded delay.
The next question is how transistor sizing impacts the performance of the gate. To
do so, we must establish the relationship between the various parameters in Eq. (5.27) and
the sizing factor S, which relates the transistor sizes of our inverter to a reference
gate—typically a minimum-sized inverter. The intrinsic capacitance Cint consists of the
diffusion and Miller capacitances, both of which are proportional to the width of the tran-
sistors. Hence, Cint = SCiref. The resistance of the gate relates to the reference gate as Req =
Rref/S. We can now rewrite Eq. (5.27),
tp = 0.69 ( Rref ⁄ S) ( SCiref) ( 1 + Cext ⁄ ( SCiref))
C C (5.28)
 ext   ext 
= 0.69RrefCiref 1 + -------------- = tp0 1 + --------------
 SCiref  SCiref

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 202 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
202 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
This leads to two important conclusions:
• The intrinsic delay of the inverter tp0 is independent of the sizing of the gate, and is
purely determined by technology and inverter layout. When no load is present, an
increase in the drive of the gate is totally offset by the increased capacitance.
• Making S infinitely large yields the maximum obtainable performance gain, elimi-
nating the impact of any external load, and reducing the delay to the intrinsic one.
Yet, any sizing factor S that is sufficiently larger than (Cext/Cint) produces similar
results at a substantial gain in silicon area.
Example 5.7 Device Sizing for Performance
Let us explore the performance improvement that can be obtained by device sizing in the
design of Example 5.5. We find from Table 5.2 that Cint/Cext ≈ 1.05 (Cint = 3.0 fF, Cext = 3.15
fF). This would predict a maximum performance gain of 2.05. A scaling factor of 10 allows
us to get within 10% of this optimal performance, while larger device sizes only yield ignor-
able performance gains.
This is confirmed by simulation results, which predict a maximum obtainable perfor-
-11
x 10
3.8 
3.6
3.4
3.2
3
(sec)p
t 2.8
2.6
2.4
Figure 5.19 Increasing inverter performance by
2.2 sizing the NMOS and PMOS transistor with an
identical factor S for a fixed fanout (inverter of
2
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 Figure 5.15).
S
mance improvement of 1.9 (tp0 = 19.3 psec). From the graph of Figure 5.19, we observe that
the bulk of the improvement is already obtained for S = 5, and that sizing factors larger than
10 barely yield any extra gain.
Sizing A Chain of Inverters
While sizing up an inverter reduces its delay, it also increases its input capacitance. Gate
sizing in an isolated fashion without taking into account its impact on the delay of the pre-
ceding gates is a purely academic enterprise. Therefore, a more relevant problem is deter-
mining the optimum sizing of a gate when embedded in a real environment. A simple
chain of inverters is a good first case to study. To determine the input loading effect, the
relationship between the input gate capacitance Cg and the intrinsic output capacitance of
the inverter has to be established. Both are proportional to the gate sizing. Hence, the fol-
lowing relationship holds, independent of gate sizing

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 203 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 203
Cint = γCg (5.29)
γ is a proportionality factor, which is only a function of technology and is close to 1 for
most sub-micron processes. Rewriting Eq. (5.28),
Cext
  
tp = tp0 1 + --------- = tp0 ( 1 + f ⁄ γ) (5.30)
 γCg
shows that the delay if the inverter is only a function of the ratio between its external load
capacitance and input capacitance. This ratio is called the effective fanout f.
Let us consider the circuit of Eq. Figure 5.20. The goal is to minimize the delay
through the inverter chain, with the input capacitance of the first inverter Cg1—typically a
minimally-sized device— and the load capacitance CL fixed.
In Out
CL
Cg1 1 2 N  Figure 5.20 Chain of N inverters with fixed
input and output capacitance.
2
Given the delay expression for the j-th inverter stage,
Cg j,  +1
  
tp j, = tp0 1 + ---------------- = tp0 ( 1 + fj ⁄ γ) (5.31)
 γCg j, 
we can derive the total delay of the chain.
N N
Cg j,  +1
  
tp = tp j, = tp0 1 + ---------------- , with Cg N,  +1 = CL (5.32)
∑  ∑  γC 
g j,
j = 1 j = 1
This equation has N-1 unknowns, being Cg,2, Cg,3, …, Cg,N. The minimum delay can be
found by taking N-1 partial derivatives, and equating them to 0, or ∂t p ⁄ ∂Cg j, = 0. The
result is a set of constraints, Cg,j+1/Cg,j = Cg,j/Cg,j-1. In other words, the optimum size of
each inverter is the geometric mean of its neighbors sizes,
Cg j, = Cg j,  –1Cg j,  +1 . (5.33)
Overall, this means that each inverter is sized up by the same factor f with respect to the
preceding gate, has the same effective fanout (fj = f), and hence the same delay. With Cg,1
and CL given, we can derive the sizing factor,
N
f = N CL ⁄ Cg, 1 = F (5.34)
and the minimum delay through the chain,
N 
tp = Ntp0 ( 1 + F ⁄ γ). (5.35)
2 
This expression ignores the wiring capacitance, which is a fair assumption for the time being.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 204 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
204 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
F represents the overall effective fanout of the circuit, and equals CL/Cg,1. Observe how the
relationship between tp and F is a very strong function of the number of stages. As
expected, the relationship is linear when only 1 stage is present. Introducing a second
stage turns it into square root, and so on. The obvious question now is how to choose the
number of stages so that the delay is minimized for a given value of F.
Choosing the Right Number of Stages in an Inverter Chain
Evaluation of Eq. (5.35) reveals the trade-off’s in choosing the number of stages for a
N
given F (=f ). When the number of stages is too large, the first component of the equation,
representing the intrinsic delay of the stages, becomes dominant. If the number of stages is
too small, the effective fanout of each stage becomes large, and the second component is
dominant. The optimum value can be found by differentiating the minimum delay expres-
sion by the number of stages, and setting the result to 0.
N 
N FlnF
γ + F – ------------------ = 0
N
(5.36)
or equivalently
( 1 +γ ⁄f)
f = e 
This equation only has a closed-form solution for γ = 0, this is when the self-loading is
ignored and the load capacitance only consists of the fanout. Under these simplified condi-
tions, it is found that the optimal number of stages equals N = ln(F), and the effective
fanout of each stage is set to f = 2.71828 = e. This optimal buffer design scales consecutive
stages in an exponential fashion, and is hence called an exponential horn [Mead79]. When
self-loading is included, Eq. (5.36) can only be solved numerically. The results are plotted
in Figure 5.21a. For the typical case of γ≈1, the optimum scaler factor turns out to be close
to 3.6. Figure 5.21b plots the (normalized) propagation delay of the inverter chain as a
function of the effective fanout for γ = 1. Choosing values of the fanout that are higher
than the optimum does not impact the delay that much, and reduces the required number
of buffer stages and the implementation area. A common practice is to select an optimum
fanout of 4. The use of too many stages (f < fopt), on the other hand, has a substantial nega-
tive impact on the delay, and should be avoided.
Example 5.8 The Impact of Introducing Buffer Stages
Table 5.3 enumerates the values of tp,opt/tp0 for the unbuffered design, the dual stage, and
optimized inverter chain for a variety of values of F (for γ = 1). Observe the impressive
speed-up obtained with cascaded inverters when driving very large capacitive loads.
The above analysis can be extended to not only cover chains of inverters, but also net-
works of inverters that contain actual fanout, an example of which is shown in Figure
5.22. We solely have to adjusting the expression for Cext to incorporate the additional
fanout factors.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 205 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 205
5 7
6
4.5
5
4
4
fopt
3
3.5
normalized delay
2
3
1
2.5 0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
γ f
(a) Optimum effective fanout f (or inverter (b) Normalized propagation delay (tp/(tpopt)
scaling factor) as a function of the self-loading as a function of the effective fanout f for γ=1.
factor γ in an inverter chain.
Figure 5.21 Optimizing the number of stages in an inverter chain.
Table 5.3 topt/tp0 versus x for various driver configurations.
F Unbuffered Two Stage Inverter Chain
10 11 8.3 8.3
100 101 22 16.5
1000 1001 65 24.8
10,000 10,001 202 33.1
Problem 5.5 Sizing an Inverter Network
Determine the sizes of the inverters in the circuit of Figure 5.22, such that the delay
between nodes Out and In is minimized. You may assume that CL = 64 Cg,1.
In Out Figure 5.22 Inverter network, in which each
gate has a fanout of 4 gates, distributing a single
CL input to 16 output signals in a tree-like fashion.
1 2 3

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 206 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
206 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Hints: Determine first the ratio’s between the devices that minimize the delay. You should
find that the following must hold,
4Cg, 2 4Cg, 3 CL
------------- = ------------- = ----------
Cg, 1 Cg, 2 Cg, 3
Finding the actual gate sizes (Cg,3 = 2.52Cg,2 = 6.35Cg,1) is a relatively straightforward
task. Straightforward sizing of the inverter chain, without taking the fanout into account,
would have led to a sizing factor of 4 instead of 2.52.
The rise/fall time of the input signal
All the above expressions were derived under the assumption that the input signal to the
inverter abruptly changed from 0 to VDD or vice-versa. Only one of the devices is assumed
to be on during the (dis)charging process. In reality, the input signal changes gradually
and, temporarily, PMOS and NMOS transistors conduct simultaneously. This affects the
total current available for (dis)charging and impacts the propagation delay. Figure 5.23
plots the propagation delay of a minimum-size inverter as a function of the input signal
slope—as obtained from SPICE. It can be observed that tp increases (approximately) lin-
early with increasing input slope, once ts > tp(ts=0).
- 1 1
x 10
5 . 4 
5 . 2
5
4 . 8
4 . 6
(sec)
tp 4 . 4
4 . 2
4
Figure 5.23 tp as a function of the
3 . 8 input signal slope (10-90% rise or
fall time) for minimum-size
3 . 6
0 2 4 6 8 inverter with fan-out of a single
- 1 1
ts(sec) x 1 0  gate.
While it is possible to derive an analytical expression describing the relationship
between input signal slope and propagation delay, the result tends to be complex and of
limited value. From a design perspective, it is more valuable to relate the impact of the
finite slope on the performance directly to its cause, which is the limited driving capability
of the preceding gate. If the latter would be infinitely strong, its output slope would be
zero, and the performance of the gate under examination would be unaffected. The
strength of this approach is that it realizes that a gate is never designed in isolation, and
that its performance is both affected by the fanout, and the driving strength of the gate(s)
feeding into its inputs. This leads to a revised expression for the propagation delay of an
inverter i in a chain of inverters [Hedenstierna87]:

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 207 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.4 Performance of CMOS Inverter: The Dynamic Behavior 207
i  i  i –1
tp = tstep + ηtstep (5.37)
Eq. (5.37) states that the propagation delay of inverter i equals the sum of the delay of the
i
same gate for a step input (tstep ) (i.e. zero input slope) augmented with a fraction of the
step-input delay of the preceding gate (i-1). The fraction η is an empirical constant, which
typically has values around 0.25. This expression has the advantage of being very simple,
while exposing all relationships necessary for global delay computations of complex cir-
cuits.
Example 5.9 Delay of Inverter embedded in Network
Consider for instance the circuit of Figure 5.22. With the aid of Eq. (5.31) and Eq. (5.37), we
can derive an expression for the delay of the stage-2 inverter, marked by the gray box.
4Cg, 3 4Cg, 2
    
tp , 2 = tp0 1 + ------------- + ηtp0 1 + -------------
 γCg, 2  γCg, 1
An analysis of the overall propagation delay in the style of Problem 5.5, leads to the following
revised sizing requirements for minimum delay,
4 1(  + η)Cg, 2 4 1(  + η)Cg, 3 CL
-------------------------------- = -------------------------------- = ----------
Cg, 1 Cg, 2 Cg ,3
or f2 = f1 = 2.47 (assuming η = 0.25).
Design Challenge
It is advantageous to keep the signal rise times smaller than or equal to the gate propagation
delays. This proves to be true not only for performance, but also for power consumption con-
siderations as will be discussed later. Keeping the rise and fall times of the signals small and of
approximately equal values is one of the major challenges in high-performance design, and is
often called ‘slope engineering’.
Problem 5.6 Impact of input slope
Determine if reducing the supply voltage increases or decreases the influence of the input
signal slope on the propagation delay. Explain your answer.
Delay in the Presence of (Long) Interconnect Wires
The interconnect wire has played a minimal role in our analysis so far. When gates get far-
ther apart, the wire capacitance and resistance can no longer be ignored, and may even
dominate the transient response. Earlier delay expressions can be adjusted to accommo-
date these extra contributions by employing the wire modeling techniques introduced in

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 208 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
208 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
the previous Chapter. The analysis detailed in Example 4.9 is directly applicable to the
problem at hand. Consider the circuit of Figure 5.24, where an inverter drives a single
fanout through a wire of length L. The driver is represented by a single resistance Rdr,
which is the average between Reqn and Reqp. Cint and Cfan account for the intrinsic capaci-
tance of the driver, and the input capacitance of the fanout gate, respectively.
(rw,cw,L)
Vout Vout
Cint  C
fan
Figure 5.24 Inverter driving single fanout through wire of
length L.
The propagation delay of the circuit can be obtained by applying the Ellmore delay
expression.
tp = 0.69RdrCint + ( 0.69Rdr + 0.38Rw)Cw + 0.69 ( Rdr + Rw)Cfan
(5.38)
2
= 0.69Rdr ( Cint + Cfan) + 0.69 ( Rdrcw + rwCfan)L + 0.38rwcwL
The 0.38 factor accounts for the fact that the wire represents a distributed delay. Cw and Rw
stand for the total capacitance and resistance of the wire, respectively. The delay expres-
sions contains a component that is linear with the wire length, as well a quadratic one. It is
the latter that causes the wire delay to rapidly become the dominant factor in the delay
budget for longer wires.
Example 5.10 Inverter delay in presence of interconnect
Consider the circuit of Figure 5.24, and assume the device parameters of Example 5.5: Cint =
3 fF, Cfan = 3 fF, and Rdr = 0.5(13/1.5 + 31/4.5) = 7.8 kΩ. The wire is implemented in metal1
and has a width of 0.4 μm—the minimum allowed. This yields the following parameters: cw =
92 aF/μm, and rw = 0.19 Ω/μm (Example 4.4). With the aid of Eq. (5.38), we can compute at
what wire length the delay of the interconnect becomes equal to the intrinsic delay caused
purely by device parasitics. Solving the following quadratic equation yields a single (mean-
ingful) solution.
–18 2  – 12 –12
6.6 × 10  L + 0.5 × 10  L = 32.29 × 10 
or
L = 65 μm
Observe that the extra delay is solely due to the linear factor in the equation, and more specif-
ically due to the extra capacitance introduced by the wire. The quadratic factor (this is, the
distributed wire delay) only becomes dominant at much larger wire lengths (> 7 cm). This is
due to the high resistance of the (minimum-size) driver transistors. A different balance
emerges when wider transistors are used. Analyze, for instance, the same problem with the
driver transistors 100 times wider, as is typical for high-speed, large fan-out drivers.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 209 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 209
5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay
So far, we have seen that the static CMOS inverter with its almost ideal VTC—symmetri-
cal shape, full logic swing, and high noise margins—offers a superior robustness, which
simplifies the design process considerably and opens the door for design automation.
Another major attractor for static CMOS is the almost complete absence of power con-
sumption in steady-state operation mode. It is this combination of robustness and low
static power that has made static CMOS the technology of choice of most contemporary
digital designs. The power dissipation of a CMOS circuit is instead dominated by the
dynamic dissipation resulting from charging and discharging capacitances.
5.5.1 Dynamic Power Consumption
Dynamic Dissipation due to Charging and Discharging Capacitances
Each time the capacitor CL gets charged through the PMOS transistor, its voltage rises
from 0 to VDD, and a certain amount of energy is drawn from the power supply. Part of this
energy is dissipated in the PMOS device, while the remainder is stored on the load capac-
itor. During the high-to-low transition, this capacitor is discharged, and the stored energy
3
is dissipated in the NMOS transistor.
A precise measure for this energy consump- VDD
tion can be derived. Let us first consider the low-to-
high transition. We assume, initially, that the input
i
waveform has zero rise and fall times, or, in other VDD
words, that the NMOS and PMOS devices are never
on simultaneously. Therefore, the equivalent circuit vout
of Figure 5.25 is valid. The values of the energy
EVDD, taken from the supply during the transition, as C
L
well as the energy EC, stored on the capacitor at the
end of the transition, can be derived by integrating
the instantaneous power over the period of interest. Figure 5.25 Equivalent circuit
during the low-to-high transition.
The corresponding waveforms of vout(t) and iVDD(t)
are pictured in Figure 5.26.
∞ ∞ VDD
dvout
EVDD = iVDD ( )t VDDdt = VDD CL------------dt = CLV dvout = CLVDD2 (5.39)
∫ ∫ dt DD ∫ 
0 0 0
3 
Observe that this model is a simplification of the actual circuit. In reality, the load capacitance consists
of multiple components some of which are located between the output node and GND, others between output
node and VDD. The latter experience a charge-discharge cycle that is out of phase with the capacitances to GND,
i.e. they get charged when Vout goes low and discharged when Vout rises. While this distributes the energy deliv-
ery by the supply over the two phases, it does not impact the overall dissipation, and the results presented in this
section are still valid.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 210 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
210 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
∞ ∞ VDD
dvout CLVDD2
EC = iVDD ( )t voutdt = CL------------voutdt = CL voutdvout = ----------------- (5.40)
∫ ∫ dt ∫  2
0 0 0
out
v
t
iVDD
Charge Discharge t Figure 5.26 Output voltages and supply
current during (dis)charge of CL.
These results can also be derived by observing that during the low-to-high transi-
tion, CL is loaded with a charge CLVDD. Providing this charge requires an energy from the
2  2
supply equal to CLVDD (= Q × VDD). The energy stored on the capacitor equals CLVDD /2.
This means that only half of the energy supplied by the power source is stored on CL. The
other half has been dissipated by the PMOS transistor. Notice that this energy dissipation
is independent of the size (and hence the resistance) of the PMOS device! During the dis-
charge phase, the charge is removed from the capacitor, and its energy is dissipated in the
NMOS device. Once again, there is no dependence on the size of the device. In summary,
each switching cycle (consisting of an L→H and an H→L transition) takes a fixed amount
2
of energy, equal to CLVDD . In order to compute the power consumption, we have to take
into account how often the device is switched. If the gate is switched on and off f0→1 times
per second, the power consumption equals
2 
Pdyn = CLVDDf0 →1 (5.41)
f0→1 represents the frequency of energy-consuming transitions, this is 0 → 1 transitions
for static CMOS.
Advances in technology result in ever-higher of values of f0→1 (as tp decreases). At
the same time, the total capacitance on the chip (CL) increases as more and more gates are
placed on a single die. Consider for instance a 0.25 μm CMOS chip with a clock rate of
500 Mhz and an average load capacitance of 15 fF/gate, assuming a fanout of 4. The
power consumption per gate for a 2.5 V supply then equals approximately 50 μW. For a
design with 1 million gates and assuming that a transition occurs at every clock edge, this
would result in a power consumption of 50 W! This evaluation presents, fortunately, a
pessimistic perspective. In reality, not all gates in the complete IC switch at the full rate of
500 Mhz. The actual activity in the circuit is substantially lower.
Example 5.11 Capacitive power dissipation of inverter
The capacitive dissipation of the CMOS inverter of Example 5.4 is now easily computed. In
Table 5.2, the value of the load capacitance was determined to equal 6 fF. For a supply volt-
age of 2.5 V, the amount of energy needed to charge and discharge that capacitance equals

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 211 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 211
2 
Edyn = CLVDD = 37.5 fJ
Assume that the inverter is switched at the maximum possible rate (T = 1/f = tpLH + tpHL
= 2 tp). For a tp of 32.5 psec (Example 5.5), we find that the dynamic power dissipation of the
circuit is
Pdyn = Edyn ⁄ ( 2tp) = 580 μW
Of course, an inverter in an actual circuit is rarely switched at this maximum rate, and
even if done so, the output does not swing from rail-to-rail. The power dissipation will hence
be substantially lower. For a rate of 4 GHz (T = 250 psec), the dissipation reduces to 150 μW.
This is confirmed by simulations, which yield a power consumption of 155 μW.
Computing the dissipation of a complex circuit is complicated by the f0→1 factor,
also called the switching activity. While the switching activity is easily computed for an
inverter, it turns out to be far more complex in the case of higher-order gates and circuits.
One concern is that the switching activity of a network is a function of the nature and the
statistics of the input signals: If the input signals remain unchanged, no switching hap-
pens, and the dynamic power consumption is zero! On the other hand, rapidly changing
signals provoke plenty of switching and hence dissipation. Other factors influencing the
activity are the overall network topology and the function to be implemented. We can
accommodate this by another rewrite of the equation, or
2  2  2 
Pdyn = CLVDDf0 → 1 = CLVDDP0 → 1f = CEFFVDDf (5.42)
where f now presents the maximum possible event rate of the inputs (which is often the
clock rate) and P0→1 the probability that a clock event results in a 0 → 1 (or power-con-
suming) event at the output of the gate. CEFF = P0→1CL is called the effective capacitance
and represents the average capacitance switched every clock cycle. For our example, an
activity factor of 10% (P0→1 = 0.1) reduces the average consumption to 5 W.
Example 5.12 Switching activity
Consider the waveforms on the
right where the upper waveform
represents the idealized clock sig- Clock
nal, and the bottom one shows the
signal at the output of the gate.
Power consuming transitions Output signal
occur 2 out of 8 times, which is
equivalent to a transition probabil- Figure 5.27 Clock and signal waveforms
ity of 0.25 (or 25%).
Low Energy/Power Design Techniques
With the increasing complexity of the digital integrated circuits, it is anticipated that the power
problem will only worsen in future technologies. This is one of the reasons that lower supply

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 212 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
212 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
voltages are becoming more and more attractive. Reducing VDD has a quadratic effect on
Pdyn. For instance, reducing VDD from 2.5 V to 1.25 V for our example drops the power dissipa-
tion from 5 W to 1.25 W. This assumes that the same clock rate can be sustained. Figure 5.17
demonstrates that this assumption is not that unrealistic as long as the supply voltage is sub-
stantially higher than the threshold voltage. An important performance penalty occurs once
VDD approaches 2 VT.
When a lower bound on the supply voltage is set by external constraints (as often hap-
pens in real-world designs), or when the performance degradation due to lowering the supply
voltage is intolerable, the only means of reducing the dissipation is by lowering the effective
capacitance. This can be achieved by addressing both of its components: the physical capaci-
tance and the switching activity.
A reduction in the switching activity can only be accomplished at the logic and architec-
tural abstraction levels, and will be discussed in more detail in later Chapters. Lowering the
physical capacitance is an overall worthwhile goal, which also helps to improve the perfor-
mance of the circuit. As most of the capacitance in a combinational logic circuit is due to tran-
sistor capacitances (gate and diffusion), it makes sense to keep those contributions to a
minimum when designing for low power. This means that transistors should be kept to minimal
size whenever possible or reasonable. This definitely affects the performance of the circuit, but
the effect can be offset by using logic or architectural speed-up techniques. The only instances
where transistors should be sized up is when the load capacitance is dominated by extrinsic
capacitances (such as fan-out or wiring capacitance). This is contrary to common design prac-
tices used in cell libraries, where transistors are generally made large to accommodate a range
of loading and performance requirements.
The above observations lead to an interesting design challenge. Assume we have to min-
imize the energy dissipation of a circuit with a specified lower-bound on the performance. An
attractive approach is to lower the supply voltage as much as possible, and to compensate the
loss in performance by increasing the transistor sizes. Yet, the latter causes the capacitance to
increase. It may be foreseen that at a low enough supply voltage, the latter factor may start to
dominate and cause energy to increase with a further drop in the supply voltage.
Example 5.13 Transistor Sizing for Energy Minimization
To analyze the transistor-sizing for mini-
mum energy problem, we examine the sim- In Out
ple case of a static CMOS inverter driving an
C
external load capacitance Cext. To take the C f  ext
g1 1
input loading effects into account, we
assume that the inverter itself is driven by a Figure 5.28 CMOS inverter driving an external
minimum-sized device (Figure 5.28). The load capacitance Cext, while being driven by a
goal is to minimize the energy dissipation of minimum sized gate.
the complete circuit, while maintaining a
lower-bound on performance. The degrees of freedom are the size factor f of the inverter and
the supply voltage Vdd of the circuit. The propagation delay of the optimized circuit should
not be larger than that of a reference circuit, chosen to have as parameters f = 1 and Vdd = Vref.
Using the approach introduced in Section 5.4.3 (Sizing a Chain of Inverters), we can
derive an expression for the propagation delay of the circuit,

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 213 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 213
  f  F
tp = tp0 1 + -- + 1 + ---- (5.43)
  γ  fγ
with F = (Cext/Cg1) the overall effective fanout of the circuit tp0 is the intrinsic delay of the
inverter. Its dependence upon VDD is approximated by the following expression, derived from
Eq. (5.21).
VDD
tp0 ∼ ------------------------- (5.44)
VDD – VTE
The energy dissipation for a single transition at the input is easily found once the total capaci-
tance of the circuit is known, or
2 
E = VddCg1 ( ( 1 + γ)) ( 1 + f ) + F) (5.45)
The performance constraint now states that the propagation delay of the scaled circuit should
be equal (or smaller) to the delay of the reference circuit (f=1, Vdd = Vref). To simplify the sub-
sequent analysis, we make the simplifying assumption that the intrinsic output capacitance of
the gate equals its gate capacitance, or γ = 1. Hence,
 F F
tp0 2 + f + ---  2 + f + ---
tp  f VDD Vref – VTE f
     
--------- = --------------------------------- = ---------- ------------------------- --------------------- = 1 (5.46)
tpref tp0ref ( 3 + F)  Vref VDD – VTE 3 + F 
 
Eq. (5.46) establishes a relationship between the sizing factor f and the supply voltage, plotted
in Figure 5.29a for different values of F. Those curves show a clear minimum. Increasing the
size of the inverter from the minimum initially increases the performance, and hence allows
for a lowering of the supply voltage. This is fruitful until the optimum sizing factor of
f = F is reached, which should not surprise careful readers of the previous sections. Fur-
ther increases in the device sizes only increase the self-loading factor, deteriorate the perfor-
mance, and require an increase in supply voltage. Also observe that for the case of F=1, the
reference case is the best solution; any resizing just increases the self-loading.
4 1 . 5
3 . 5 F=1 1
3
2 2
1
2 . 5
2 5
5
vdd (V)
1 . 5
0 . 5
normalized energy
1 10
10
0 . 5 20 
20
0 0
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
f f
(a) (b)
Figure 5.29 Sizing of an inverter for energy-minimization. (a) Required supply voltage as a function of the sizing factor f
for different values of the overall effective fanout F; (b) Energy of scaled circuit (normalized with respect to the reference
case) as a function of f. Vref = 2.5V, VTE = 0.5V.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 214 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
214 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
With the VDD(f) relationship in hand, we can derive the energy of the scaled circuit
(normalized with respect to the reference circuit) as a function of the sizing factor f.
2 
E  VDD   2 + 2f + F
--------- = ---------- ------------------------ (5.47)
Eref  Vref  4 + F 
Finding an analytical expression for the optimal sizing factor is possible, but yields a complex
and messy equation. A graphical approach is just as effective. The resulting charts are plotted
in Figure 5.29b, from which a number of conclusions can be drawn:
• Device sizing, combined with supply voltage reduction, is a very effective approach in
reducing the energy consumption of a logic network. This is especially true for net-
works with large effective fanouts, where energy reductions with almost a factor of 10 can
be observed. But the gain is also sizable for smaller values of F. The only exception is the
F=1 case, where the minimum size device is also the most effective one.
• Oversizing the transistors beyond the optimal value comes at a hefty price in energy. This
is unfortunately a common approach in many of today’s designs.
• The optimal sizing factor for energy is smaller than the one for performance, especially for
large values of F. For example, for a fanout of 20, fopt(energy) = 3.53, while fopt(perfor-
mance) = 4.47. Increasing the device sizes only leads to a minimal supply reduction once
VDD starts approaching VTE, hence leading to very minimal energy gains.
Dissipation Due to Direct-Path Currents
In actual designs, the assumption of the zero rise and fall times of the input wave forms is
not correct. The finite slope of the input signal causes a direct current path between VDD
and GND for a short period of time during switching, while the NMOS and the PMOS
transistors are conducting simultaneously. This is illustrated in Figure 5.30. Under the
(reasonable) assumption that the resulting current spikes can be approximated as triangles
and that the inverter is symmetrical in its rising and falling responses, we can compute the
energy consumed per switching period,
Ipeaktsc Ipeaktsc
Edp = VDD----------------- + VDD----------------- = tsc V Ipeak (5.48)
DD
2 2
as well as the average power consumption
2 
Pdp = tsc VDDIpeak f = Csc VDDf (5.49)
The direct-path power dissipation is proportional to the switching activity, similar to the
capacitive power dissipation. tsc represents the time both devices are conducting. For a lin-
ear input slope, this time is reasonably well approximated by Eq. (5.50) where ts repre-
sents the 0-100% transition time.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 215 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 215
VDD
VDD – VT
vin
VT
Vin Isc Vout
Ipeak t
CL ishort
t
Figure 5.30 Short-circuit currents during transients.
VDD – 2VT VDD – 2VT tr f( )
tsc = ------------------------- ts ≈ ------------------------- × -------- (5.50)
VDD VDD 0.8
Ipeak is determined by the saturation current of the devices and is hence directly pro-
portional to the sizes of the transistors. The peak current is also a strong function of the
ratio between input and output slopes. This relationship is best illustrated by the follow-
ing simple analysis: Consider a static CMOS inverter with a 0 → 1 transition at the input.
Assume first that the load capacitance is very large, so that the output fall time is signifi-
cantly larger than the input rise time (Figure 5.31a). Under those circumstances, the input
VDD VDD
ISC ≈ 0 ISC ≈ IMAX
Vout Vout
Vin Vin
CL CL
(a) Large capacitive load (b) Small capacitive load
Figure 5.31 Impact of load capacitance on short-circuit current.
moves through the transient region before the output starts to change. As the source-drain
voltage of the PMOS device is approximately 0 during that period, the device shuts off
without ever delivering any current. The short-circuit current is close to zero in this case.
Consider now the reverse case, where the output capacitance is very small, and the output
fall time is substantially smaller than the input rise time (Figure 5.31b). The drain-source
voltage of the PMOS device equals VDD for most of the transition period, guaranteeing the
maximal short-circuit current (equal to the saturation current of the PMOS). This clearly

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 216 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
216 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
represents the worst-case condition. The conclusions of the above analysis are confirmed
in Figure 5.32, which plots the short-circuit current through the NMOS transistor during a
low-to-high transition as a function of the load capacitance.
-4
x 10
2.5 
C = 20 fF
2 L 
1.5
CL = 100 fF
(A)  1
Isc
CL = 500 fF
0.5
Figure 5.32 CMOS inverter short-circuit current
0 through NMOS transistor as a function of the load
capacitance (for a fixed input slope of 500 psec).
-0.5
0 2 4 6
-10
time (sec) x 10
This analysis leads to the conclusion that the short-circuit dissipation is minimized
by making the output rise/fall time larger than the input rise/fall time. On the other hand,
making the output rise/fall time too large slows down the circuit and can cause short-cir-
cuit currents in the fan-out gates. This presents a perfect example of how local optimiza-
tion and forgetting the global picture can lead to an inferior solution.
Design Techniques
A more practical rule, which optimizes the power consumption in a global way, can be formu-
lated (Veendrick84]):
The power dissipation due to short-circuit currents is minimized by matching the rise/fall
times of the input and output signals. At the overall circuit level, this means that rise/fall
times of all signals should be kept constant within a range.
Making the input and output rise times of a gate identical is not the optimum solution for
that particular gate on its own, but keeps the overall short-circuit current within bounds. This is
shown in Figure 5.33, which plots the short-circuit energy dissipation of an inverter (normal-
ized with respect to the zero-input rise time dissipation) as a function of the ratio r between
input and output rise/fall times. When the load capacitance is too small for a given inverter size
(r > 2…3 for VDD = 5 V), the power is dominated by the short-circuit current. For very large
capacitance values, all power dissipation is devoted to charging and discharging the load
capacitance. When the rise/fall times of inputs and outputs are equalized, most power dissipa-
tion is associated with the dynamic power and only a minor fraction (< 10%) is devoted to
short-circuit currents.
Observe also that the impact of short-circuit current is reduced when we lower the
supply voltage, as is apparent from Eq. (5.50). In the extreme case, when VDD < VTn + |VTp|,
short-circuit dissipation is completely eliminated, because both devices are never on
simultaneously. With threshold voltages scaling at a slower rate than the supply voltage, short-
circuit power dissipation is becoming of a lesser importance in deep-submicron technologies.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 217 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 217
8
W/L|P = 1.125 μm/0.25 μm
7
W/L|N = 0.375 μm/0.25 μm
V = 3.3 V
6 DD  CL = 30 fF
5
norm4
P
3
Figure 5.33 Power dissipation of a static CMOS
2 VDD = 2.5 V inverter as a function of the ratio between input
and output rise/fall times. The power is
1
VDD = 1.5 V normalized with respect to zero input rise-time
0 dissipation. At low values of the slope ratio, input-
0 1 2 3 4 5 output coupling leads to some extra dissipation.
t /t
sin sout
At a supply voltage of 2.5 V and thresholds around 0.5 V, an input/output slope ratio of 2 is
needed to cause a 10% degradation in dissipation.
Finally, its is worth observing that the short-circuit power dissipation can be mod-
eled by adding a load capacitance Csc = tscIpeak/VDD in parallel with CL, as is apparent in
Eq. (5.49). The value of this short-circuit capacitance is a function of VDD, the transistor
sizes, and the input-output slope ratio.
5.5.2 Static Consumption
The static (or steady-state) power dissipation of a circuit is expressed by Eq. (5.51), where
Istat is the current that flows between the supply rails in the absence of switching activity
Pstat = IstatVDD (5.51)
Ideally, the static current of the CMOS inverter is equal to zero, as the PMOS and
NMOS devices are never on simultaneously in steady-state operation. There is, unfortu-
nately, a leakage current flowing through the reverse-biased diode junctions of the transis-
tors, located between the source or drain and the substrate as shown in Figure 5.34. This
contribution is, in general, very small and can be ignored. For the device sizes under con-
sideration, the leakage current per unit drain area typically ranges between 10-100
2 
pA/μm at room temperature. For a die with 1 million gates, each with a drain area of 0.5
2 
μm and operated at a supply voltage of 2.5 V, the worst-case power consumption due to
diode leakage equals 0.125 mW, which is clearly not much of an issue.
However, be aware that the junction leakage currents are caused by thermally gener-
ated carriers. Their value increases with increasing junction temperature, and this occurs
in an exponential fashion. At 85°C (a common junction temperature limit for commercial
hardware), the leakage currents increase by a factor of 60 over their room-temperature val-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 218 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
218 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
VDD
VDD
Vout = VDD
Drain Leakage
Current
Subthreshold current Figure 5.34 Sources of leakage currents in
CMOS inverter (for Vin = 0 V).
ues. Keeping the overall operation temperature of a circuit low is consequently a desirable
goal. As the temperature is a strong function of the dissipated heat and its removal mecha-
nisms, this can only be accomplished by limiting the power dissipation of the circuit
and/or by using chip packages that support efficient heat removal.
An emerging source of leakage current is the subthreshold current of the transistors.
As discussed in Chapter 3, an MOS transistor can experience a drain-source current, even
when VGS is smaller than the threshold voltage (Figure 5.35). The closer the threshold
voltage is to zero volts, the larger the leakage current at VGS = 0 V and the larger the static
power consumption. To offset this effect, the threshold voltage of the device has generally
been kept high enough. Standard processes feature VT values that are never smaller than
0.5-0.6V and that in some cases are even substantially higher (~ 0.75V).
This approach is being challenged by the reduction in supply voltages that typically
goes with deep-submicron technology scaling as became apparent in Figure 3.40. We con-
cluded earlier (Figure 5.17) that scaling the supply voltages while keeping the threshold
voltage constant results in an important loss in performance, especially when VDD
approaches 2 VT. One approach to address this performance issue is to scale the device
thresholds down as well. This moves the curve of Figure 5.17 to the left, which means that
the performance penalty for lowering the supply voltage is reduced. Unfortunately, the
threshold voltages are lower-bounded by the amount of allowable subthreshold leakage
current, as demonstrated in Figure 5.35. The choice of the threshold voltage hence repre-
sents a trade-off between performance and static power dissipation. The continued scaling
of the supply voltage predicted for the next generations of CMOS technologies however
forces the threshold voltages ever downwards, and makes subthreshold conduction a dom-
inant source of power dissipation. Process technologies that contain devices with sharper
turn-off characteristic will therefore become more attractive. An example of the latter is
the SOI (Silicon-on-Insulator) technology whose MOS transistors have slope-factors that
are close to the ideal 60 mV/decade.
Example 5.14 Impact of threshold reduction on performance and static power dissipation
Consider a minimum size NMOS transistor in the 0.25 μm CMOS technology. In Chapter 3,
we derived that the slope factor S for this device equals 90 mV/decade. The off-current (at
-11
VGS = 0) of the transistor for a VT of approximately 0.5V equals 10 A (Figure 3.22). Reduc-
ing the threshold with 200 mV to 0.3 V multiplies the off-current of the transistors with a fac-
tor of 170! Assuming a million gate design with a supply voltage of 1.5 V, this translates into
6  -11
a static power dissipation of 10 ×170×10 ×1.5 = 2.6 mW. A further reduction of the thresh-

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 219 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 219
ID
Figure 5.35 Decreasing the threshold
increases the subthreshold current at VGS =
VT = 0.2 VT = 0.6 V 0.
GS
old to 100 mV results in an unacceptable dissipation of almost 0.5 W! At that supply voltage,
the threshold reductions correspond to a performance improvement of 25% and 40%, respec-
tively.
This lower bound on the thresholds is in some sense artificial. The idea that the leak-
age current in a static CMOS circuit has to be zero is a preconception. Certainly, the pres-
ence of leakage currents degrades the noise margins, because the logic levels are no longer
equal to the supply rails. As long as the noise margins are within range, this is not a com-
pelling issue. The leakage currents, of course, cause an increase in static power dissipa-
tion. This is offset by the drop in supply voltage, that is enabled by the reduced thresholds
at no cost in performance, and results in a quadratic reduction in dynamic power. For a
0.25 μm CMOS process, the following circuit configurations obtain the same perfor-
mance: 3 V supply–0.7 V VT; and 0.45 V supply–0.1 V VT. The dynamic power consump-
tion of the latter is, however, 45 times smaller [Liu93]! Choosing the correct values of
supply and threshold voltages once again requires a trade-off. The optimal operation point
depends upon the activity of the circuit. In the presence of a sizable static power dissipa-
tion, it is essential that non-active modules are powered down, lest static power dissipation
would become dominant. Power-down (also called standby) can be accomplished by dis-
connecting the unit from the supply rails, or by lowering the supply voltage.
5.5.3 Putting It All Together
The total power consumption of the CMOS inverter is now expressed as the sum of its
three components:
Ptot = Pdyn + Pdp + P = ( CLVDD2 + VDD Ipeakts)f0 → 1 + VDDIleak (5.52)
stat 
In typical CMOS circuits, the capacitive dissipation is by far the dominant factor. The
direct-path consumption can be kept within bounds by careful design, and should hence
not be an issue. Leakage is ignorable at present, but this might change in the not too dis-
tant future.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 220 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
220 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
The Power-Delay Product, or Energy per Operation
In Chapter 1, we introduced the power-delay product (PDP) as a quality measure for a
logic gate.
PDP = Pavtp (5.53)
The PDP presents a measure of energy, as is apparent from the units (Wsec = Joule).
Assuming that the gate is switched at its maximum possible rate of fmax = 1/(2tp), and
ignoring the contributions of the static and direct-path currents to the power consumption,
we find
2
2  CLVDD
PDP = CLVDDfmaxtp = ----------------- (5.54)
2
The PDP stands for the average energy consumed per switching event (this is, for a
0→1, or a 1→0 transition). Remember that earlier we had defined Eav as the average
energy per switching cycle (or per energy-consuming event). As each inverter cycle con-
tains a 0→1, and a 1→0 transition, Eav hence is twice the PDP.
Energy-Delay Product
The validity of the PDP as a quality metric for a process technology or gate topology is
questionable. It measures the energy needed to switch the gate, which is an important
property for sure. Yet for a given structure, this number can be made arbitrarily low by
reducing the supply voltage. From this perspective, the optimum voltage to run the circuit
at would be the lowest possible value that still ensures functionality. This comes at the
major expense in performance, at discussed earlier. A more relevant metric should com-
bine a measure of performance and energy. The energy-delay product (EDP) does exactly
that.
2
2 CLVDD
EDP = PDP × tp = P tp = -----------------tp (5.55)
av
2
It is worth analyzing the voltage dependence of the EDP. Higher supply voltages reduce
delay, but harm the energy, and the opposite is true for low voltages. An optimum opera-
tion point should hence exist. Assuming that NMOS and PMOS transistors have compara-
ble threshold and saturation voltages, we can simplify the propagation delay expression
Eq. (5.21).
αCLVDD
tp ≈ ------------------------ (5.56)
VDD – VTe
where VTe = VT + VDSAT/2, and α technology parameter. Combining Eq. (5.55) and Eq.
4
(5.56), 
4 
This equation is only accurate as long as the devices remain in velocity saturation, which is probably
not the case for the lower supply voltages. This introduces some inaccuracy in the analysis, but will not distort
the overall result.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 221 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.5 Power, Energy, and Energy-Delay 221
2  3
αCLVDD
EDP = --------------------------------- (5.57)
2 ( VDD – VTE)
The optimum supply voltage can be obtained by taking the derivative of Eq. (5.57) with
respect to VDD, and equating the result to 0.
3
VDDopt = ---VTE (5.58)
2
The remarkable outcome from this analysis is the low value of the supply voltage
that simultaneously optimizes performance and energy. For sub-micron technologies with
thresholds in the range of 0.5 V, the optimum supply is situated around 1 V.
Example 5.15 Optimum supply voltage for 0.25 μm CMOS inverter
From the technology parameters for our generic CMOS process presented in Chapter 3, the
value of VTE can be derived.
VTn = 0.43 V, VDsatn = 0.63 V, VTEn = 0.74 V.
VTp = -0.4 V, VDsatp = -1 V, VTEp = -0.9 V.
VTE ≈ (VTEn+|VTEp|)/2 = 0.8 V
Hence, VDDopt = (3/2) × 0.8 V = 1.2 V. The simulated graphs of Figure 5.36, plotting normal-
ized delay, energy, and energy-delay product, confirm this result. The optimum supply volt-
age is predicted to equal 1.1 V. The charts clearly illustrate the trade-off between delay and
energy.
15
Energy-Delay
10
Energy
Delay
5
Energy-Delay (norm)
Figure 5.36 Normalized delay, energy,
and energy-delay plots for CMOS inverter in
0 0.25 μm CMOS technology.
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
V (V)
DD
WARNING: While the above example demonstrates that there exists a supply voltage
that minimizes the energy-delay product of a gate, this voltage does not necessarily repre-
sent the optimum voltage for a given design problem. For instance, some designs require a
minimum performance, which requires a higher voltage at the expense of energy. Simi-
larly, a lower-energy design is possible by operating by circuit at a lower voltage and by

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 222 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
222 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
obtaining the overall system performance through the use of architectural techniques such
as pipelining or concurrency.
5.5.4 Analyzing Power Consumption Using SPICE
A definition of the average power consumption of a circuit was provided in Chapter 1, and
is repeated here for the sake of convenience.
T T
1 VDD
Pav = --- p t( )dt = ---------- iDD ( )t dt (5.59)
T∫  T ∫
0 0
with T the period of interest, and VDD and iDD the supply voltage and current, respectively.
Some implementations of SPICE provide built-in functions to measure the average value
of a circuit signal. For instance, the HSPICE .MEASURE TRAN I(VDD) AVG command
computes the area under a computed transient response (I(VDD)) and divides it by the
period of interest. This is identical to the definition given in Eq. (5.59). Other implementa-
tions of SPICE are, unfortunately, not as extensive. This is not as bad as it seems, as long
as one realizes that SPICE is actually a differential equation solver. A small circuit can
easily be conceived that acts as an integrator and whose output signal is nothing but the
average power.
Consider, for instance, the circuit of Figure 5.37. The current delivered by the power
supply is measured by the current-controlled current source and integrated on the capaci-
tor C. The resistance R is only provided for DC-convergence reasons and should be cho-
sen as high as possible to minimize leakage. A clever choice of the element parameter
ensures that the output voltage Pav equals the average power consumption. The operation
of the circuit is summarized in Eq. (5.60) under the assumption that the initial voltage on
the capacitor C is zero.
dPav 
C  = kiDD
dt
or
(5.60)
T
k
Pav = ---- iDDdt
C∫
0
Equating Eq. (5.59) and Eq. (5.60) yields the necessary conditions for the equivalent
circuit parameters: k/C = VDD/T. Under these circumstances, the equivalent circuit shown
presents a convenient means of tracking the average power in a digital circuit.
Example 5.16 Average Power of Inverter
The average power consumption of the inverter of Example 5.4 is analyzed using the above
technique for a toggle period of 250 psec (T = 250 psec, k = 1, VDD = 2.5 V, hence C = 100
pF). The resulting power consumption is plotted in Figure 5.38, showing an average power
consumption of approximately 157.3 μW. The .MEAS AVG command yields a value of

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 223 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter Metrics 223
VDD P
av
C
+
Circuit k i R
iDD DD
under test
–
Figure 5.37 Equivalent circuit to measure average power in SPICE.
160.32 μW, which demonstrates the approximate equivalence of both methods. These num-
bers are equivalent to an energy of 39 fJ (which is close to the 37.5 fJ derived in Example
5.11). Observe the slightly negative dip during the high-to-low transition. This is due to the
injection of current into the supply, when the output briefly overshoots VDD as a result of the
capacitive coupling between input and output (as is apparent from in the transient response of
Figure 5.16).
-4
x 10
1.8 
Average Power
1.6
(over one cycle)
1.4
1.2
Vin: 0→1
1
0.8
power (W)
0.6
0.4
0.2
Figure 5.38 Deriving the power
0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 consumption using SPICE.
-10
t (sec) x 10
5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter
Metrics
In section 3.5, we have explored the impact of the scaling of technology on the some of
the important design parameters such as area, delay, and power. For the sake of clarity, we
repeat here some of the most important entries in the resulting scaling table (Table 3.8).
Table 5.4 Scaling scenarios for short-channel devices (S and U represent the technology and voltage
scaling parameters, respectively).
Parameter Relation Full Scaling General Scaling Fixed-Voltage Scaling
2  2  2
Area/Device WL 1/S 1/S 1/S
Intrinsic Delay RonCgate 1/S 1/S 1/S

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 224 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
224 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Table 5.4 Scaling scenarios for short-channel devices (S and U represent the technology and voltage
scaling parameters, respectively).
Parameter Relation Full Scaling General Scaling Fixed-Voltage Scaling
2  3  2 
Intrinsic Energy CgateV 1/S 1/SU 1/S
2  2 
Intrinsic Power Energy/Delay 1/S 1/U 1
2 2  2
Power Density P/Area 1 S /U S
To validity of these theoretical projec-
tions can be verified by looking back and
observing the trends during the past decades.
From Figure 5.39, we can derive that the gate
delay indeed decreases exponentially at a rate
of 13%/year, or halving every five years. This
rate is on course with the prediction of Table
5.4, since S averages approximately 1.15 as
we had already observed in Figure 3.39. The
delay of a 2-input NAND gate with a fanout of
four has gone from tens of nanoseconds in the
1960s to a tenth of a nanosecond in the year
Figure 5.39 Scaling of the gate delay (from
2000, and is projected to be a few tens of pico- [Dally98]).
seconds by 2010.
Reducing power dissipation has only been a second-order priority until recently.
Hence, statistics on dissipation-per-gate or design are only marginally available. An inter-
esting chart is shown in Figure 5.40, which plots the power density measured over a large
number of designs produced between 1980 and 1995. Although the variation is
large—even for a fixed technology—it shows the power density to increase approximately
2
with S . This is in correspondence with the fixed-voltage scaling scenario presented in
Table 5.4. For more recent years, we expect a scenario more in line with the full-scaling
model—which predicts a constant power density—due to the accelerated supply-voltage
scaling and the increased attention to power-reducing design techniques. Even under these
circumstances, power dissipation-per-chip will continue to increase due to the ever-larger
die sizes.
The presented scaling model has one fatal flaw however: the performance and
power predictions produce purely “intrinsic” numbers that take only device parameters
into account. In Chapter 4, it was concluded that the interconnect wires exhibit a different
scaling behavior, and that wire parasitics may come to dominate the overall performance.
Similarly, charging and discharging the wire capacitances may dominate the energy bud-
get. To get a crisper perspective, one has to construct a combined model that considers
device and wire scaling models simultaneously. The impact of the wire capacitance and its
scaling behavior is summarized in Table 5.5. We adopt the fixed-resistance model intro-
duced in Chapter 4. We furthermore assume that the resistance of the driver dominates the
wire resistance, which is definitely the case for short to medium-long wires.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 225 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.6 Perspective: Technology Scaling and its Impact on the Inverter Metrics 225
2
∝ S
Figure 5.40 Evolution of power-density in
micro- and DSP processors, as a function of
the scaling factor S ([Sakurai97]). S is
normalized to 1 for a 4 μm process.
S
Table 5.5 Scaling scenarios for wire capacitance. S and U represent the technology and voltage scaling
parameters, respectively, while SL stands for the wire-length scaling factor. εc represents the impact of fringing
and inter-wire capacitances.
Parameter Relation General Scaling
Wire Capacitance WL/t εc/SL
Wire Delay RonCint εc/SL
2  2
Wire Energy CintV εc/SLU
Wire Delay / Intrinsic Delay εcS/SL
Wire Energy / Intrinsic Energy εcS/SL
The model predicts that the interconnect-caused delay (and energy) gain in impor-
tance with the scaling of technology. This impact is limited to an increase with εc for short
wires (S = SL), but it becomes increasingly more outspoken for medium-range and long
wires (SL < S). These conclusions have been confirmed by a number of studies, an exam-
ple of which is shown in Figure 5.41. How the ratio of wire over intrinsic contributions
will actually evolve is debatable, as it depends upon a wide range of independent parame-
ters such as system architecture, design methodology, transistor sizing, and interconnect
materials. The doom-day scenario that interconnect may cause CMOS performance to sat-
urate in the very near future hence may be exaggerated. Yet, it is clear to that increased
attention to interconnect is an absolute necessity, and may change the way the next-gener-
ation circuits are designed and optimized (e.g. [Sylvester99]).

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 226 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
226 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
Figure 5.41 Evolution of wire delay / gate delay ratio
with respect to technology (from [Fisher98]).
5.7 Summary
This chapter presented a rigorous and in-depth analysis of the static CMOS inverter. The
key characteristics of the gate are summarized:
• The static CMOS inverter combines a pull-up PMOS section with a pull-down
NMOS device. The PMOS is normally made wider than the NMOS due to its infe-
rior current-driving capabilities.
• The gate has an almost ideal voltage-transfer characteristic. The logic swing is equal
to the supply voltage and is not a function of the transistor sizes. The noise margins
of a symmetrical inverter (where PMOS and NMOS transistor have equal current-
driving strength) approach VDD/2. The steady-state response is not affected by fan-
out.
• Its propagation delay is dominated by the time it takes to charge or discharge the
load capacitor CL. To a first order, it can be approximated as
Reqn + Reqp
 
tp = 0.69CL ---------------------------
 2 
Keeping the load capacitance small is the most effective means of implementing
high-performance circuits. Transistor sizing may help to improve performance as
long as the delay is dominated by the extrinsic (or load) capacitance of fanout and
wiring.
• The power dissipation is dominated by the dynamic power consumed in charging
2
and discharging the load capacitor. It is given by P0→1 CLVDD f. The dissipation is
proportional to the activity in the network. The dissipation due to the direct-path
currents occurring during switching can be limited by careful tailoring of the signal

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 227 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
Section 5.8 To Probe Further 227
slopes. The static dissipation can usually be ignored but might become a major fac-
tor in the future as a result of subthreshold currents.
• Scaling the technology is an effective means of reducing the area, propagation delay
and power consumption of a gate. The impact is even more striking if the supply
voltage is scaled simultaneously.
• The interconnect component is gradually taking a larger fraction of the delay and
performance budget.
5.8 To Probe Further
The operation of the CMOS inverter has been the topic of numerous publications and text-
books. Virtually every book on digital design devotes a substantial number of pages to the
analysis of the basic inverter gate. An extensive list of references was presented in Chapter
1. Some references of particular interest that were explicitly quoted in this chapter are
given below.
REFERENCES
[Dally98] W. Dally and J. Poulton, Digital Systems Engineering, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[Fisher98] P. D. Fisher and R. Nesbitt, ``The Test of Time: Clock-Cycle Estimation and Test Chal-
lenges for Future Microprocessors,'' IEEE Circuits and Devices Magazine, 14(2), pp. 37-44,
1998.
[Hedenstierna87] N. Hedenstierna and K. Jeppson, “CMOS Circuit Speed and Buffer Optimiza-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on CAD, Vol CAD-6, No 2, pp. 270-281, March 1987.
[Liu93] D. Liu and C Svensson, “Trading speed for low power by choice of supply and threshold
voltages”, IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Vol.28, no.1, pp. 10-17, Jan. 1993, p.10-17.
[Mead80] C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Systems, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
[Sakurai97] T.Sakurai, H.Kawaguchi, T.Kuroda, “Low-Power CMOS Design through VTH Control
and Low-Swing Circuits,” Digest International Symp.on Low-Power Electronics and Design,
pp.1-6, Sept. 1997. Also in T.Sakurai, T.Kuroda, “Low Voltage Technology and Circuits,” Mead
Microelectronics Conference, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 1997.
[Sedra87] Sedra and Smith, MicroElectronic Circuits, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1987.
[Swanson72] R. Swanson and J. Meindl, “Ion-Implanted Complementary CMOS transistors in Low-
Voltage Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-7, No. 2, pp.146-152, April
1972.
[Veendrick84] H. Veendrick, “Short-Circuit Dissipation of Static CMOS Circuitry and its Impact on
the Design of Buffer Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. SC-19, no. 4,
pp. 468–473, 1984.

--- Page Break ---

chapter5.fm Page 228 Friday, January 18, 2002 9:01 AM
228 THE CMOS INVERTER Chapter 5
5.9 Exercises and Design Problems
For all problems, use the device parameters provided in Chapter 3 (as well as the inside back cover),
unless otherwise mentioned.
DESIGN PROBLEM
Using the 1.2 μm CMOS introduced in Chapter 2, design a static CMOS
inverter that meets the following requirements:
1. Matched pull-up and pull-down times (i.e., tpHL = tpLH).
2. tp = 5 nsec (± 0.1 nsec).
The load capacitance connected to the output is equal to 4 pF. Notice that this
capacitance is substantially larger than the internal capacitances of the gate.
Determine the W and L of the transistors. To reduce the parasitics, use
minimal lengths (L = 1.2 μm) for all transistors. Verify and optimize the design
using SPICE after proposing a first design using manual computations. Com-
pute also the energy consumed per transition. If you have a layout editor (such
as MAGIC) available, perform the physical design, extract the real circuit
parameters, and compare the simulated results with the ones obtained earlier.

--- Page Break ---

C H A P T E R
6
D E S I G N I N G C O M B I N A T I O N A L
L O G I C G A T E S I N C M O S
In-depth discussion of logic families in CMOS—
static and dynamic, pass-transistor, non-ratioed and ratioed logic
n
Optimizing a logic gate for area, speed, energy, or robustness
n
Low-power and high-performance circuit-design techniques
6.1 Introduction 6.3.3 Issues in Dynamic Design
6.3.4 Cascading Dynamic Gates
6.2 Static CMOS Design
6.2.1 Complementary CMOS 6.4 Perspectives
6.2.2 Ratioed Logic 6.4.1 How to Choose a Logic Style?
6.2.3 Pass-Transistor Logic 6.4.2 Designing Logic for Reduced Supply
Voltages
6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design
6.3.1 Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles 6.5 Summary
6.3.2 Speed and Power Dissipation of 6.6 To Probe Further
Dynamic Logic
229

--- Page Break ---

230 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
6.1 Introduction
The design considerations for a simple inverter circuit were presented in the previous
chapter. Now, we will extend this discussion to address the synthesis of arbitrary digital
gates such as NOR, NAND and XOR. The focus is on combinational logic (or non-regen-
erative) circuits; this is, circuits that have the property that at any point in time, the output
of the circuit is related to its current input signals by some Boolean expression (assuming
that the transients through the logic gates have settled). No intentional connection between
outputs and inputs is present.
This is in contrast to another class of circuits, known as sequential or regenerative,
for which the output is not only a function of the current input data, but also of previous
values of the input signals (Figure 6.1). This is accomplished by connecting one or more
outputs intentionally back to some inputs. Consequently, the circuit “remembers” past
events and has a sense of history. A sequential circuit includes a combinational logic por-
tion and a module that holds the state. Example circuits are registers, counters, oscillators,
and memory. Sequential circuits are the topic of the next Chapter.
Combinational In Combinational Out
In Logic Out Logic
Circuit Circuit
State
(a) Combinational (b) Sequential
Figure 6.1 High level classification of logic circuits.
There are numerous circuit styles to implement a given logic function. As with the
inverter, the common design metrics by which a gate is evaluated are area, speed, energy
and power. Depending on the application, the emphasis will be on different metrics. For
instance, the switching speed of digital circuits is the primary metric in a high-perfor-
mance processor, while it is energy dissipation in a battery operated circuit. In addition to
these metrics, robustness to noise and reliability are also very important considerations.
We will see that certain logic styles can significantly improve performance, but are more
sensitive to noise. Recently, power dissipation has also become a very important require-
ment and significant emphasis is placed on understanding the sources of power and
approaches to deal with power.
6.2 Static CMOS Design
The most widely used logic style is static complementary CMOS. The static CMOS style
is really an extension of the static CMOS inverter to multiple inputs. In review, the pri-
mary advantage of the CMOS structure is robustness (i.e, low sensitivity to noise), good
performance, and low power consumption with no static power dissipation. Most of those

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 231
properties are carried over to large fan-in logic gates implemented using a similar circuit
topology.
The complementary CMOS circuit style falls under a broad class of logic circuits
called static circuits in which at every point in time (except during the switching tran-
sients), each gate output is connected to either VDD or Vss via a low-resistance path. Also,
the outputs of the gates assume at all times the value of the Boolean function implemented
by the circuit (ignoring, once again, the transient effects during switching periods). This is
in contrast to the dynamic circuit class, which relies on temporary storage of signal values
on the capacitance of high-impedance circuit nodes. The latter approach has the advantage
that the resulting gate is simpler and faster. Its design and operation are however more
involved and prone to failure due to an increased sensitivity to noise.
In this section, we sequentially address the design of various static circuit flavors
including complementary CMOS, ratioed logic (pseudo-NMOS and DCVSL), and pass-
transistor logic. The issues of scaling to lower power supply voltages and threshold volt-
ages will also be dealt with.
6.2.1 Complementary CMOS
Concept
A static CMOS gate is a combination of two networks, called the pull-up network (PUN)
and the pull-down network (PDN) (Figure 6.2). The figure shows a generic N input logic
gate where all inputs are distributed to both the pull-up and pull-down networks. The func-
tion of the PUN is to provide a connection between the output and VDD anytime the output
of the logic gate is meant to be 1 (based on the inputs). Similarly, the function of the PDN
is to connect the output to VSS when the output of the logic gate is meant to be 0. The PUN
and PDN networks are constructed in a mutually exclusive fashion such that one and only
one of the networks is conducting in steady state. In this way, once the transients have set-
tled, a path always exists between VDD and the output F, realizing a high output (“one”),
or, alternatively, between VSS and F for a low output (“zero”). This is equivalent to stating
that the output node is always a low-impedance node in steady state.
VDD
In1
In2 pull-up: make a connection from V to F when
DD 
PUN
F(In1,In2, ... Inn) = 1
InN
F (In1,In2, ... Inn)
In1
In2
pull-down: make a connection from VDD to Vss when
PDN
F(In1,In2, ... Inn) = 0
InN
VSS
Figure 6.2 Complementary logic gate as a combination of a PUN (pull-up network) and a
PDN (pull-down network).

--- Page Break ---

232 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
In constructing the PDN and PUN networks, the following observations should be
kept in mind:
• A transistor can be thought of as a switch controlled by its gate signal. An NMOS
switch is on when the controlling signal is high and is off when the controlling signal
is low. A PMOS transistor acts as an inverse switch that is on when the controlling
signal is low and off when the controlling signal is high.
• The PDN is constructed using NMOS devices, while PMOS transistors are used in
the PUN. The primary reason for this choice is that NMOS transistors produce
“strong zeros,” and PMOS devices generate “strong ones”. To illustrate this, con-
sider the examples shown in Figure 6.3. In Figure 6.3a, the output capacitance is ini-
tially charged to VDD. Two possible discharge scenarios are shown. An NMOS
device pulls the output all the way down to GND, while a PMOS lowers the output
no further than |VTp| — the PMOS turns off at that point, and stops contributing dis-
charge current. NMOS transistors are hence the preferred devices in the PDN. Simi-
larly, two alternative approaches to charging up a capacitor are shown in Figure
6.3b, with the output initially at GND. A PMOS switch succeeds in charging the
output all the way to VDD, while the NMOS device fails to raise the output above
VDD-VTn. This explains why PMOS transistors are preferentially used in a PUN.
V → |V |
Out VDD→ 0 Out DD Tp
VDD CL CL
(a) pulling down a node using NMOS and PMOS switches Figure 6.3 Simple examples
illustrate why an NMOS should be
used as a pull-down, and a PMOS
VDD 0 → V
0→ VDD- VTn  DD should be used as a pull-up device.
Out
Out
CL
CL
(b) pulling down a node using NMOS and PMOS switches
• A set of construction rules can be derived to construct logic functions (Figure 6.4).
NMOS devices connected in series corresponds to an AND function. With all the
inputs high, the series combination conducts and the value at one end of the chain is
transferred to the other end. Similarly, NMOS transistors connected in parallel rep-
resent an OR function. A conducting path exists between the output and input termi-
nal if at least one of the inputs is high. Using similar arguments, construction rules
for PMOS networks can be formulated. A series connection of PMOS conducts if
both inputs are low, representing a NOR function (A.B = A+B), while PMOS transis-
tors in parallel implement a NAND (A+B = A·B.
• Using De Morgan’s theorems ((A + B) = A·B and A·B = A + B), it can be shown that
the pull-up and pull-down networks of a complementary CMOS structure are dual
networks. This means that a parallel connection of transistors in the pull-up network
corresponds to a series connection of the corresponding devices in the pull-down

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 233
B A
Series Combination
Parallel Combination
A B 
Conducts if A · B Conducts if A + B
(a) series (b) parallel
Figure 6.4 NMOS logic rules — series devices implement an AND, and parallel devices
implement an OR.
network, and vice versa. Therefore, to construct a CMOS gate, one of the networks
(e.g., PDN) is implemented using combinations of series and parallel devices. The
other network (i.e., PUN) is obtained using duality principle by walking the hierar-
chy, replacing series sub-nets with parallel sub-nets, and parallel sub-nets with
series sub-nets. The complete CMOS gate is constructed by combining the PDN
with the PUN.
• The complementary gate is naturally inverting, implementing only functions such as
NAND, NOR, and XNOR. The realization of a non-inverting Boolean function
(such as AND OR, or XOR) in a single stage is not possible, and requires the addi-
tion of an extra inverter stage.
• The number of transistors required to implement an N-input logic gate is 2N.
Example 6.1 Two-input NAND Gate
Figure 6.5 shows a two-input NAND gate (F = A·B). The PDN network consists of two
NMOS devices in series that conduct when both A and B are high. The PUN is the dual net-
work, and consists of two parallel PMOS transistors. This means that F is 1 if A = 0 or B = 0,
which is equivalent to F = A·B. The truth table for the simple two input NAND gate is given
in Table 6.1. It can be verified that the output F is always connected to either VDD or GND,
but never to both at the same time.
VDD
Table 6.1Truth Table for 2 input NAND
A B
A B F
F 0 0 1
0 1 1
A
1 0 1
1 1 0
B
Figure 6.5 Two-input NAND gate in complementary static CMOS style.
Example 6.2 Synthesis of complex CMOS Gate
Using complementary CMOS logic, consider the synthesis of a complex CMOS gate whose
function is F = D + A· (B +C). The first step in the synthesis of the logic gate is to derive the
pull-down network as shown in Figure 6.6a by using the fact that NMOS devices in series

--- Page Break ---

234 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
implements the AND function and parallel device implements the OR function. The next step
is to use duality to derive the PUN in a hierarchical fashion. The PDN network is broken into
smaller networks (i.e., subset of the PDN) called sub-nets that simplify the derivation of the
PUN. In Figure 6.6b, the sub-nets (SN) for the pull-down network are identified At the top
level, SN1 and SN2 are in parallel so in the dual network, they will be in series. Since SN1
consists of a single transistor, it maps directly to the pull-up network. On the other hand, we
need to recursively apply the duality rules to SN2. Inside SN2, we have SN3 and SN4 in
series so in the PUN they will appear in parallel. Finally, inside SN3, the devices are in paral-
lel so they appear in series in the PUN. The complete gate is shown in Figure 6.6c. The reader
can verify that for every possible input combination, there always exists a path to either VDD
or GND.
VDD VDD
C
SN1 F SN4 A
F
SN2 B
A A
D D SN3
B C B C D
F
A
(a) pull-down network (b) Deriving the pull-up network
hierarchically by identifying D
sub-nets
B C
Figure 6.6 Complex complementary CMOS gate.
(c) complete gate
Static Properties of Complementary CMOS Gates
Complementary CMOS gates inherit all the nice properties of the basic CMOS inverter.
They exhibit rail to rail swing with VOH = VDD and VOL = GND. The circuits also have no
static power dissipation, since the circuits are designed such that the pull-down and pull-
up networks are mutually exclusive. The analysis of the DC voltage transfer characteris-
tics and the noise margins is more complicated then for the inverter, as these parameters
depend upon the data input patterns applied to gate.
Consider the static two-input NAND gate shown in Figure 6.7. Three possible input
combinations switch the output of the gate from high-to-low: (a) A = B = 0 → 1, (b) A= 1,
B = 0 → 1, and (c) B= 1, A = 0 → 1. The resulting voltage transfer curves display signifi-
cant differences. The large variation between case (a) and the others (b & c) is explained
by the fact that in the former case both transistors in the pull-up network are on simulta-
neously for A=B=0, representing a strong pull-up. In the latter cases, only one of the pull-
up devices is on. The VTC is shifted to the left as a result of the weaker PUN.
The difference between (b) and (c) results mainly from the state of the internal node
int between the two NMOS devices. For the NMOS devices to turn on, both gate-to-
source voltages must be above VTn, with VGS2 = VA - VDS1 and VGS1 = VB. The threshold

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 235
3.0
VDD
A B
M M
3  4 A = B = 0→ 1
2.0
F
, V
out A=1, B=0→1
A M2 V
1.0
int
B=1, A=0→1
B M1
0.0
0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0
Vin, V
Figure 6.7 The VTC of a two-input NAND is data-dependent. NMOS devices are
0.5μm/0.25μm while the PMOS devices are sized at 0.75μm/0.25μm.
voltage of transistor M2 will be higher than transistor M1 due to the body effect. The
threshold voltages of the two devices are given by:
VTn2 = Vtn0 + γ ( ( 2φf + Vint) – 2φf ) (6.1)
VTn1 = Vtn0 (6.2)
For case (b), M3 is turned off, and the gate voltage of M2 is set to VDD. To a first
order, M2 may be considered as a resistor in series with M1. Since the drive on M2 is large,
this resistance is small and has only a small effect on the voltage transfer characteristics.
In case (c), transistor M1 acts as a resistor, causing body effect in M2. The overall impact
is quite small as seen from the plot.
Design Consideration
The important point to take away from the above discussion is that the noise margins are
input-pattern dependent. For the above example, a glitch on only one of the two inputs has a
larger chance of creating a false transition at the output than when the glitch would occur on
both inputs simultaneously. Therefore, the former condition has a lower low noise margin. A
common practice when characterizing gates such as NAND and NOR is to connect all the
inputs together. This unfortunately does not represent the worst-case static behavior. The data
dependencies should be carefully modeled.
Propagation Delay of Complementary CMOS Gates
The computation of propagation delay proceeds in a fashion similar to the static inverter.
For the purpose of delay analysis, each transistor is modeled as a resistor in series with an
ideal switch. The value of the resistance is dependent on the power supply voltage and an
equivalent large signal resistance, scaled by the ratio of device width over length, must be

--- Page Break ---

236 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
used. The logic is transformed into an equivalent RC network that includes the effect of
internal node capacitances. Figure 6.8 shows the two-input NAND gate and its equivalent
RC switch level model. Note that the internal node capacitance Cint —attributable to the
source/drain regions and the gate overlap capacitance of M2/M1— is included. While com-
plicating the analysis, the capacitance of the internal nodes can have quite an impact in
some networks such as large fan-in gates. In a first pass, we ignore the effect of the inter-
nal capacitance.
VDD
VDD
RP RP
A B
M3 M
4
A B
F
F RN
CL
A M A
2 Figure 6.8 Equivalent RC
model for a 2-input NAND gate.
RN
Cint
B M1
B
(a) Two-input NAND (b) RC equivalent model
A simple analysis of the model shows that—similar to the noise margins—the
propagation delay depends upon the input patterns. Consider for instance the low-to-
high transition. Three possible input scenarios can be identified for charging the output to
VDD. If both inputs are driven low, the two PMOS devices are on. The delay in this case is
0.69 × (Rp/2) × CL, since the two resistors are in parallel. This is not the worst-case low-to-
high transition, which occurs when only one device turns on, and is given by 0.69 × Rp ×
CL. For the pull-down path, the output is discharged only if both A and B are switched
high, and the delay is given by 0.69 × (2RN) × CL to a first order. In other words, adding
devices in series slows down the circuit, and devices must be made wider to avoid a per-
formance penalty. When sizing the transistors in a gate with multiple fan-in’s, we should
pick the combination of inputs that triggers the worst-case conditions.
For example, for a NAND gate to have the same pull-down delay (tphl) as a mini-
mum-sized inverter, the NMOS devices in the NAND stack must be made twice as wide
so that the equivalent resistance the NAND pull-down is the same as the inverter. The
PMOS devices can remain unchanged.
This first-order analysis assumes that the extra capacitance introduced by widening
the transistors can be ignored. This is not a good assumption in general, but allows for a
reasonable first cut at device sizing.
Example 6.3 Delay dependence on input patterns
Consider the NAND gate of Figure 6.8a. Assume NMOS and PMOS devices of
0.5μm/0.25μm and 0.75μm/0.25μm, respectively. This sizing should result in approximately
equal worst-case rise and fall times (since the effective resistance of the pull-down is
designed to be equal to the pull-up resistance).

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 237
Figure 6.9 shows the simulated low-to-high delay for different input patterns. As
expected, the case where both inputs transition go low ( A = B = 1→0) results in a smaller
delay, compared to the case where only one input is driven low. Notice that the worst-case
low-to-high delay depends upon which input (A or B) goes low. The reason for this involves
the internal node capacitance of the pull-down stack (i.e., the source of M2). For the case that
B = 1 and A transitions from 1→0, the pull-up PMOS device only has to charge up the output
node capacitance since M2 is turned off. On the other hand, for the case where A=1 and B tran-
sitions from 1→0, the pull-up PMOS device has to charge up the sum of the output and the
internal node capacitances, which slows down the transition.
3.0
A = B = 1→0 Input Data Delay
Pattern (psec)
2.0
A = B= 0→ 1 69
A = 1, B = 1→0 A = 1, B= 0→ 1 62
1.0
A= 0→ 1, B = 1 50
Voltage, V A = 1→0, B =1
A=B= 1→ 0 35
0.0
A=1, B = 1→ 0 76
-1.0 A= 1→ 0, B = 1 57
0 100 200 300 400
time, psec
Figure 6.9 Example showing the delay dependence on input patterns.
The table in Figure 6.9 shows a compilation of various delays for this circuit. The first-
order transistor sizing indeed provides approximately equal rise and fall delays. An important
point to note is that the high-to-low propagation delay depends on the state of the internal
nodes. For example, when both inputs transition from 0→1, it is important to establish the
state of the internal node. The worst-case happens when the internal node is charged up to
VDD-VTn. The worst case can be ensured by pulsing the A input from 1 →0→1, while input B
only makes the 0→1. In this way, the internal node is initialized properly.
The important point to take away from this example is that estimation of delay can be
fairly complex, and requires a careful consideration of internal node capacitances and data
patterns. Care must be taken to model the worst-case scenario in the simulations. A brute
force approach that applies all possible input patterns, may not always work as it is important
to consider the state of internal nodes.
The CMOS implementation of a NOR gate (F = A + B) is shown in Figure 6.10. The
output of this network is high, if and only if both inputs A and B are low. The worst-case
pull-down transition happens when only one of the NMOS devices turns on (i.e., if either
A or B is high). Assume that the goal is to size the NOR gate such that it has approxi-
mately the same delay as an inverter with the following device sizes: NMOS
0.5μm/0.25μm and PMOS 1.5μm/0.25μm. Since the pull-down path in the worst case is a
single device, the NMOS devices (M1 and M2) can have the same device widths as the
NMOS device in the inverter. For the output to be pulled high, both devices must be
turned on. Since the resistances add, the devices must be made two times larger compared
to the PMOS in the inverter (i.e., M3 and M4 must have a size of 3μm/0.25μm). Since
PMOS devices have a lower mobility relative to NMOS devices, stacking devices in series

--- Page Break ---

238 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
must be avoided as much as possible. A NAND implementation is clearly preferred over a
NOR implementation for implementing generic logic.
V VDD
DD
RP
B M4
B
F Figure 6.10 Sizing of a NOR gate to
R produce the same delay as an inverter with
A M3 P Cint
size of NMOS: 0.5μm/0.25μm and PMOS:
A
F 1.5μm/0.25μm.
F
A M1 B M2 R R
N  N CL
A B
Problem 6.1 Transistor Sizing in Complementary CMOS Gates
Determine the transistor sizes of the individual transistors in Figure 6.6c such that it has
approximately the same tplh and tphl as a inverter with the following sizes: NMOS:
0.5μm/0.25μm and PMOS: 1.5μm/0.25μm.
So far in the analysis of propagation delay, we have ignored the effect of internal
node capacitances. This is often a reasonable assumption for a first-order analysis. How-
ever, in more complex logic gates that have large fan-in, the internal node capacitances
can become significant. Consider a 4-input NAND gate as shown in Figure 6.11, which
shows the equivalent RC model of the gate, including the internal node capacitances. The
internal capacitances consist of the junction capacitance of the transistors, as well as the
gate-to-source and gate-to-drain capacitances. The latter are turned into capacitances to
ground using the Miller equivalence. The delay analysis for such a circuit involves solving
distributed RC networks, a problem we already encountered when analyzing the delay of
interconnect networks. Consider the pull-down delay of the circuit. The output is dis-
charged when all inputs are driven high. The proper initial conditions must be placed on
the internal nodes (this is, the internal nodes must be charged to VDD-VTN) before the
inputs are driven high.
VDD VDD
R5 R6 R7 R8
A M5 B M6 C M7 D M8
A B C D
F
R4
A M4 CL
A
R3
B M3 C3
B
R
C M2 2 C
2
C
R
D M1 1 C
1 Figure 6.11 Four input NAND
D
gate and its RC model.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 239
The propagation delay can be computed using the Elmore delay model and is
approximated as:
t = 0.69 ( R ⋅ C + ( R + R ) ⋅ C + ( R + R + R ) ⋅ C + ( R + R + R +R ) ⋅C ) (6.3)
pHL  1  1 1  2 2 1  2  3 3 1  2  3  4 L
Notice that the resistance of M1 appears in all the terms, which makes this device
especially important when attempting to minimize delay. Assuming that all NMOS
devices have an equal size, Eq. (6.3) simplifies to
t = 0.69R ( C + 2 ⋅ C + 3 ⋅ C +4 ⋅C ) (6.4)
pHL  N  1  2 3 L
Example 6.4 A Four-Input Complementary CMOS NAND Gate
In this example, the intrinsic propagation delay of the 4 input NAND gate (without any load-
ing) is evaluated using hand analysis and simulation. Assume that all NMOS devices have a
W/L of 0.5μm/0.25μm, and all PMOS devices have a device size of 0.375μm/0.25μm. The
layout of a four-input NAND gate is shown in Figure 6.12. The devices are sized such that the
worst case rise and fall time are approximately equal (to first order ignoring the internal node
capacitances).
Using techniques similar to those employed for the CMOS inverter in Chapter 3, the
capacitances values can be computed from the layout. Notice that in the pull-up path, the
PMOS devices share the drain terminal in order to reduce the overall parasitic contribution to
the output. Using our standard design rules, the area and perimeter for various devices can be
easily computed as shown in Table 6.1
In this example, we will focus on the pull-down delay, and the capacitances will be
computed for the high-to-low transition at the output. While the output makes a transition
from VDD to 0, the internal nodes only transition from VDD-VTn to GND. We would need to
linearize the internal junction capacitances for this voltage transition, but, to simplify the
analysis, we will use the same Keff for the internal nodes as for the output node.
VDD
Out
GND
A B C D
Figure 6.12 Layout a four-input NAND gate in complementary CMOS.

--- Page Break ---

240 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Table 6.1 Area and perimeter of transistors in 4 input NAND gate.
2 2
Transistor W (μm) AS (μm ) AD (μm ) PS (μm) PD(μm)
1 0.5 0.3125 0.0625 1.75 0.25
2 0.5 0.0625 0.0625 0.25 0.25
3 0.5 0.0625 0.0625 0.25 0.25
4 0.5 0.0625 0.3125 0.25 1.75
5 0.375 0.296875 0.171875 1.875 0.875
6 0.375 0.171875 0.171875 0.875 0.875
7 0.375 0.171875 0.171875 0.875 0.875
8 0.375 0.296875 0.171875 1.875 0.875
It is assumed that the output connects to a single, minimum-size inverter. The effect of
intra-cell routing, which is small, is ignored. The various contributions are summarized in
Table 6.2. For the NMOS and PMOS junctions, we use Keq = 0.57, Keqsw = 0.61, and Keq
= 0.79, Keqsw = 0.86, respectively. Notice that the gate-to-drain capacitance is multiplied
by a factor of two for all internal nodes and the output node to account for the Miller
effect (this ignores the fact that the internal nodes have a slightly smaller swing due to
the threshold drop).
Table 6.2 Computation of capacitances for high-to-low transition at the output. The table shows
the intrinsic delay of the gate without extra loading. Any fan-out capacitance would simply be
added to the CL term.
Capacitor Contributions (H→L) Value (fF) (H→L)
C1 Cd1 + Cs2 + 2 * Cgd1 + 2 * Cgs2 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
(0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
C2 Cd2 + Cs3 + 2 * Cgd2 + 2 * Cgs3 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
(0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
C3 Cd3 + Cs4 + 2 * Cgd3 + 2 * Cgs4 (0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25 * 0.28) +
(0.57 * 0.0625 * 2+ 0.61 * 0.25* 0.28) +
2 * (0.31 * 0.5) + 2 * (0.31 * 0.5) = 0.85fF
CL Cd4 + 2 * Cgd4 + Cd5 +Cd6 +Cd7 + Cd8 + (0.57 * 0.3125 * 2 + 0.61 * 1.75 *0.28) +
2 * Cgd5+2 * Cgd6+ 2 * Cgd7+ 2 * Cgd8 2 * (0.31 * 0.5)+ 4 * (0.79 * 0.171875* 1.9+ 0.86
= Cd4 + 4 * Cd5 + 4 * 2 * Cgd6 * 0.875 * 0.22)+ 4 * 2 * (0.27 * 0.375) = 3.47fF
Using Eq. (6.4), we can compute the propagation delay as:
 13KΩ 
t = 0.69 --------------- ( 0.85fF + 2 ⋅ 0.85fF + 3 ⋅ 0.85fF + 4 ⋅ 3.47fF) = 85ps
pHL   2 
The simulated delay for this particular transition was found to be 86 psec! The hand analysis
gives a fairly accurate estimate given all assumptions and linearizations made. For example,
we assume that the gate-source (or gate-drain) capacitance only consists of the overlap com-
ponent. This is not entirely the case, as during the transition some other contributions come in
place depending upon the operating region. Once again, the goal of hand analysis is not to

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 241
provide a totally accurate delay prediction, but rather to give intuition into what factors influ-
ence the delay and to aide in initial transistor sizing. Accurate timing analysis and transistor
optimization is usually done using SPICE. The simulated worst-case low-to-high delay time
for this gate was 106ps.
While complementary CMOS is a very robust and simple approach for implement-
ing logic gates, there are two major problems associated with using this style as the com-
plexity of the gate (i.e., fan-in) increases. First, the number of transistors required to
implement an N fan-in gate is 2N. This can result in significant implementation area. The
second problem is that propagation delay of a complementary CMOS gate deteriorates
rapidly as a function of the fan-in. The large number of transistors (2N) increases the over-
all capacitance of the gate. For an N-input NAND gate, the output capacitance increases
linearly with the fan-in since the number of PMOS devices connected to the output node
increases linearly with the fan-in. Also, a series connection of transistors in either the PUN
or PDN slows the gate as well, because the effective (dis)charging resistance is increased.
For the same N-input NAND gate, the effective resistance of the PDN path increases lin-
early with the fan-in. Since the output capacitance increase linearly and the pull-down
resistance increases linearly, the high-to-low delay can increase in a quadratic fashion.
The fan-out has a large impact on the delay of complementary CMOS logic as well.
Each input to a CMOS gate connects to both an NMOS and a PMOS device, and presents
a load to the driving gate equal to the sum of the gate capacitances.
The above observations are summarized by the following formula, which approxi-
mates the influence of fan-in and fan-out on the propagation delay of the complementary
CMOS gate
tp = a1FI + a2FI2 + a3FO (6.5)
where FI and FO are the fan-in and fan-out of the gate, respectively, and a1, a2 and a3 are
weighting factors that are a function of the technology.
At first glance, it would appear that the increase in resistance for larger fan-in can be
solved by making the devices in the transistor chain wider. Unfortunately, this does not
improve the performance as much as expected, since widening a device also increases its
gate and diffusion capacitances, and has an adverse affect on the gate performance. For
the N-input NAND gate, the low-to-high delay only increases linearly since the pull-up
resistance remains unchanged and only the capacitance increases linearly.
Figure 6.13 show the propagation delay for both transitions as a function of fan-in
assuming a fixed fan-out (NMOS: 0.5μm and PMOS: 1.5μm). As predicted above, the
tpLH increases linearly due to the linearly-increasing value of the output capacitance. The
simultaneous increase in the pull-down resistance and the load capacitance results in an
approximately quadratic relationship for tpHL. Gates with a fan-in greater than or equal to 4
become excessively slow and must be avoided.
Design Techniques for Large Fan-in
Several approaches may be used to reduce delays in large fan-in circuits.

--- Page Break ---

242 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
1250
1000 tpHL
750
(psec) 
tp
500
Figure 6.13 Propagation delay of
CMOS NAND gate as a function of
tpLH
250
fan-in. A fan-out of one inverter is
assumed, and all pull-down
0 transistors are minimal size.
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
Fan-in
1. Transistor Sizing
The most obvious solution is to increase the overall transistor size. This lowers the resis-
tance of devices in series and lowers the time constant. However, increasing the transistor size,
results in larger parasitic capacitors, which do not only affect the propagation delay of the gate
in question, but also present a larger load to the preceding gate. This technique should, there-
fore, be used with caution. If the load capacitance is dominated by the intrinsic capacitance of
the gate, widening the device only creates a “self-loading” effect, and the propagation delay is
unaffected. A more comprehensive approach towards sizing transistors in complex CMOS
gates is discussed in the next section.
2. Progressive Transistor Sizing
An alternate approach to uniform sizing (in which each transistor is scaled up uni-
formly), is to use progressive transistor sizing (Figure 6.14). Referring back to Eq. (6.3), we see
that the resistance of M1 (R1) appears N times in the delay equation, the resistance of M2 (R2)
appears N-1 times, etc. From the equation, it is clear that R1 should be made the smallest, R2 the
next smallest, etc. Consequently, a progressive scaling of the transistors is beneficial: M1 > M2
> M3 > MN. Basically, in this approach, the important resistance is reduced while reducing
capacitance. For an excellent treatment on the optimal sizing of transistors in a complex net-
work, we refer the interested reader to [Shoji88, pp. 131–143]. The reader should be aware of
Out
InN MN CL
C M1 > M2 > M3 > MN
In3 M 3
3
C
In2 M2 2
In1 M1 C1
Figure 6.14 Progressive sizing of transistors in large transistor
chains copes with the extra load of internal capacitances.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 243
C
In3 M L In M CL
3 1 1
C
In2 M2 2 In M C2
2 2
In1 M1 C1 In M C3
3 3
(a) (b)
Figure 6.15 Influence of transistor ordering on delay. Signal In1 is the critical signal.
one important pitfall of this approach. While progressive resizing of transistors is relatively
easy in a schematic diagram, it is not as simple in a real layout. Very often, design-rule consid-
erations force the designer to push the transistors apart, which causes the internal capacitance
to grow. This may offset all the gains of the resizing!
3. Input Re-Ordering
Some signals in complex combinational logic blocks might be more critical than others.
Not all inputs of a gate arrive at the same time (due, for instance, to the propagation delays of
the preceding logical gates). An input signal to a gate is called critical if it is the last signal of
all inputs to assume a stable value. The path through the logic which determines the ultimate
speed of the structure is called the critical path.
Putting the critical-path transistors closer to the output of the gate can result in a speed-
up. This is demonstrated in Figure 6.15. Signal In1 is assumed to be a critical signal. Suppose
further that In2 and In3 are high and that In1 undergoes a 0→1 transition. Assume also that CL
is initially charged high. In case (a), no path to GND exists until M1 is turned on, which is
unfortunately the last event to happen. The delay between the arrival of In1 and the output
is therefore determined by the time it takes to discharge CL, C1 and C2. In the second case,
C1 and C2 are already discharged when In1 changes. Only CL still has to be discharged,
resulting in a smaller delay.
4. Logic Restructuring
Manipulating the logic equations can reduce the fan-in requirements and hence reduce
the gate delay, as illustrated in Figure 6.16. The quadratic dependency of the gate delay on fan-
in makes the six-input NOR gate extremely slow. Partitioning the NOR-gate into two three-
input gates results in a significant speed-up, which offsets by far the extra delay incurred by
turning the inverter into a two-input NAND gate.
Figure 6.16 Logic restructuring
can reduce the gate fan-in.

--- Page Break ---

244 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Transistor Sizing for Performance in Combinational Networks
Earlier, we established that minimization of the propagation delay of a gate in isolation is
a purely academic effort. The sizing of devices should happen in its proper context. In
Chapter 5, we developed a methodology to do so for inverters. In Chapter 5 we found out
1/N
that an optimal fanout for a chain of inverters driving a load CL is (CL/Cin) , where N is
the number of stages in the chain, and Cin the input capacitance of the first gate in the
chain. If we have an opportunity to select the number of stages, we found out that we
would like to keep the fanout per stage around 4. Can this result be extended to determine
the size of any combinational path for minimal delay? By extending our previous
approach to address complex logic networks, we will find out that this is indeed possible
1
[Sutherland99].
To do so, we modify the basic delay equation of the inverter, introduced in Chapter
5, and repeated here for the sake of clarity,
Cext
  
tp = tp0 1 + --------- = tp0 ( 1 + f ⁄ γ) (6.6)
 γCg
to
tp = tp0 ( p + gf ⁄ γ) (6.7)
with tp0 still representing the intrinsic delay of an inverter, and f the ratio between the
external load and the input capacitance of the gate. In this context, f is often called the
electrical effort. p represents the ratio of the intrinsic (or unloaded) delays of the complex
gate and the simple inverter. The more involved structure of the multiple-input gate, com-
bined with its series devices, increases its intrinsic delay. p is a function of gate topology
as well as layout style. Table 6.3 enumerates the values of p for some standard gates,
assuming simple layout styles, and ignoring second-order effects such as internal node
capacitances.
Table 6.3 Estimates of intrinsic delay factors of various logic types assuming simple layout styles, and
a fixed PMOS/NMOS ratio.
Gate type p
Inverter 1
n-input NAND n
n-input NOR n
n-way multiplexer 2n
n-1
XOR, NXOR n2
1 
The approach introduced in this section is commonly called logical effort, and was first introduced in
[Sutherland99], which presents an extensive treatment of the topic. The treatment offered here represents only a
glance-over of the overall approach.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 245
The factor g is called the logical effort, and represents the fact that, for a given load,
complex gates have to work harder than an inverter to produce a similar response. In other
words, the logical effort of a logic gate tells how much worse it is at producing output cur-
rent than an inverter, given that each of its inputs may contain only the same input capaci-
tance as the inverter. Equivalently, logical effort is how much more input capacitance a
gate presents to deliver the same output current as an inverter. Logical effort is a useful
parameter, because it depends only on circuit topology. The logical efforts of some com-
mon logic gates are given in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4 Logic efforts of common logic gates, assuming a PMOS/NMOS ratio of 2.
Number of Inputs
Gate Type 1 2 3 n
Inverter 1
NAND 4/3 5/3 (n+2)/3
NOR 5/3 7/3 (2n+1)/3
Multiplexer 2 2 2
XOR 4 12
Example 6.5 Logical effort of complex gates
Consider the gates shown in Figure 6.17. Assuming an PMOS/NMOS ratio of 2, the input
capacitance of a minimum-sized symmetrical inverter equals 3 times the gate capacitance of a
minimum-sized NMOS (called Cunit). We size the 2-input NAND and NOR such that their
equivalent resistances equal the resistance of the inverter (using the techniques described ear-
lier). This increases the input capacitance of the 2-input NOR to 4 Cunit, or 4/3 the capacitance
of the inverter.The input capacitance of the 2-input NOR is 5/3 that of the inverter. Equiva-
lently, for the same input capacitance, the NAND and NOR gate have 4/3 and 5/3 less driving
strength than the inverter. This affects the delay component that corresponds to the load,
increasing it by this same factor, called ‘logical effort.’ Hence, gNAND = 4/3, and gNOR = 5/3.
VDD V VDD
DD
A B
A 2 2 B 4
2 
F
F A 4
A 2
F
A 1
A 1 B 1
B 2
Figure 6.17 Logical effort of 2-input NAND
and NOR gates.
Inverter 2-input NAND 2-input NOR

--- Page Break ---

246 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
The delay model of a logic gate, as
=2 represented in Eq. (6.7), is a simple
 p
linear relationship. Figure 6.18 shows
5 =4/3;
 g this relationship graphically: the delay
 p=1 is plotted as a function of the fanout
4
=1;
 g (electrical effort) for an inverter and
3 2-input NAND: for a 2-input NAND gate. The slope of
Inverter: Effort
Delay the line is the logical effort of the gate;
2 its intercept is the intrinsic delay. The
Normalized Delay
graph shows that we can adjust the
1
Intrinsic delay by adjusting the effective fanout
Delay
(by transistor sizing) or by choosing a
1 2 3 4 5 logic gate with a different logical
Fanout f effort. Observe also that fanout and
Figure 6.18 Delay as a function of fanout for an logical effort contribute to the delay in
inverter and a 2-input NAND. a similar way. We call the product of
the two h = fg the gate effort.
The total delay of a path through a combinational logic block can now be expressed
as
N N
fjgj
 
tp = tp j, = tp0 pj + ------- (6.8)
∑  ∑ γ 
j = 1 j = 1
We use a similar procedure as we did for the inverter chain in Chapter 5 to determine the
minimum delay of the path. By finding N – 1 partial derivatives and setting theme to zero,
we find that each stage should bear the same ‘effort’:
f1g1 = f2 g2 = … = fNgN (6.9)
The fanouts along the path can be multiplied to get a path effective fanout, and so can the
logical efforts.
F = f1f2…fN = CL ⁄ Cg1
(6.10)
G = g1g2…gN
The path effort can then be defined as the product of the two, or H = FG. From here on, the
analysis proceeds along the same lines as the inverter chain. The gate effort that minimizes
the path delay is found to equal
N N
h = FG = H , (6.11)
and the minimum delay through the path is
N
N
 N ( H)
D = tp0  pj + ------------------ (6.12)
∑  γ
 
j = 1

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 247
Note that the overall intrinsic delay is a function of the types of logic gates in the path, and
is not affected by the sizing.
Example 6.6 Sizing combinational logic for minimum delay
Consider the logic network of Figure 6.19, which may represent the critical path of a more
complex logic block. The output of the network is loaded with a capacitance which is 5 times
larger than the input capacitance of the first gate, which is a minimum-sized inverter. The
effective fanout of the path hence equals F = CL/Cg1 = 5. Using the entries in Table 6.4, we
find the path logical effort
5 5 25
G = 1 × --- × --- × 1 = ------
3 3 9
4
H = FG = 125/9, and the optimal stage effort h is H = 1.93. Taking into account the gate
types, we derive the fanout factors: f1 = 1.93; f2 = 1.93×(3/5) = 1.16; f3 = 1.16; f4=1.93. Notice
that the inverters are assigned larger electrical efforts than the more complex gates because
they are better at driving loads. From this, we can derive the sizes of the gates (with respect to
their minimum-sized versions): a = f1/g2 = 1.16; b = f1f2/g3= 1.34; c = f1f2f3/g4=2.60.
These calculations do not have to be very precise. As discussed in the Chapter 5, sizing
a gate too large or too small by a factor of 1.5 still result in circuits within 5% of minimum
delay. Therefore, the “back of the envelope” hand calculations using this technique are quite
effective.
1  b c 
a  5
Figure 6.19 Critical path of
combinational network.
Power Consumption in CMOS Logic Gates
The sources of power consumption in a complementary CMOS inverter were discussed in
detail in Chapter 5. Many of these issues apply directly to complex CMOS gates. The
power dissipation is a strong function of transistor sizing (which affects physical capaci-
tance), input and output rise/fall times (which affects the short-circuit power), device
thresholds and temperature (which affect leakage power), and switching activity. The
2 
dynamic power dissipation is given by α0→1 CL VDD f. Making a gate more complex
mostly affects the switching activity α0→1, which has two components: a static component
that is only a function of the topology of the logic network, and a dynamic one that results
from the timing behavior of the circuit—the latter factor is also called glitching.
Logic Function—The transition activity is a strong function of the logic function being
implemented. For static CMOS gates with statistically independent inputs, the static
transition probability is the probability p0 that the output will be in the zero state in one
cycle, multiplied by the probability p1 that the output will be in the one state in the next
cycle:
α = p • p = p • ( 1 – p ) (6.13)
0 → 1 0  1 0  0

--- Page Break ---

248 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Assuming that the inputs are independent and uniformly distributed, any N-input static
gate has a transition probability that corresponds to
 N  
N N N0 •  2 – N0
0 1
α = ------- • ------- = -------------------------------------- (6.14)
0 → 1 N N 2N
2 2 2
where N0 is the number of zero entries and N1 is the number of one entries in the output
column of the truth table of the function. To illustrate, consider a static 2-input NOR gate
whose truth table is shown in Table 6.5. Assume that only one input transition is possible
during a clock cycle, and that the inputs to the NOR gate have a uniform input distribution
—this is, the four possible states for inputs A and B (00, 01, 10, 11) are equally likely.
Table 6.5 Truth table of a 2 input NOR gate.
A B Out
0 0 1
0 1 0
1 0 0
1 1 0
From Table 6.5 and Eq. (6.14), the output transition probability of a 2-input static
CMOS NOR gate can be derived:
N  2 
N • 2 – N  3 • 2 – 3
0  0   3
α = -------------------------------------- = ----------------------------- = ------ (6.15)
0 → 1 2N 2 •2 16
2 2
Problem 6.2 N input XOR gate
Assuming the inputs to an N-input XOR gate are uncorrelated and uniformly distributed,
derive the expression for the switching activity factor.
Signal Statistics—The switching activity of a logic gate is a strong function of the input
signal statistics. Using a uniform input distribution to compute activity is not a good one
since the propagation through logic gates can significantly modify the signal statistics. For
example, consider once again a 2-input static NOR gate, and let pa and pb be the
probabilities that the inputs A and B are one. Assume further that the inputs are not
correlated. The probability that the output node equals one is given by
p1 = (1-pa) (1-pb) (6.16)
Therefore, the probability of a transition from 0 to 1 is
α0->1 = p0 p1 = (1-(1-pa) (1-pb)) (1-pa) (1-pb) (6.17)

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 249
Figure 6.20 Transition activity of
a two-input NOR gate as a
function of the input probabilities
(pA,pB)
Figure 6.20 shows the transition probability as a function of pa and pb. Observe how
this graph degrades into the simple inverter case when one of the input probabilities is set
to 0. From this plot, it is clear that understanding the signal statistics and their impact on
switching events can be used to significantly impact the power dissipation.
Problem 6.3 Power Dissipation of Basic Logic Gates
Derive the 0 → 1 output transition probabilities for the basic logic gates (AND, OR, XOR).
The results to be obtained are given in Table 6.6.
Table 6.6 Output transition probabilities for static logic gates.
α0→1
AND (1 – pApB)pApB
OR (1 – pA)(1 – pB)[1 – (1 – pA)(1 – pB)]
XOR [1 – (pA + pB – 2pApB)](pA + pB – 2pApB)
Inter-signal Correlations—The evaluation of the switching activity is further
complicated by the fact that signals exhibit correlation in space and time. Even if the
primary inputs to a logic network are uncorrelated, the signals become correlated or
“colored”, as they propagate through the logic network. This is best illustrated with a
simple example. Consider first the circuit shown in Figure 6.21a, and assume that the
primary inputs, A and B, are uncorrelated and uniformly distributed. Node C has a 1 (0)
probability of 1/2, and a 0->1 transition probability of 1/4. The probability that the node Z
undergoes a power consuming transition is then determined using the AND-gate expres-
sion of Table 6.6.
p0->1 = (1- pa pb) pa pb = (1-1/2 • 1/2) 1/2 • 1/2 = 3/16 (6.18)

--- Page Break ---

250 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
A C  C
A
Z
Z
B
B
(a) Logic circuit without (b) Logic circuit with
reconvergent fanout reconvergent fanout
Figure 6.21 Example illustrating the effect of signal correlations.
The computation of the probabilities is straightforward: signal and transition proba-
bilities are evaluated in an ordered fashion, progressing from the input to the output node.
This approach, however, has two major limitations: (1) it does not deal with circuits with
feedback as found in sequential circuits; (2) it assumes that the signal probabilities at the
input of each gate are independent. This is rarely the case in actual circuits, where recon-
vergent fanout often causes inter-signal dependencies. For instance, the inputs to the AND
gate in Figure 6.21b (C and B) are inter-dependent as both are a function of A. The
approach to compute probabilities, presented previously, fails under these circumstances.
Traversing from inputs to outputs yields a transition probability of 3/16 for node Z, similar
to the previous analysis. This value for transition probability is clearly false, as logic trans-
formations show that the network can be reduced to Z = C•B = A•A = 0, and no transition
will ever take place.
To get the precise results in the progressive analysis approach, its is essential to take
signal inter-dependencies into account. This can be accomplished with the aid of condi-
tional probabilities. For an AND gate, Z equals 1 if and only if B and C are equal to 1.
pZ = p(Z=1) = p(B=1, C=1) (6.19)
where p(B=1,C=1) represents the probability that B and C are equal to 1 simultaneously. If
B and C are independent, p(B=1,C=1) can be decomposed into p(B=1) • p(C=1), and this
yields the expression for the AND-gate, derived earlier: pZ = p(B=1) • p(C=1) = pB pC. If a
dependency between the two exists (as is the case in Figure 6.21b), a conditional probabil-
ity has to be employed, such as
pZ = p(C=1|B=1) • p(B=1) (6.20)
The first factor in Eq. (6.20) represents the probability that C=1 given that B=1. The
extra condition is necessary as C is dependent upon B. Inspection of the network shows
that this probability is equal to 0, since C and B are logical inversions of each other, result-
ing in the signal probability for Z, pZ = 0.
Deriving those expressions in a structured way for large networks with reconvergent
fanout is complex, especially when the networks contain feedback loops. Computer sup-
port is therefore essential. To be meaningful, the analysis program has to process a typical
sequence of input signals, as the power dissipation is a strong function of statistics of those
signals.
Dynamic or Glitching Transitions—When analyzing the transition probabilities of
complex, multistage logic networks in the preceding section, we ignored the fact that the
gates have a non-zero propagation delay. In reality, the finite propagation delay from one

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 251
Out1 Out2 Out3 Out4 Out5
1
...
3.0
Out6
Out2
2.0 Out
6
Out8
Voltage, V
1.0 Out7
Out
1 Figure 6.22 Glitching in a chain of NAND
Out
5 gates.
Out3
0.0
0  200  400  600
time, psec
logic block to the next can cause spurious transitions, called glitches, critical races, or
dynamic hazards, to occur: a node can exhibit multiple transitions in a single clock cycle
before settling to the correct logic level.
A typical example of the effect of glitching is shown in Figure 6.22, which displays
the simulated response of a chain of NAND gates for all inputs going simultaneously from
0 to 1. Initially, all the outputs are 1 since one of the inputs was 0. For this particular tran-
sition, all the odd bits must transition to 0 while the even bits remain at the value of 1.
However, due to the finite propagation delay, the higher order even outputs start to dis-
charge and the voltage drops. When the correct input ripples through the network, the out-
put goes high. The glitch on the even bits causes extra power dissipation beyond what is
required to strictly implement the logic function. Although the glitches in this example are
only partial (i.e., not from rail to rail), they contribute significantly to the power dissipa-
tion. Long chains of gates often occur in important structures such as adders and multipli-
ers and the glitching component can easily dominate the overall power consumption.
Design Techniques to Reduce Switching Activity
The dynamic power of a logic gate can be reduced by minimizing the physical capacitance and
the switching activity. The physical capacitance can be minimized in a number ways, including
circuit style selection, transistor sizing, placement and routing, and architectural optimizations.
The switching activity, on the other hand, can be minimized at all level of the design abstrac-
tion, and is the focus of this section. Logic structures can be optimized to minimize both the
fundamental transitions required to implement a given function, and the spurious transitions.
1. Logic Restructuring
Changing the topology of a logic network may reduce its power dissipation. Consider for
instance two alternate implementations of F = A • B • C • D, as shown in Figure 6.23. Ignore

--- Page Break ---

252 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
A O
A O1  1
O2 
B
B  F F
C 
D
C
D O2
Chain structure Tree structure
Figure 6.23 Simple example to demonstrate the influence of circuit topology on activity.
glitching and assume that all primary inputs (A,B,C,D) are uncorrelated and uniformly distrib-
uted (i.e., p1 (a,b,c,d)= 0.5). Using the expressions from Table 6.6, the activity can be computed
for the two topologies, as shown in Table 6.7. The results indicate that the chain implementa-
tion will have an overall lower switching activity than the tree implementation for random
inputs. However, as mentioned before, it is also important to consider the timing behavior to
accurately make power trade-offs. In this example the tree topology will have lower (no)
glitching activity since the signal paths are balanced to all the gates.
Table 6.7Probabilities for tree and chain topologies.
O1 O2 F
p1 (chain) 1/4 1/8 1/16
p0 = 1-p1 (chain) 3/4 7/8 15/16
p0->1 (chain) 3/16 7/64 15/256
p1 (tree) 1/4 1/4 1/16
p0 = 1-p1 (tree) 3/4 3/4 15/16
p0->1 (tree) 3/16 3/16 15/256
2. Input ordering
Consider the two static logic circuits of Figure 6.24. The probabilities of A, B and C being 1 are
listed in the Figure. Since both circuits implement identical logic functionality, it is clear that
the activity at the output node Z is equal in both cases. The difference is in the activity at the
intermediate node. In the first circuit, this activity equals (1 − 0.5 × 0.2) (0.5 × 0.2) = 0.09. In
the second case, the probability that a 0 → 1 transition occurs equals (1 – 0.2 × 0.1) (0.2 × 0.1)
= 0.0196. This is substantially lower. From this we learn that it is beneficial to postpone the
introduction of signals with a high transition rate (i.e., signals with a signal probability close to
0.5). A simple reordering of the input signals is often sufficient to accomplish that goal.
3. Time-multiplexing resources
Time-multiplexing a single hardware resource—such as a logic unit or a bus—over a number
functions is an often used technique to minimize the implementation area. Unfortunately, the
minimum area solution does not always result in the lowest switching activity. For example,
consider the transmission of two input bits (A and B) using either dedicated resources or a time-
multiplexed approach, as shown in Figure 6.25. To first order—ignoring the multiplexer over-

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 253
A B
p(A = 1) = 0.5
p(B = 1) = 0.2
B C
p(C = 1) = 0.1
Z Z
C A
Figure 6.24 Reordering of inputs affects the circuit activity.
head—, it would seem that the degree of time-multiplexing should not affect the switched
capacitance, since the time-multiplexed solution has half the capacitance switched at twice the
frequency (for a fixed throughput).
If data being transmitted were random, it will make no difference which architecture is
used. However if the data signals have some distinct properties (called temporal correlation),
the power dissipation of the time-multiplexed solution can be significantly higher. Suppose, for
instance, that A is always (or mostly) 1 and B is (mostly) 0. In the parallel solution, the
switched capacitance is very low since there are very few transitions on the data bits. However,
in the time-multiplexed solution, the bus toggles between 0 and 1. Care must be taken in digital
systems to avoid time-multiplexing data streams with very distinct data characteristics.
A
A 0
C t 0 A
t
B 1
C 1 B
B
C t
(a) parallel data transmission (b) serial data transmission
Figure 6.25 Parallel versus time-multiplexed data busses.
4. Glitch Reduction by balancing signal paths
The occurrence of glitching in a circuit is mainly due to a mismatch in the path lengths in the
network. If all input signals of a gate change simultaneously, no glitching occurs. On the other
hand, if input signals change at different times, a dynamic hazard might develop. Such a mis-
match in signal timing is typically the result of different path lengths with respect to the pri-
mary inputs of the network. This is illustrated in Figure 6.26. Assume that the XOR gate has a
unit delay. The first network (a) suffers from glitching as a result of the wide disparity between
the arrival times of the input signals for a gate. For example, for gate F3, one input settles at
time 0, while the second one only arrives at time 2. Redesigning the network so that all arrival
times are identical can dramatically reduce the number of superfluous transitions (network b).
Summary
The CMOS logic style described in the previous section is highly robust and scalable with

--- Page Break ---

254 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
0
F1
0
0 1 
2 1
F1
0 F2 F3
F3
0  1
0 0
F2
0
(a) Network sensitive to glitching (b) Glitch-free network
Figure 6.26 Glitching is influenced by matching of signal path lengths. The annotated numbers
indicate the signal arrival times.
technology, but requires 2N transistors to implement a N-input logic gate. Also, the load
capacitance is significant, since each gate drives two devices (a PMOS and an NMOS) per
fan-out. This has opened the door for alternative logic families that either are simpler or
faster.
6.2.2 Ratioed Logic
Concept
Ratioed logic is an attempt to reduce the number of transistors required to implement a
given logic function, at the cost of reduced robustness and extra power dissipation. The
purpose of the PUN in complementary CMOS is to provide a conditional path between
VDD and the output when the PDN is turned off. In ratioed logic, the entire PUN is replaced
with a single unconditional load device that pulls up the output for a high output (Figure
6.27a). Instead of a combination of active pull-down and pull-up networks, such a gate
consists of an NMOS pull-down network that realizes the logic function, and a simple load
device. Figure 6.27b shows an example of ratioed logic, which uses a grounded PMOS
load and is referred to as a pseudo-NMOS gate.
VDD VDD
PMOS
load
load
F F
In1 In1
In2 PDN In2 PDN
In3 In3
(a) generic (b) pseudo-NMOS
Figure 6.27 Ratioed logic gate.
The clear advantage of pseudo-NMOS is the reduced number of transistors (N+1
versus 2N for complementary CMOS). The nominal high output voltage (VOH) for this
gate is VDD since the pull-down devices are turned off when the output is pulled high
(assuming that VOL is below VTn). On the other hand, the nominal low output voltage is

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 255
not 0 V since there is a fight between the devices in the PDN and the grounded PMOS
load device. This results in reduced noise margins and more importantly static power dis-
sipation. The sizing of the load device relative to the pull-down devices can be used to
trade-off parameters such a noise margin, propagation delay and power dissipation. Since
the voltage swing on the output and the overall functionality of the gate depends upon the
ratio between the NMOS and PMOS sizes, the circuit is called ratioed. This is in contrast
to the ratioless logic styles, such as complementary CMOS, where the low and high levels
do not depend upon transistor sizes.
Computing the dc-transfer characteristic of the pseudo-NMOS proceeds along paths
similar to those used for its complementary CMOS counterpart. The value of VOL is
obtained by equating the currents through the driver and load devices for Vin = VDD. At
this operation point, it is reasonable to assume that the NMOS device resides in linear
mode (since the output should ideally be close to 0V), while the PMOS load is saturated.
2
VOL2 VDSAT
    
kn ( VDD – VTn)VOL – --------- = kp ( – VDD – VTp) ⋅ VDSAT – -------------- (6.21)
 2   2 
Assuming that VOL is small relative to the gate drive (VDD-VT) and that VTn is equal
to VTp in magnitude, VOL can be approximated as:
kp ( – VDD – VTp) ⋅ VDSAT μp ⋅ Wp
VOL ≈ --------------------------------------------------------- ≈ ----------------- ⋅ VDSAT (6.22)
kn ( VDD – VTn) μn ⋅ Wn
In order to make VOL as small as possible, the PMOS device should be sized much
smaller than the NMOS pull-down devices. Unfortunately, this has a negative impact on
the propagation delay for charging up the output node since the current provided by the
PMOS device is limited.
A major disadvantage of the pseudo-NMOS gate is the static power that is dissi-
pated when the output is low through the direct current path that exists between VDD and
GND. The static power consumption in the low-output mode is easily derived
2
VDSATp
 
Plow = VDDIlow ≈ VDD ⋅ kp ( – VDD – VTp) ⋅ VDSATp – ----------------- (6.23)
 2 
Example 6.7 Pseudo-NMOS Inverter
Consider a simple pseudo-NMOS inverter (where the PDN network in Figure 6.27 degener-
ates to a single transistor) with an NMOS size of 0.5μm/0.25μm. The effect of sizing the
PMOS device is studied in this example to demonstrate the impact on various parameters.
The W/L ratio of the grounded PMOS is varied over values from 4, 2, 1, 0.5 to 0.25. Devices
with a W/L < 1 are constructed by making the length longer than the width. The voltage trans-
fer curve for the different sizes is plotted in Figure 6.28.
Table 6.8 summarizes the nominal output voltage (VOL), static power dissipation, and
the low-to-high propagation delay. The low-to-high delay is measured as the time to reach
1.25V from VOL (which is not 0V for this inverter). This is chosen since the load gate is a
CMOS inverter with a switching threshold of 1.25V. The trade-off between the static and
dynamic properties is apparent. A larger pull-up device improves performance, but increases
static power dissipation and lowers noise margins (i.e., increases VOL).

--- Page Break ---

256 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
3.0
2.5
2.0 W/Lp = 4
1.5
, V W/L = 2
out p 
V 1.0
W/Lp = 0.5 W/Lp = 1
0.5
Figure 6.28 Voltage-transfer curves of
W/Lp = .25
the pseudo-NMOS inverter as a
0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 function of the PMOS size.
Vin, V
Table 6.8Performance of a pseudo-NMOS inverter.
Static Power
Size VOL Dissipation tplh
4 0.693V 564μW 14ps
2 0.273V 298μW 56ps
1 .133V 160μW 123ps
0.5 0.064V 80μW 268ps
0.25 0.031V 41μW 569ps
Notice that the simple first-order model to predict VOL is quite effective. For a
PMOS W/L of 4, VOL is given by (30/115) (4) (0.63V) = 0.66V.
The static power dissipation of pseudo-NMOS limits its use. However, pseudo-
NMOS still finds use in large fan-in circuits. Figure 6.29 shows the schematics of pseudo-
NMOS NOR and NAND gates. When area is most important, the reduced transistor count
compared to complimentary CMOS is quite attractive.
VDD
VDD
Out
In1
F
CL
A B C D
In2
In3
(a) NOR
Figure 6.29 Four-input pseudo-NMOS NOR
In4 (b) NAND
and NAND gates.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 257
Problem 6.4 NAND Versus NOR in Pseudo-NMOS
Given the choice between NOR or NAND logic, which one would you prefer for implementa-
tion in pseudo-NMOS?
How to Build Even Better Loads
It is possible to create a ratioed logic style that completely eliminates static currents and
provides rail-to-rail swing. Such a gate combines two concepts: differential logic and pos-
itive feedback. A differential gate requires that each input is provided in complementary
format, and produces complementary outputs in turn. The feedback mechanism ensures
that the load device is turned off when not needed. A example of such a logic family,
called Differential Cascode Voltage Switch Logic (or DCVSL), is presented conceptually
in Figure 6.30a [Heller84].
The pull-down networks PDN1 and PDN2 use NMOS devices and are mutually
exclusive (this is, when PDN1 conducts, PDN2 is off, and when PDN1 is off, PDN2 con-
ducts), such that the required logic function and its inverse are simultaneously imple-
mented. Assume now that, for a given set of inputs, PDN1 conducts while PDN2 does not,
and that Out and Out are initially high and low, respectively. Turning on PDN1, causes
Out to be pulled down, although there is still a fight between M1 and PDN1. Out is in a
high impedance state, as M2 and PDN2 are both turned off. PDN1 must be strong enough
to bring Out below VDD-|VTp|, the point at which M2 turns on and starts charging Out to
VDD —eventually turning off M1. This in turn enables Out to discharge all the way to GND.
Figure 6.30b shows an example of an XOR/XNOR gate. Notice that it is possible to share
transistors among the two pull-down networks, which reduces the implementation over-
head
VDD VDD V
DD
M1 M2 Out
Out
Out Out
A B B B B
A
PDN1 PDN2
B
B
A A
(a) Basic principle (b) XOR-XNOR gate
Figure 6.30 DCVSL logic gate.
The resulting circuit exhibits a rail-to-rail swing, and the static power dissipation is
eliminated: in steady state, none of the stacked pull-down networks and load devices are
simultaneously conducting. However, the circuit is still ratioed since the sizing of the
PMOS devices relative to the pull-down devices is critical to functionality, not just perfor-

--- Page Break ---

258 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
mance. In addition to the problem of increase complexity in design, this circuit style still
has a power-dissipation problem that is due to cross-over currents. During the transition,
there is a period of time when PMOS and PDN are turned on simultaneously, producing a
short circuit path.
Example 6.8 DCVSL Transient Response
An example transient response is shown for an AND/NAND gate in DCVSL. Notice
that as Out is pulled down to VDD-|VTp|, Out starts to charge up to VDD quickly. The
delay from the input to Out is 197 psec and to Out is 321 psec. A static CMOS AND
gate (NAND followed by an inverter) has a delay of 200ps.
2.5
Out = A B Out = A B
 A B
1.5
A B
A M1
A M3 B M4 Voltage,V A,B
0.5 A,B 
B M2
-0.5
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Time, ns
Figure 6.31Transient response of a simple AND/NAND DCVSL gate. M1 and M2
1μm/0.25μm, M3 and M4 are 0.5μm/0.25μm and the cross-coupled PMOS devices are
1.5μm/0.25μm.
Design Consideration: Single-ended versus Differential
The DCVSL gate provides differential (or complementary) outputs. Both the output signal
(Vout1) and its inverted value (Vout2) are simultaneously available. This is a distinct advantage,
as it eliminates the need for an extra inverter to produce the complementary signal. It has been
observed that a differential implementation of a complex function may reduce the number of
gates required by a factor of two! The number of gates in the critical timing path is often
reduced as well. Finally, the approach prevents some of the time-differential problems intro-
duced by additional inverters. For example, in logic design it often happens that both a signal
and its complement are needed simultaneously. When the complementary signal is generated
using an inverter, the inverted signal is delayed with respect to the original (Figure 6.32a). This
causes timing problems, especially in very high-speed designs. The differential output capabil-
ity avoids this problem (Figure 6.32b).
With all these positive properties, why not always use differential logic? Well, the differ-
ential nature virtually doubles the number of wires that has to be routed, leading very often to
unwieldy designs (on top of the additional implementation overhead in the individual gates).
Additionally, the dynamic power dissipation is high.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 259
Vout2
V
out1  Vout2 V
Vin in
Vout1
Vout1  Vout2 Vout1 V
out2
Figure 6.32 Advantage of differential
(a) Single-ended  (b) over single-ended (a) gate.
(b) Differential
6.2.3 Pass-Transistor Logic
Pass-Transistor Basics
A popular and widely-used alternative to complementary CMOS is pass-transistor logic,
which attempts to reduce the number of transistors required to implement logic by allow-
ing the primary inputs to drive gate terminals as well as source/drain terminals
[Radhakrishnan85]. This is in contrast to logic families that we have studied so far, which
only allow primary inputs to drive the gate terminals of MOSFETS.
Figure 6.33 shows an implementation of the AND
B
function constructed that way, using only NMOS tran-
sistors. In this gate, if the B input is high, the top transis-
A
tor is turned on and copies the input A to the output F. B 
F = AB
When B is low, the bottom pass transistor is turned on
and passes a 0. The switch driven by B seems to be 0
redundant at first glance. Its presence is essential to Figure 6.33 Pass-transistor
ensure that the gate is static, this is that a low-imped- implementation of an AND gate.
ance path exists to the supply rails under all circum-
stances, or, in this particular case, when B is low.
The promise of this approach is that fewer transistors are required to implement a given
function. For example, the implementation of the AND gate in Figure 6.33 requires 4 tran-
sistors (including the inverter required to invert B), while a complementary CMOS imple-
mentation would require 6 transistors. The reduced number of devices has the additional
advantage of lower capacitance.
Unfortunately, as discussed earlier, an NMOS device is effective at passing a 0 but
is poor at pulling a node to VDD. When the pass transistor pulls a node high, the output
only charges up to VDD -VTn. In fact, the situation is worsened by the fact that the devices
experience body effect, as there exists a significant source-to-body voltage when pulling
high. Consider the case when the pass transistor is charging up a node with the gate and
drain terminals set at VDD. Let the source of the NMOS pass transistor be labeled x. Node
x will charge up to VDD-VTn(Vx):
Vx = VDD – ( Vtn0 + γ ( ( 2φf + Vx) – 2φf )) (6.24)

--- Page Break ---

260 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Example 6.9 Voltage swing for pass transistors circuits
Assuming a power supply voltage of 2.5V, the transient response of Figure 6.34 shows the
output of a NMOS charging up (where the drain voltage is at VDD and the gate voltage in is
ramped from 0V to VDD). Assume that node x was initially 0. Also notice that if IN is low,
3.0
In
IN
Out
1.5μm/0.25μm 2.0
x
VDD x
Out
0.5μm/0.25μm 
Voltage, V
0.5μm/0.25μm 1.0
0.0
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Time, ns
Figure 6.34 Transient response of charging up a node using an N device. Notice the slow tail
after an initial quick response.
node x is in a high impedance state (not driven to one of the rails using a low resistance path).
Extra transistors can be added to provide a path to GND, but for this discussion, the simplified
circuit is sufficient. Notice that the output charges up quickly initially, but has slow tail. This
is attributed to the fact that the drive (gate to source voltage) reduces significantly as the out-
put approaches VDD-VTn and the current available to charge up node x reduces drastically.
Hand calculation using Eq. (6.24), results in an output voltage of 1.8V, which comes close to
the simulated value.
WARNING:
The above example demonstrates that pass-transistor gates cannot be cascaded by con-
necting the output of a pass gate to the gate input of another pass transistor. This is
illustrated in Figure 6.35a, where the output of M1 (node x) drives the gate of another
MOS device. Node x can charge up to VDD-VTn1. If node C has a rail to rail swing, node Y
only charges up to the voltage on node x - VTn2, which works out to VDD-VTn1-VTn2. Figure
6.35b on the other hand has the output of M1 (x) driving the junction of M2, and there is
only one threshold drop. This is the proper way of cascading pass gates.
B
x B C
A
M1
x Y
A Out
Y M1 M2
C  Out
M2
Swing on Y = VDD- VTn1
Swing on Y = VDD- VTn- VTn2
(b)
(a) 
Figure 6.35 Pass transistor output (Drain/Source) terminal should not drive other gate terminals to
avoid multiple threshold drops.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 261
Example 6.10 VTC of the pass transistor AND gate
The voltage transfer curve of a pass-transistor gate shows little resemblance to complemen-
tary CMOS. Consider the AND gate shown in Figure 6.36. Similar to complementary CMOS,
the VTC of pass transistor logic is data-dependent. For the case when B = VDD, the top pass
transistor is turned on, while the bottom one is turned off. In this case, the output just follows
the input A until the input is high enough to turn off the top pass transistor (i.e., reaches VDD-
VTn). Next consider the case when A=VDD, and B makes a transition from 0 → 1. Since the
inverter has a threshold of VDD/2, the bottom pass transistor is turned on till then and the out-
put is close to zero. Once the bottom pass transistor turns off, the output follows the input B
minus a threshold drop. A similar behavior is observed when both inputs A and B transition
from 0 → 1.
Observe that a pure pass-transistor gate is not regenerative. A gradual signal degrada-
tion will be observed after passing through a number of subsequent stages. This can be reme-
died by the occasional insertion of a CMOS inverter. With the inclusion of an inverter in the
signal path, the VTC resembles the one of CMOS gates.
1.5μm/0.25μm
2.0
0.5μm/0.25μm  B=V , A = 0→V
DD DD
B , V
out
V
A
0.5μm/0.25μm 1.0
B  A=Vdd, B = 0→VDD
F = AB
A= B = 0→VDD
0
0.5μm/0.25μm
0.0
0.0 1.0 2.0
Vin, V
Figure 6.36 Voltage Transfer Characteristic for the pass-transistor AND gate of Figure 6.33.
Pass-transistors require lower switching energy to charge up a node due to the
reduced voltage swing. For the pass transistor circuit in Figure 6.34 assume that the drain
voltage is at VDD and the gate voltage transitions to VDD. The output node charges from 0V
to VDD-VTn (assuming that node x was initially at 0V) and the energy drawn from the
power supply for charging the output of a pass transistor is given by:
( V –V )
T T DD  Tn
E = P t( )dt = V i ( )t dt = V C dV = C •V •( V –V ) (6.25)
0 → 1 ∫  DD ∫ supply  DD ∫ L out L  DD  DD  Tn
0 0 0
While the circuit exhibits lower switching power, it may consumes static power
when the output is high—the reduced voltage level may be insufficient to turn off the
PMOS transistor of the subsequent CMOS inverter.

--- Page Break ---

262 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
A
Pass-Transistor
A
F
B Network
B
A
Inverse
A Pass-Transistor F
B
Network
B
(a) Basic concept
B B B B B B
A A A
B F = AB B F = A + B A F = A ⊕ B
A A A
B F = AB B F = A + B A F = A ⊕ B
AND/NAND OR/NOR XOR/NXOR
(b) Example pass-transistor networks
Figure 6.37 Complementary pass-transistor logic (CPL).
Differential Pass Transistor Logic
For high performance design, a differential pass-transistor logic family, called CPL or
DPL, is commonly used. The basic idea (similar to DCVSL) is to accept true and comple-
mentary inputs and produce true and complementary outputs. A number of CPL gates
(AND/NAND, OR/NOR, and XOR/NXOR) are shown in Figure 6.37. These gates pos-
sess a number of interesting properties:
• Since the circuits are differential, complementary data inputs and outputs are always
available. Although generating the differential signals requires extra circuitry, the
differential style has the advantage that some complex gates such as XORs and
adders can be realized efficiently with a small number of transistors. Furthermore,
the availability of both polarities of every signal eliminates the need for extra invert-
ers, as is often the case in static CMOS or pseudo-NMOS.
• CPL belongs to the class of static gates, because the output-defining nodes are
always connected to either VDD or GND through a low resistance path. This is
advantageous for the noise resilience.
• The design is very modular. In effect, all gates use exactly the same topology. Only
the inputs are permutated. This makes the design of a library of gates very simple.
More complex gates can be built by cascading the standard pass-transistor modules.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 263
Example 6.11 Four-input NAND in CPL
Consider the implementation of a four-input AND/NAND gate using CPL. Based on the asso-
ciativity of the boolean AND operation [A·B·C·D = (A·B)·(C·D)], a two-stage approach has
been adopted to implement the gate (Figure 6.38). The total number of transistors in the gate
(including the final buffer) is 14. This is substantially higher than previously discussed gates.
This factor, combined with the complicated routing requirements, makes this circuit style not
particularly efficient for this gate. One should, however, be aware of the fact that the structure
simultaneously implements the AND and the NAND functions, which might reduce the tran-
sistor count of the overall circuit.
B B
B A Out C D
A
B X
X X
X Y A
B X Y
X Out
D D
X Y Y
C X Out
D Y
C
B A Out C D
D Y
Figure 6.38 Layout and schematics of four-input NAND-gate using CPL (the final inverter stage is
omitted). See also Colorplate 9.
In summary, CPL is a conceptually simple and modular logic style. Its applicability
depends strongly upon the logic function to be implemented. The availability of a simple
XOR as well of the ease of implementing some specific gate structures makes it attractive
for structures such as adders and multipliers. Some extremely fast and efficient implemen-
tations have been reported in that application domain [Yano90]. When considering CPL,
the designer should not ignore the implicit routing overhead of the complementary signals,
which is apparent in the layout of Figure 6.38.
Robust and Efficient Pass-Transistor Design
Unfortunately, differential pass-transistor logic, like single-ended pass-transistor logic,
suffers from static power dissipation and reduced noise margins, since the high input to
the signal-restoring inverter only charges up to VDD-VTn. There are several solutions pro-
posed to deal with this problem as outlined below.
Solution 1: Level Restoration. A common solution to the voltage drop problem is the
use of a level restorer, which is a single PMOS configured in a feedback path (Figure
6.39). The gate of the PMOS device is connected to the output of the inverter, its drain
connected to the input of the inverter and the source to VDD. Assume that node X is at 0V
(out is at VDD and the Mr is turned off) with B = VDD and A = 0. If input A makes a 0 to VDD
transition, Mn only charges up node X to VDD-VTn. This is, however, enough to switch the

--- Page Break ---

264 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
output of the inverter low, turning on the feedback device Mr and pulling node X all the
way to VDD. This eliminates any static power dissipation in the inverter. Furthermore, no
static current path can exist through the level restorer and the pass-transistor, since the
restorer is only active when A is high. In summary, this circuit has the advantage that all
voltage levels are either at GND or VDD, and no static power is consumed.
Level restorer VDD
VDD
Mr
B
M2
X Out
A Mn
M1
Figure 6.39 Level-restoring circuit.
While this solution is appealing in terms of eliminating static power dissipation, it
adds complexity since the circuit is now ratioed. The problem arises during the transition
of node X from high-to-low. The pass transistor network attempts to pull-down node X
while the level restorer pulls now X to VDD. Therefore, the pull-down device must be
stronger than the pull-up device in order to switch node X and the output. Some careful
transistor sizing is necessary to make the circuit function correctly. Assume the notation
R1 to denote the equivalent on-resistance of transistor M1, R2 for M2, and so on. When Rr is
made too small, it is impossible to bring the voltage at node X below the switching thresh-
old of the inverter. Hence, the inverter output never switches to VDD, and the level-restor-
ing transistor stays on. This sizing problem can be reformulated as follows: the resistance
of Mn and Mr must be such that the voltage at node X drops below the threshold of the
inverter, VM = f(R1, R2). This condition is sufficient to guarantee a switching of the output
voltage Vout to VDD and a turning off of the level-restoring transistor.
VDD
VDD
Mr
B
M2
X
Mn Out
A = 0
M1 Figure 6.40 Transistor-sizing problem
for level-restoring circuit.
Example 6.12 Sizing of a Level Restorer
Analyzing the circuit as a whole is nontrivial, because the restoring transistor acts as a feed-
back device. One way to simplify the circuit for manual analysis is to open the feedback loop
and to ground the gate of the restoring transistor when determining the switching point (this is
a reasonable assumption, as the feedback only becomes effective once the inverter starts to

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 265
switch). Hence, Mr and Mn form a “pseudo-NMOS-like” configuration, with Mr the load tran-
sistor and Mn acting as a pull-down device to GND. Assume that the inverter M1, M2 is sized
to have the switching point at VDD/2 (NMOS: 0.5μm/0.25μm and PMOS: 1.5μm/0.25μm).
Therefore, node X must be pulled below VDD/2 in order to switch the inverter and shut off Mr.
This is confirmed in Figure 6.42, which shows the transient response as the size of the
level restorer is varied while keeping the size of Mn fixed (0.5μm/0.25μm). As the simulation
indicates, for sizes above 1.5μm/0.25μm, node X can’t be brought below the switching
threshold of the inverter and can’t switch the output. The detailed derivation of sizing require-
ment will be presented in the sequential design chapter. An important point to observe here is
that the sizing of Mr is critical for DC functionality, not just performance!
3.0
2.0
W/Lr =1.75/0.25
W/Lr =1.50/0.25
Voltage, V
1.0
Figure 6.41Transient response of the
circuit in Figure 6.40. A level restorer
W/Lr =1.0/0.25 W/Lr =1.25/0.25
that is too large can result in incorrect
evaluation.
0.0
0 100 200 300 400 500
Time, psec
Another concern is the influence of the level restorer on the switching speed of the
device. Adding the restoring device increases the capacitance at the internal node X, slow-
ing down the gate. The rise time of the gate is further negatively affected, since, the level-
restoring transistor Mr fights the decrease in voltage at node X before being switched off.
On the other hand, the level restorer reduces the fall time, since the PMOS transistor, once
turned on, speeds the pull-up action.
Problem 6.5 Device Sizing in Pass Transistors
For the circuit shown in Figure 6.40, assume that the pull-down device consists of 6 pass tran-
sistors in series each with a device size of 0.5μm/0.25μm (replacing transistor Mn). Determine
the maximum W/L size for the level restorer transistor for correct functionality.
A modification of the level-restorer, applicable in differential networks and known
as swing-restored pass transistor logic, is shown in Figure 6.42. Instead of a simple
inverter or half-latch at the output of the pass transistor network, two back-to-back invert-
ers, configured in a cross-coupled fashion, are used for level restoration and performance
improvement. Inputs are fed to both the gate and source/drain terminals as in the case of
conventional pass transistor networks. Figure 6.42 shows a simple XOR/XNOR gate of
three variables A, B and C. Notice that the complementary network can be optimized by
sharing transistors between the true and complementary outputs.

--- Page Break ---

266 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
VDD VDD
VDD VDD
M2 M2
Out Out M2 M2
Out Out
M1 M1
M1 M1
Complementary Output
NMOS Pass Transistor Network
C C C C
B B B B
Complementary inputs A A A A
to gate and source/drain
terminals 
(a) general concept (b) XOR/XNOR gate
Figure 6.42 Swing-restored pass transistor logic [Parameswar96].
Solution 2: Multiple-Threshold Transistors. A technology solution to the voltage-drop
problem associated with pass-transistor logic is the use of multiple-threshold devices.
Using zero threshold devices for the NMOS pass-transistors eliminates most of the thresh-
old drop, and passes a signal close to VDD. Notice that even if the devices threshold was
implanted to be exactly equal to zero, the body effect of the device prevents a swing to
VDD. All devices other than the pass transistors (i.e., the inverters) are implemented using
standard high-threshold devices. The use of multiple-threshold transistors is becoming
more common, and involves simple modifications to existing process flows.
VDD
Zero (or low)-threshold transistor
VDD
0 V  2.5 V
V 0 V Out
DD
2.5 V
Figure 6.43 Static power consumption when
using zero-threshold pass-transistors.
The use of zero-threshold transistors can be dangerous due to the subthreshold cur-
rents that can flow through the pass-transistors, even if VGS is slightly below VT. This is
demonstrated in Figure 6.43, which points out a potential sneak dc-current path. While
these leakage paths are not critical when the device is switching constantly, they do pose a
significant energy-overhead when the circuit is in the idle state.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 267
C
C
Figure 6.44 CMOS transmission gate.
A B
A B
C
C
(b) Symbolic representation
(a) Circuit
Solution 3: Transmission Gate Logic. The most widely-used solution to deal with the
voltage-drop problem is the use of transmission gates. It builds on the complementary
properties of NMOS and PMOS transistors: NMOS devices pass a strong 0 but a weak 1,
while PMOS transistors pass a strong 1 but a weak 0. The ideal approach is to use an
NMOS to pull-down and a PMOS to pull-up. The transmission gate combines the best of
both device flavors by placing a NMOS device in parallel with a PMOS device (Figure
6.44a). The control signals to the transmission gate (C and C) are complementary. The
transmission gate acts as a bidirectional switch controlled by the gate signal C. When C =
1, both MOSFETs are on, allowing the signal to pass through the gate. In short,
A = B if C = 1 (6.26)
On the other hand, C = 0 places both transistors in cutoff, creating an open circuit between
nodes A and B. Figure 6.44b shows a commonly used transmission-gate symbol.
Consider the case of charging node B to VDD for the transmission gate circuit in Fig-
ure 6.45a. Node A is driven to VDD and transmission gate is enabled (C = 1 and C= 0). If
only the NMOS pass-device were present, node B charges up to VDD-VTn at which point
the NMOS device turns off. However, since the PMOS device is present and turned on
(VGSp = -VDD), charging continues all the way up to VDD. Figure 6.45b shows the opposite
case, this is discharging node B to 0. B is initially at VDD when node A is driven low. The
PMOS transistor by itself can only pull down node B to VTp at which point it turns off. The
parallel NMOS device however stays turned on (since its VGS = VDD) and pulls node B all
the way to GND. Though the transmission gate requires two transistors and more control
signals, it enables rail-to-rail swing.
C = VDD
C = VDD
B (initially at 0)
B (initially at VDD)
A = VDD A = 0
Figure 6.45 Transmission gates
C = 0 enable rail-to-rail switching
C = 0
(a) charging node B (a) discharging node B
Transmission gates can be used to build some complex gates very efficiently. Figure
6.46 shows an example of a simple inverting two-input multiplexer. This gate either

--- Page Break ---

268 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
selects input A or B based on the value of the control signal S, which is equivalent to
implementing the following Boolean function:
F = ( A ⋅ S + B ⋅ S) (6.27)
A complementary implementation of the gate requires eight transistors instead of six.
S S
VDD
V
S DD
A 
M2 Out
S F
M1
B
S
GND
S S
A B
Figure 6.46 Transmission gate multiplexer and its layout.
Another example of the effective use of transmission gates is the popular XOR cir-
cuit shown in Figure 6.47. The complete implementation of this gate requires only six
transistors (including the inverter used for the generation of B), compared to the twelve
transistors required for a complementary implementation. To understand the operation of
this circuit, we have to analyze the B = 0 and B = 1 cases separately. For B = 1, transistors
M1 and M2 act as an inverter while the transmission gate M3/M4 is off; hence F = AB. In
the opposite case, M1 and M2 are disabled, and the transmission gate is operational, or F =
AB. The combination of both results in the XOR function. Notice that, regardless of the
values of A and B, node F always has a connection to either VDD or GND and is hence a
low-impedance node. When designing static-pass transistor networks, it is essential to
adhere to the low-impedance rule under all circumstances. Other examples where trans-
mission-gate logic is effectively used are fast adder circuits and registers.
B
B
M2
A
A
F
M
1 M3/M4 Figure 6.47 Transmission gate XOR.
B
B

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 269
Performance of Pass-Transistor and Transmission Gate Logic
The pass-transistor and the transmission gate are, unfortunately, not ideal switches, and
have a series resistance associated with it. To quantify the resistance, consider the circuit
in Figure 6.48, which involves charging a node from 0 V to VDD. In this discussion, we use
the large-signal definition of resistance, which involves dividing the voltage across the
switch by the drain current. The effective resistance of the switch is modeled as a parallel
connection of the resistances Rn and Rp of the NMOS and PMOS devices, defined as (VDD
– Vout)/In and (VDD – Vout)/Ip, respectively. The currents through the devices are obviously
dependent on the value of Vout and the operating mode of the transistors. During the low-
to-high transition, the pass-transistors traverse through a number of operation modes. For
low values of Vout, the NMOS device is saturated and the resistance is approximated as:
V – V V – V
DD  out DD  out
R = ------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
n I 2
N W  VDSAT
k′  -----  ( V – V – V )V – -------------------
n L DD  out Tn DSAT 2
N  
V – V
DD  out
≈ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
k ( V – V – V )V
n  DD  out Tn DSAT
(6.28)
The resistance goes up for increasing values of Vout, and approaches infinity when Vout
reaches VDD-VTn, this is when the device shuts off. Similarly, we can analyze the behavior
of the PMOS transistor. When Vout is small, the PMOS is saturated, but it enters the linear
mode of operation for Vout approaching VDD, giving the following approximated resis-
tance:
V – V V – V
DD  out DD  out
R = ------------------------------- = --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
p I
P  ( Vout – VDD)2
k ⋅ ( – V – V ) ( V – V ) – ----------------------------------
p  DD  Tp out  DD 2 
1
≈ -------------------------------------------
k ( V – V )
p  DD  Tp (6.29)
The simulated value of Req = Rp || Rn as a function of Vout is plotted in Figure 6.48. It
can be observed that Req is relatively constant (≈ 8kΩ in this particular case). The same is
true in other design instances (for instance, when discharging CL). When analyzing trans-
mission-gate networks, the simplifying assumption that the switch has a constant resistive
value is therefore acceptable.
Problem 6.6 Equivalent Resistance During Discharge
Determine the equivalent resistance by simulation for the high-to-low transition of a transmis-
sion gate (this is, produce a plot similar to the one presented in Figure 6.48).
An important consideration is the delay associated with a chain of transmission
gates. Figure 6.49 shows a chain of n transmission gates. Such a configuration often
occurs in circuits such as adders or deep multiplexors. Assume that all transmission gates
are turned on and a step is applied at the input. To analyze the propagation delay of this

--- Page Break ---

270 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
30
2.5 V 
Rn Rn
20 Rp
2.5 V Vout
Rp
0 V
10
Resistance, ohms Rn || Rp
0
0.0 1.0 2.0
Vout, V
Figure 6.48 Simulated equivalent resistance of transmission gate for low-to-high transition
(for (W/L)n = (W/L)p = 0.5μm/0.25μm). A similar response for overall resistance is obtained for the
high-to-low transition
network, the transmission gates are replaced by their equivalent resistances Req. This pro-
duces the network of Figure 6.49b.
The delay of a network of n transmission gates in sequence can be estimated using the
Elmore approximation (see Chapter 4):
n
n n(  + 1)
tp ( Vn) = 0.69 CReqk = 0.69CReq-------------------- (6.30)
∑  2
k = 0
2 
This means that the propagation delay is proportional to n and increases rapidly with the
number of switches in the chain.
2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
V1 V Vi V Vn–1 V
i-1 i+1 n
In
C C C C C
0 0 0 0
(a) A chain of transmission gates
Req Req Req Req
V1 Vi V Vn-1 V
i+1 n
In
C C C C C
(b) Equivalent RC network
Figure 6.49 Speed optimization in transmission-gate networks.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.2 Static CMOS Design 271
Example 6.13 Delay through 16 transmission gates
Consider 16 cascaded minimum-sized transmission gates, each with an average resistance of
8 kΩ. The node capacitance consists of the capacitance of two NMOS and PMOS devices
(junction and gate). Since the gate inputs are assumed to be fixed, there is no Miller multipli-
cation. The capacitance can be calculated to be approximately 3.6 fF for the low-to-high tran-
sition. The delay is given by:
n n(  + 1) 16 16(  + 1)
t = 0.69 ⋅ CR -------------------- = 0.69 ⋅ ( 3.6fF) ( 8KΩ)  -------------------------- ≈ 2.7ns (6.31)
p  eq 2  2 
The transient response for this particular example is shown in Figure 6.50. The simu-
lated delay is 2.7ns. It is remarkable that a simple RC model predicts the delay so accurately.
It is also clear that the use of long pass transistor chains causes significant delay degradation.
3.0
Out1 Out2
2.0
Out16
Voltage, V
1.0
Figure 6.50 Transient response of 16
0.0 transmission gates cascaded in series.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Time (ns)
The most common approach for dealing with the long delay is to break the chain and
by inserting buffers every m switches (Figure 6.51). Assuming a propagation delay tbuf for
each buffer, the overall propagation delay of the transmission-gate/buffer network is then
computed as follows,
n m m(  + 1)  n  
tp = 0.69 ----CReq----------------------- + ---- – 1 tbuf
m 2  m 
(6.32)
n m(  + 1)  n  
= 0.69 CReq--------------------- + ---- – 1 tbuf
2  m 
The resulting delay exhibits only a linear dependence on the number of switches n, in con-
trast to the unbuffered circuit, which is quadratic in n. The optimal number of switches
∂tp
mopt between buffers can be found by setting the derivative to 0, which yields
∂m
tpbuf
mopt = 1.7 ------------ (6.33)
CReq

--- Page Break ---

272 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Obviously, the number of switches per segment grows with increasing values of tbuf. In
current technologies, mopt is typically around 3.
m
Req Req Req Req Req Req
In
C C C C C C C C
Figure 6.51 Breaking up long transmission gate chains by inserting buffers.
Example 6.14 Transmission Gate Chain
Consider the same 16 transmission gate chain. The buffers shown in Figure 6.51 can be
implemented as inverters (instead of two cascaded inverters). In some cases, it might be nec-
essary to add an extra inverter to produce the correct polarity. Assuming that each inverter is
sized such that the NMOS is 0.5μm/0.25μm and PMOS is 0.5μm /0.25μm, Eq. (6.33) predicts
that an inverter must be inserted every 3 transmission gates. The simulated delay when plac-
ing an inverter every two transmission gates equals 154 psec, for every three transmission
gates is 154 psec, and for four transmission gates is 164 psec. The insertion of buffering
inverters reduces the delay with a factor of almost 2.
CAUTION: Although many of the circuit styles discussed in the previous sections sound
very exciting, and might be superior to static CMOS in many respects, none of them has
the robustness and ease of design of complementary CMOS. Therefore, use them spar-
ingly and with caution. For designs that have no extreme area, complexity, or speed con-
straints, complementary CMOS is the recommended design style.
6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design
It was noted earlier that static CMOS logic with a fan-in of N requires 2N devices. A vari-
ety of approaches were presented to reduce the number of transistors required to imple-
ment a given logic function including pseudo-NMOS, pass transistor logic, etc. The
pseudo-NMOS logic style requires only N + 1 transistors to implement an N input logic
gate, but unfortunately it has static power dissipation. In this section, an alternate logic
style called dynamic logic is presented that obtains a similar result, while avoiding static
power consumption. With the addition of a clock input, it uses a sequence of precharge
and conditional evaluation phases.
6.3.1 Dynamic Logic: Basic Principles
The basic construction of an (n-type) dynamic logic gate is shown in Figure 6.52a. The
PDN (pull-down network) is constructed exactly as in complementary CMOS. The opera-

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 273
tion of this circuit is divided into two major phases: precharge and evaluation, with the
mode of operation determined by the clock signal CLK.
VDD VDD
CLK Mp
CLK Mp
Out Out
CL
In1 A
In2 PDN C
In3 B
CLK Me CLK Me
(a) n-type network (b) Example
Figure 6.52 Basic concepts of a dynamic gate.
Precharge
When CLK = 0, the output node Out is precharged to VDD by the PMOS transistor Mp.
During that time, the evaluate NMOS transistor Me is off, so that the pull-down path is dis-
abled. The evaluation FET eliminates any static power that would be consumed during the
precharge period (this is, static current would flow between the supplies if both the pull-
down and the precharge device were turned on simultaneously).
Evaluation
For CLK = 1, the precharge transistor Mp is off, and the evaluation transistor Me is turned
on. The output is conditionally discharged based on the input values and the pull-down
topology. If the inputs are such that the PDN conducts, then a low resistance path exists
between Out and GND and the output is discharged to GND. If the PDN is turned off, the
precharged value remains stored on the output capacitance CL, which is a combination of
junction capacitances, the wiring capacitance, and the input capacitance of the fan-out
gates. During the evaluation phase, the only possible path between the output node and a
supply rail is to GND. Consequently, once Out is discharged, it cannot be charged again till
then next precharge operation. The inputs to the gate can therefore make at most one tran-
sition during evaluation. Notice that the output can be in the high-impedance state during
the evaluation period if the pull-down network is turned off. This behavior is fundamen-
tally different from the static counterpart that always has a low resistance path between the
output and one of the power rails.
As as an example, consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.52b. During the precharge
phase (CLK=0), the output is precharged to VDD regardless of the input values since the
evaluation device is turned off. During evaluation (CLK=1), a conducting path is created

--- Page Break ---

274 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
between Out and GND if (and only if) A·B+C is TRUE. Otherwise, the output remains at
the precharged state of VDD. The following function is thus realized:
Out = CLK + ( A ⋅ B + C) ⋅ CLK (6.34)
A number of important properties can be derived for the dynamic logic gate:
• The logic function is implemented by the NMOS pull-down network. The construc-
tion of the PDN proceeds just as it does for static CMOS.
• The number of transistors (for complex gates) is substantially lower than in the
static case: N + 2 versus 2N.
• It is non-ratioed. The sizing of the PMOS precharge device is not important for real-
izing proper functionality of the gate. The size of the precharge device can be made
large to improve the low-to-high transition time (of course, at a cost to the high-to-
low transition time). There is however, a trade-off with power dissipation since a
larger precharge device directly increases clock-power dissipation.
• It only consumes dynamic power. Ideally, no static current path ever exists between
VDD and GND. The overall power dissipation, however, can be significantly higher
compared to a static logic gate.
• The logic gates have faster switching speeds. There are two main reasons for this.
The first (obvious) reason is due to the reduced load capacitance attributed to the
lower number of transistors per gate and the single-transistor load per fan-in. Sec-
ond, the dynamic gate does not have short circuit current, and all the current pro-
vided by the pull-down devices goes towards discharging the load capacitance.
The low and high output levels VOL and VOH are easily identified as GND and VDD
and are not dependent upon the transistor sizes. The other VTC parameters are dramati-
cally different from static gates. Noise margins and switching thresholds have been
defined as static quantities that are not a function of time. To be functional, a dynamic gate
requires a periodic sequence of precharges and evaluations. Pure static analysis, therefore,
does not apply. During the evaluate period, the pull-down network of a dynamic inverter
starts to conduct when the input signal exceeds the threshold voltage (VTn) of the NMOS
pull-down transistor. Therefore, it is reasonable to set the switching threshold (VM) as well
as VIH and VIL of the gate equal to VTn. This translates to a low value for the NML.
Design Consideration
It is also possible to implement dynamic logic using a complimentary approach, where the out-
put node is connected by a pre-discharge NMOS transistor to GND, and the evaluation PUN
network is implemented in PMOS. The operation is similar: during precharge, the output node
is discharged to GND. During evaluation, the output is conditionally charged to VDD. This p-
type dynamic gate has the disadvantage of being slower than the n-type due to the lower cur-
rent drive of the PMOS transistors.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 275
6.3.2 Speed and Power Dissipation of Dynamic Logic
The main advantages of dynamic logic are increased speed and reduced implementation
area. Fewer devices to implement a given logic function implies that the overall load
capacitance is much smaller. The analysis of the switching behavior of the gate has some
interesting peculiarities to it. After the precharge phase, the output is high. For a low input
signal, no additional switching occurs. As a result, tpLH = 0! The high-to-low transition, on
the other hand, requires the discharging of the output capacitance through the pull-down
network. Therefore tpHL is proportional to CL and the current-sinking capabilities of the
pull-down network. The presence of the evaluation transistor slows the gate somewhat, as
it presents an extra series resistance. Omitting this transistor, while functionally not for-
bidden, may result in static power dissipation and potentially a performance loss.
The above analysis is somewhat unfair, because it ignores the influence of the pre-
charge time on the switching speed of the gate. The precharge time is determined by the
time it takes to charge CL through the PMOS precharge transistor. During this time, the
logic in the gate cannot be utilized. However, very often, the overall digital system can be
designed in such a way that the precharge time coincides with other system functions. For
instance, the precharge of the arithmetic unit in a microprocessor can coincide with the
instruction decode. The designer has to be aware of this “dead zone” in the use of dynamic
logic, and should carefully consider the pros and cons of its usage, taking the overall sys-
tem requirements into account.
Example 6.15 A Four-Input Dynamic NAND Gate
Figure 6.53 shows the design of a four-input NAND example designed using the dynamic-cir-
cuit style. Due to the dynamic nature of the gate, the derivation of the voltage-transfer charac-
teristic diverges from the traditional approach. As we had discussed above, we will assume
that the switching threshold of the gate equals the threshold of the NMOS pull-down transis-
tor. This results in asymmetrical noise margins, as shown in Table 6.9.
The dynamic behavior of the gate is simulated with SPICE. It is assumed that all inputs
are set high as the clock transitions high. On the rising edge of the clock, the output node is
discharged. The resulting transient response is plotted in Figure 6.53, and the propagation
delays are summarized in Table 6.9. The duration of the precharge cycle can be adjusted by
changing the size of the PMOS precharge transistor. Making the PMOS too large should be
avoided, however, as it both slows down the gate, and increases the capacitive load on the
clock line. For large designs, the latter factor might become a major design concern as the
clock load can become excessive and hard to drive.
Table 6.9 The dc and ac parameters of a four-input dynamic NAND.
Transistors VOH VOL VM NMH NML tpHL tpLH tpre
6 2.5 V 0 V VTN 2.5-VTN VTN 110 psec 0 nsec 83psec
As mentioned earlier, the static parameters are time-dependent. To illustrate this, con-
sider the four input NAND gate with all inputs tied together, and making a partial low-to-high
transition. Figure 6.54 shows a transient simulation of the output voltage for three different

--- Page Break ---

276 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
VDD
CLK 2.5
Out
In1 Out
1.5
IN &
In2 Voltage CLK
0.5
In3
-0.5
In4 0  0.5  1
Time, ns
Figure 6.53 Schematic and transient response of a four-input
CLK 
dynamic NAND gate.
input transitions—to 0.45V, 0.5V and 0.55V, respectively. Above, we have defined the
switching threshold of the dynamic gate as the device threshold. However, notice that the
amount by which the output voltage drops is a strong function of the input voltage and the
available evaluation time. The noise voltage needed to corrupt the signal has to be larger if the
evaluation time is short. In other words, the switching threshold is really a function of the
evaluation time.
When evaluating the power dissipation of a dynamic gate, it would appear that
dynamic logic presents a significant advantage. There are three reasons for this. First, the
physical capacitance is lower since dynamic logic uses fewer transistors to implement a
given function. Also, the load seen for each fanout is one transistor instead of two. Sec-
ond, dynamic logic gates by construction can at most have one transition per clock cycle.
Glitching (or dynamic hazards) does not occur in dynamic logic. Finally, dynamic gates
do not exhibit short circuit power since the pull-up path is not turned on when the gate is
evaluating.
While these arguments are generally true, they are offset by other considerations: (i)
the clock power of dynamic logic can be significant, particularly since the clock node has
3.0
CLK
2.0
Vout
V  (VG=0.45)
V out
1.0 (Vout=0.55) (VG=0.5)
G Figure 6.54 Effect of an input glitch on the
Voltage, V
output. The switching threshold depends on the
VG time for evaluation. A larger glitch is acceptable
0.0
if the evaluation phase is smaller. In this
example, the input glitches high during
evaluation and stays high during the whole
-1.0
0 20 40 60 80 100 period.
Time, nsec

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 277
a guaranteed transition on every single clock cycle; (ii) the number of transistors is higher
than the minimal set required for implementing the logic; (iii) short-circuit power may
exist when leakage-combatting devices are added (as will be discussed further); (iv) and,
most importantly, dynamic logic generally displays a higher switching activity due to the
periodic precharge and discharge operations. Earlier, the transition probability for a static
gate was shown to be p0 p1 = p0 (1-p0). For dynamic logic, the output transition probability
does not depend on the state (history) of the inputs, but rather on the signal probabilities
only. For an n-tree dynamic gate, the output makes a 0’1 transition during the precharge
phase only if the output was discharged during the preceding evaluate phase. The 0’1
transition probability for an n-type dynamic gate hence equals
α = p (6.35)
0 → 1 0
where p0 is the probability that the output is zero. This number is always larger or equal to
p0 p1. For uniformly distributed inputs, the transition probability for an N-input gate is:
N
0
α = ------- (6.36)
0 → 1
N
2
where N0 is the number of zero entries in the truth table of the logic function.
Example 6.16 Activity estimation in dynamic logic
To illustrate the increased activity for a dynamic gate, once again consider a 2 input NOR
gate. An n-tree dynamic implementation is shown in Figure 6.55 along with its static counter-
part. For equi-probable inputs, there is then a 75% probability that the output node of the
dynamic gate will discharge immediately after the precharge phase, implying that the activity
2
for such a gate equals 0.75 (i.e PNOR= 0.75 CLVddfclk). The corresponding activity is a lot
smaller, 3/16, for a static implementation. For a dynamic NAND gate, the transition probabil-
ity is 1/4 (since there is a 25% probability the output will be discharged) while it is 3/16 for a
static implementation. Though these example illustrate that the switching activity of dynamic
logic is generally higher, it should be noted that dynamic logic has lower physical capaci-
tance. Both factors must be accounted for when choosing a logic style.
V VDD
DD
A CLK
CL
B
A  B
Figure 6.55 Static NOR versus n-type
dynamic NOR.
CL
A  B CLK

--- Page Break ---

278 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Problem 6.7 Activity Computation
For the 4-input dynamic NAND gate, compute the activity factor with the following assump-
tion for the inputs. Assume that the inputs are independent and pA=1 = 0.2, pB=1 = 0.3, pC=1 =
0.5, and pD=1 = 0.4.
6.3.3 Issues in Dynamic Design
Dynamic logic clearly can result in high performance solutions compared to static circuits.
However, there are several important considerations that must be taken into account if one
wants dynamic circuits to function properly. This include charge leakage, charge sharing,
backgate (and in general capacitive) coupling, and clock feedthrough. Some of these
issues are highlighted in this section.
Charge Leakage
The operation of a dynamic gate relies on the dynamic storage of the output value on a
capacitor. If the pull-down network is off, the output should ideally remain at the pre-
charged state of VDD during the evaluation phase. However, this charge gradually leaks
away due to leakage currents, eventually resulting in a malfunctioning of the gate. Figure
6.56a shows the sources of leakage for the basic dynamic inverter circuit.
VDD
CLK
(4)
CLK
Mp
(3)
Out
(1) CL
A = 0 t
M1
V Precharge Evaluate
(2) out
CLK
Me
t
(a) Leakage sources (b) Effect on waveforms
Figure 6.56 Leakage issues in dynamic circuits.
Source 1 and 2 are the reverse-biased diode and sub-threshold leakage of the
NMOS pull-down device M1, respectively. The charge stored on CL will slowly leak away
due these leakage sources, assuming that the input is at zero during evaluation. Charge
leakage causes a degradation in the high level (Figure 6.56b). Dynamic circuits therefore
require a minimal clock rate, which is typically on the order of a few kHz. This makes the
usage of dynamic techniques unattractive for low performance products such as watches,
or processors that use conditional clocks (where there are no guarantees on minimum
clock rates). Note that the PMOS precharge device also contributes some leakage current

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 279
due to the reverse bias diode (source 3) and the subthreshold conduction (source 4). To
some extent, the leakage current of the PMOS counteracts the leakage of the pull-down
path. As a result the output voltage is going to be set by the resistive divider composed of
the pull-down and pull-up paths.
Example 6.17 Leakage in dynamic circuits
Consider the simple inverter with all devices set at 0.5μm/0.25μm. Assume that the input is
low during the evaluation period. Ideally, the output should remain at the precharged state of
VDD. However, as seen from Figure 6.57 the output voltage drops. Once the output drops
below the switching threshold of the fan-out logic gate, the output is interpreted as a low volt-
age. Notice that the output settles to an intermediate voltage. This is due to the leakage current
provided by the PMOS pull-up.
3.0
2.0
Out
Voltage, V
1.0
Figure 6.57 Impact of charge leakage. The
output settles to an intermediate voltage
CLK determined by a resistive divider of the pull-
down and pull up devices.
0.0
0 10 20 30 40
time, ms
Leakage is caused by the high impedance state of the output node during the evalu-
ate mode, when the pull down path is turned off. The leakage problem van be counteracted
by reducing the output impedance on the output node during evaluation. This is often done
by adding a bleeder transistor as shown in Figure 6.58a. The only function of the
bleeder—a pseudo-NMOS-like pull-up device—is to compensate for the charge lost due
to the pull-down leakage paths. To avoid the ratio problems associated with this style of
circuit and the associated static power consumption, the bleeder resistance is made high,
or, in other words, the device is kept small. This allows the (strong) pull-down devices to
VDD VDD
CLK Mp Mbl CLK Mp Mbl
Out Out
A Ma A Ma
B Mb B Mb
Figure 6.58 Static bleeders
CLK Me CLK Me
(a) (b) compensates for the charge-leakage.

--- Page Break ---

280 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
lower the Out node substantially below the switching threshold of the inverter. Often, the
bleeder is implemented in a feedback configuration to eliminate the static power dissipa-
tion (Figure 6.58b).
Charge Sharing
Another important concern in dynamic logic is the impact of charge sharing. Consider the
circuit of Figure 6.59. During the precharge phase, the output node is precharged to VDD.
Assume that all inputs are set to 0 during precharge, and that the capacitance Ca is dis-
charged. Assume further that input B remains at 0 during evaluation, while input A makes
a 0 → 1 transition, turning transistor Ma on. The charge stored originally on capacitor CL
is redistributed over CL and Ca. This causes a drop in the output voltage, which cannot be
recovered due to the dynamic nature of the circuit.
VDD
CLK Mp
Out
CL
A Ma
X
Ca
B = 0 Mb
Cb
CLK Me
Figure 6.59 Charge sharing in dynamic networks.
The influence on the output voltage is readily calculated. Under the above assump-
tions, the following initial conditions are valid: Vout(t = 0) = VDD and VX(t = 0) = 0. Two
possible scenarios must be considered:
1. ∆Vout < VTn — In this case, the final value of VX equals VDD – VTn(VX). Charge con-
servation yields
CLVDD = CLVout ( )t  + Ca [ VDD – VTn ( VX)]
or
(6.37)
Ca
∆Vout = Vout ( )t  – VDD = –------ [ VDD – VTn ( VX)]
CL
2. ∆Vout > VTn — Vout and VX reach the same value:
Ca
 
∆Vout = –VDD ------------------- (6.38)
 Ca + CL
Which of the above scenarios is valid is determined by the capacitance ratio. The bound-
ary condition between the two cases can be determined by setting ∆Vout equal to VTn in Eq.
(6.38), yielding

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 281
Ca VTn
------ = ------------------------ (6.39)
CL VDD – VTn
Overall, it is desirable to keep the value of ∆Vout below |VTp|. The output of the dynamic
gate might be connected to a static inverter, in which case the low level of Vout would
cause static power consumption. One major concern is circuit malfunction if the output
voltage is brought below the switching threshold of the gate it drives.
Example 6.18 Charge-Sharing
Let us consider the impact of charge sharing on the dynamic logic gate shown in Figure 6.60,
which implements a 3-input EXOR function y = A ⊕ B ⊕ C. The first question to be resolved
is what conditions cause the worst-case voltage drop on node y. For simplicity, ignore the
load inverter, and assume that all inputs are low during the precharge operation and that all
isolated internal nodes (Va, Vb, Vc, and Vd) are initially at 0V.
Inspection of the truth table for this particular logic function shows that the output
stays high for 4 out of 8 cases. The worst-case change in output is obtained by exposing the
maximum amount of internal capacitance to the output node during the evaluation period.
This happens for A B C or A B C. The voltage change can then be obtained by equating the
initial charge with the final charge as done with equation Eq. (6.38), yielding a worst-case
change of 30/(30+50) * 2.5V = 0.94V. To ensure that the circuit functions correctly, the
switching threshold of the connecting inverter should be placed below 2.5- 0.94 = 1.56V.
The most common and effective approach to deal with the charge redistribution is to
also precharge critical internal nodes, as is shown in Figure 6.61. Since the internal nodes
are charged to VDD during precharge, charge sharing does not occur. This solution obvi-
ously comes at the cost of increased area and capacitance.
Capacitive Coupling
The high impedance of the output node makes the circuit very sensitive to crosstalk
effects. A wire routed over a dynamic node may couple capacitively and destroy the state
of the floating node. Another equally important form of capacitive coupling is the back-
gate (or output-to-input) coupling.Consider the circuit shown in Figure 6.62 in which a
dynamic two-input NAND gate drives a static NAND gate. A transition in the input In of
VDD = 2.5V
CLK Load Inverter
y
A Cy = 50 fF
A
a
Ca = 15 fF b
B B Cb = 15 fF
B B
c d
C = 15 fF
c  Cd = 10 fF
C C Figure 6.60 Example illustrating the
charge sharing effect in dynamic logic.
CLK

--- Page Break ---

282 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
V DD
CLK M p Mbl CLK
Out
A M a
B M b
Figure 6.61 Dealing with charge-sharing by precharging
CLK M internal nodes. An NMOS precharge transistor may also be
e
used, but this requires an inverted clock.
the static gate may cause the output of the gate (Out2) to go low. This output transition
couples capacitively to the other input of the gate, the dynamic node Out1, through the
gate-source and gate-drain capacitances of transistor M4. A simulation of this effect is
shown in Figure 6.63, and demonstrates that the output of the dynamic gate can drop sig-
nificantly. This further causes the output of the static NAND gate not to drop all the way
down to 0V, and a small amount of static power is dissipated. If the voltage drop is large
enough, the circuit can evaluate incorrectly, and the NAND output may not go low. When
designing and laying out dynamic circuits, special care is needed to minimize capacitive
coupling.
V DD
V DD V DD
CLK M p
M  M 
Out 1 6 5
Out 
C L1 2
In
A = 0 M 1 C L2
M 4
B = 0 M 2
M 3
CLK M e Figure 6.62 Example demonstrating
the effect of backgate coupling.
Clock-Feedthrough
A special case of capacitive coupling is clock-feedthrough, an effect caused by the capaci-
tive coupling between the clock input of the precharge device and the dynamic output
node. The coupling capacitance consists of the gate-to-drain capacitance of the precharge
device, and includes both the overlap and the channel capacitances. This capacitive cou-
pling causes the output of the dynamic node to rise above VDD on the low-to-high transi-
tion of the clock, assuming that the pull-down network is turned off. Subsequently, the fast
rising and falling edges of the clock couple onto the signal node, as is quite apparent in the
simulation of Figure 6.63.
The danger of clock feedthrough is that it may cause the (normally reverse-biased)
junction diodes of the precharge transistor to become forward-biased. This causes electron

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 283
due to clock feedthrough
3.0
Out
2.0 1
1.0 CLK IN
Voltage, V
Out2 (does not discharge
to gnd)
0.0
-1.0
0 2 4 6 Figure 6.63 Clock feedthrough effect.
Time, ns
injection into the substrate, which can be collected by a nearby high impedance node in
the 1 state, eventually resulting in faulty operation. CMOS latchup might be another result
of this injection. For all purposes, high-speed dynamic circuits should be carefully simu-
lated to ensure that clock-feedthrough effects stay within bounds.
All the above considerations demonstrate that the design of dynamic circuits is
rather tricky and requires extreme care. It should therefore only be attempted when high
performance is required.
6.3.4 Cascading Dynamic Gates
Besides the signal integrity issues, there is one major catch that complicates the design of
dynamic circuits: straightforward cascading of dynamic gates to create more complex
structures does not work. The problem is best illustrated with the two cascaded n-type
dynamic inverters, shown in Figure 6.64a. During the precharge phase (i.e., CLK =0), the
outputs of both inverters are precharged to VDD. Assume that the primary input In makes a
0 → 1 transition (Figure 6.64b). On the rising edge of the clock, output Out1 starts to dis-
charge. The second output should remain in the precharged state of VDD as its expected
VDD VDD V
CLK
CLK Mp CLK Mp
In
Out1 Out2
Out1
VTn
In
Out2 ∆V
CLK Me CLK Me t
(a) (b)
Figure 6.64 Cascade of dynamic n−type blocks.

--- Page Break ---

284 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
value is 1 (Out1 transitions to 0 during evaluation). However, there is a finite propagation
delay for the input to discharge Out1 to GND. Therefore, the second output also starts to
discharge. As long as Out1 exceeds the switching threshold of the second gate, which
approximately equals VTn, a conducting path exists between Out2 and GND, and precious
charge is lost at Out2. The conducting path is only disabled once Out1 reaches VTn, and
turns off the NMOS pull-down transistor. This leaves Out2 at an intermediate voltage
level. The correct level will not be recovered, as dynamic gates rely on capacitive storage
in contrast to static gates, which have dc restoration. The charge loss leads to reduced
noise margins and potential malfunctioning.
The cascading problem arises because the outputs of each gate—and hence the
inputs to the next stages—are precharged to 1. This may cause inadvertent discharge in the
beginning of the evaluation cycle. Setting all the inputs to 0 during precharge addresses
that concern. When doing so, all transistors in the pull-down network are turned off after
precharge, and no inadvertent discharging of the storage capacitors can occur during eval-
uation. In other words, correct operation is guaranteed as long as the inputs can only
2
make a single 0 → 1 transition during the evaluation period . Transistors are only be
turned on when needed, and at most once per cycle. A number of design styles complying
with this rule have been conceived. The two most important ones are discussed below.
Domino Logic
Concept. A Domino logic module [Krambeck82] consists of an n-type dynamic logic
block followed by a static inverter (Figure 6.65). During precharge, the output of the n-
type dynamic gate is charged up to VDD, and the output of the inverter is set to 0. During
evaluation, the dynamic gate conditionally discharges, and the output of the inverter
makes a conditional transition from 0 → 1. If one assumes that all the inputs of a Domino
3
gate are outputs of other Domino gates , then it is ensured that all inputs are set to 0 at the
end of the precharge phase, and that the only transitions during evaluation are 0 → 1 tran-
sitions. The formulated rule is hence obeyed. The introduction of the static inverter has the
additional advantage that the fan-out of the gate is driven by a static inverter with a low-
impedance output, which increases noise immunity. The buffer furthermore reduces the
capacitance of the dynamic output node by separating internal and load capacitances.
Consider now the operation of a chain of Domino gates. During precharge, all inputs
are set to 0. During evaluation, the output of the first Domino block either stays at 0 or
makes a 0 → 1 transition, affecting the second gate. This effect might ripple through the
whole chain, one after the other, similar to a line of falling dominoes—hence the name.
Domino CMOS has the following properties:
• Since each dynamic gate has a static inverter, only non-inverting logic can be imple-
mented. Although there are ways to deal with this, as is discussed in a subsequent
section, this is major limiting factor, and pure Domino design has become rare.
2 
This ignores the impact of charge distribution and leakage effects, discussed earlier.
3 
It is required that all other inputs that do not fall under this classification (for instance, primary inputs)
stay constant during evaluation.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 285
VDD VDD
CLK Mp CLK Mp
Out 2
Out1
In1
In2 PDN In4 PDN
In3
CLK Me CLK Me
Figure 6.65 DOMINO CMOS logic.
• Very high speeds can be achieved: only a rising edge delay exists, while tpHL equals
zero. The inverter can be sized to match the fan-out, which is already much smaller
than in the complimentary static CMOS case, as only a single gate capacitance has
to be accounted for per fan-out gate.
Since the inputs to a Domino gate are low during precharge, it is tempting to elimi-
nate the evaluation transistor as this would reduce clock load and increase pull-down
drive. However, eliminating the evaluation device extends the precharge cycle: the pre-
charge now has to ripple through the logic network as well. Consider the logic network
shown in Figure 6.66, where the evaluation devices have been eliminated. If the primary
input In1 is 1 during evaluation, the output of each dynamic gate is 0 and the output of
each static inverter is 1. On the falling edge of the clock, the precharge operation is started.
Assume further that In1 makes a high-to-low transition. The input to the second gate is ini-
tially high, and it takes two gate delays before In2 is driven low. During that time, the sec-
ond gate cannot precharge its output, as the pull-down network is fighting the precharge
device. Similarly, the third gate has to wait till the second gate precharges before it can
start precharging, etc. Therefore the time taken to precharge the logic circuit is equal to its
critical path. Another important negative is the extra power dissipation when both pull-up
and pull-down devices are on. It is therefore good practice to always utilize evaluation
devices.
Dealing with the Non-inverting Property of Domino Logic. A major limitation in
Domino logic is that only non-inverting logic can be implemented. This requirement has
VDD V
DD VDD
CLK Mp CLK M
p CLK Mp
Out1 Out
2 Outn
0->1 0->1
0->1
In1 In2
In3 Inn
1->0 
1->0 1->0 1->0
Figure 6.66 Effect of ripple precharge when the evaluation transistor is removed. The
circuit also exhibits static power dissipation.

--- Page Break ---

286 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
limited the widespread use of pure Domino logic. There are several ways to deal with the
non-inverting logic requirement. Figure 6.67 shows one approach to the problem—reorga-
nizing the logic using simple boolean transforms such as De Morgan’s Law. Unfortu-
nately, this sort of optimization is not always possible, and more general schemes may
have to be used.
Domino AND
A
A
B X
B X
C
C
D
D
E Y
E Y
F
G F
H G
H
Domino AND-OR
Domino OR
(a) before logic transformation (b) after logic transformation
Figure 6.67 Restructuring logic to enable implementation using non-inverting Domino Logic.
A general but expensive approach to solving the problem is the use of differential
logic. Dual-rail Domino is similar in concept to the DCVSL structure discussed earlier,
but uses a precharged load instead of a static cross-coupled PMOS load. Figure 6.68
shows the circuit schematic of an AND/NAND differential logic gate. Note that all inputs
come from other differential Domino gates, and are low during the precharge phase, while
making a conditional 0→1 transition during evaluation. Using differential Domino, it is
possible to implement any arbitrary function. This comes at the expense of an increased
power dissipation, since a transition is guaranteed every single clock cycle regardless of
the input values—either O or O must make a 0→1 transition. The function of transistors
Mf1 and Mf2 is to keep the circuit static when the clock is high for extended periods of time
(bleeder). Notice that this circuit is not ratioed, even in the presence of the PMOS pull-up
devices! Due to its high-performance, this differential approach is very popular, and is
used in several commercial microprocessors.
Optimization of Domino Logic Gates. Several optimizations can be performed on
Domino logic gates. The most obvious performance optimization involves the sizing of
VDD VDD
CLK Mp M M M
f1  f2 p CLK
O = AB O = AB
A M1
A B
B M2
CLK Me Figure 6.68 Simple dual rail (differential)
Domino logic gate.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.3 Dynamic CMOS Design 287
the transistors in the static inverter. With the inclusion of the evaluation devices in Dom-
ino circuits, all gates precharge in parallel, and the precharge operation takes only two
gate delays—charging the output of the dynamic gate to VDD, and driving the inverter out-
put low. The critical path during evaluation goes through the pull-down path of the
dynamic gate, and the PMOS pull-up transistor of the static inverter. Therefore, to speed
up the circuit during evaluation, the beta ratio of the static inverter should be made high so
that its switching threshold is close to VDD. This can be accomplished by using a small
(minimum) sized NMOS and a large PMOS device. The minimum-sized NMOS only
impacts the precharge time, which is limited in general due to the parallel precharging of
all gates. The only disadvantage of using a large beta ratio is a reduction in noise margin.
A designer should therefor simultaneously consider the reduced noise margin and perfor-
mance during the device sizing.
Numerous variations of Domino VDD
logic have been proposed [Bernstein98].
M
One optimization that reduces area is Mul- CLK p
tiple Output Domino Logic. The basic O1= A B(C+D)
concept is illustrated is Figure 6.69. It CLK
A
exploits the fact that certain outputs are O2= B(C+D) = B O3
subsets of other outputs to generate a B CLK
number of logical functions in a single O3= C+D
gate. In this example, O3 = C+D is used in C D
all three outputs, and hence it is imple-
mented at the bottom of the pull-down CLK Me
network. Since O2 equals B ·O3, it can
reuse the logic for O3. Notice that the
internal nodes have to be precharged to Figure 6.69 Multiple output Domino
VDD to produce the correct results. Given
that the internal nodes precharge to VDD, the number of devices driving precharge devices
is not reduced. However, the number of evaluation transistors is drastically reduced as
they are amortized over multiple outputs. Additionally, this approach results in a reduction
of the fan-out factor, once again due to the reuse of transistors over multiple functions.
Compound Domino (Figure 6.70) represents another optimization of the generic
Domino gate, once again minimizing the number of transistors. Instead of each dynamic
gate driving a static inverter, it is possible to combine the outputs of multiple dynamic
gates with the aid of a complex static CMOS gate, as shown in Figure 6.70. The outputs of
three dynamic structures, implementing O1 = A B C, O2 = D E F and O3 = G H, are com-
bined using a single complex CMOS static gate that implements O = (o1+o2) o3. The total
logic function realized this way equals O = A B C D E F + GH.
Compound Domino is a useful tool for constructing complex dynamic logic gates.
Large dynamic stacks are replaced using parallel small fan-in structures and complex
CMOS gates. For example, a large fan-in Domino AND can be implemented as parallel
dynamic NAND structures with lower fan-in that are combined using a static NOR gate.
One important consideration in Compound Domino is the problem associated with back-

--- Page Break ---

288 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
CLK Mp CLK Mp CLK Mp
O2
O1 
O3 O
A D
B E G
Figure 6.70 Compound Domino logic uses
C F H complex static gates at the output of the
dynamic gates.
M
CLK Me CLK Me CLK e
gate coupling. Care must be taken to ensure that the dynamic nodes are not affected by the
coupling between the output of the static gates and the output of dynamic nodes.
np-CMOS
The Domino logic presented in the previous section has the disadvantage that each
dynamic gate requires an extra static inverter in the critical path to make the circuit func-
tional. np-CMOS, provides an alternate approach to cascading dynamic logic by using two
flavors (n-tree and p-tree) of dynamic logic. In a p-tree logic gate, PMOS devices are used
to build a pull-up logic network, including a PMOS evaluation transistor (Figure 6.71)
([Goncalvez83, Friedman84, Lee86]). The NMOS predischarge transistor drives the out-
put low during precharge. The output conditionally makes a 0 → 1 transition during eval-
uation depending on its inputs.
VDD
VDD
CLK Mp
CLK Me
Out1
In1
PUN
In2 PDN In4
In3
Out2
Figure 6.71 The np-CMOS logic
circuit style.
CLK Me
CLK Mp
To other
N-blocks To other
P-blocks
np-CMOS logic exploits the duality between n-tree and p-tree logic gates to elimi-
nate the cascading problem. If the n-tree gates are controlled by CLK, and p-tree gates are
controlled using CLK, n-tree gates can directly drive p-tree gates, and vice-versa. Similar
to Domino, n-tree outputs must go through an inverter when connecting to another n-tree
gate. During the precharge phase (CLK = 0), the output of the n-tree gate, Out1, is charged

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.4 Perspectives 289
to VDD, while the output of the p-tree gate, Out2, is pre-discharged to 0V. Since the n-tree
gate connects PMOS pull-up devices, the PUN of the p-tree is turned off at that time. Dur-
ing evaluation, the output of the n-tree gate can only make a 1→0 transition, conditionally
turning on some transistors in the p-tree. This ensures that no accidental discharge of Out2
can occur. Similarly, n-tree blocks can follow p-tree gates without any problems, as the
inputs to the n-gate are precharged to 0. A disadvantage of the np-CMOS logic style is that
the p-tree blocks are slower than the n-tree modules, due to the lower current drive of the
PMOS transistors in the logic network. Equalizing the propagation delays requires extra
area.
6.4 Perspectives
6.4.1 How to Choose a Logic Style?
In the preceding sections, we have discussed several gate-implementation approaches
using the CMOS technology. Each of the circuit styles has its advantages and disadvan-
tages. Which one to select depends upon the primary requirement: ease of design, robust-
ness, area, speed, or power dissipation. No single style optimizes all these measures at the
same time. Even more, the approach of choice may vary from logic function to logic
function.
The static approach has the advantage of being robust in the presence of noise. This
makes the design process rather trouble-free and amenable to a high degree of automation.
This ease-of-design does not come for free: for complex gates with a large fan-in, comple-
mentary CMOS becomes expensive in terms of area and performance. Alternative static
logic styles have therefore been devised. Pseudo-NMOS is simple and fast at the expense
of a reduced noise margin and static power dissipation. Pass-transistor logic is attractive
for the implementation of a number of specific circuits, such as multiplexers and XOR-
dominated logic such as adders.
Dynamic logic, on the other hand, makes it possible to implement fast and small
complex gates. This comes at a price. Parasitic effects such as charge sharing make the
design process a precarious job. Charge leakage forces a periodic refresh, which puts a
lower bound on the operating frequency of the circuit.
The current trend is towards an increased use of complementary static CMOS. This
tendency is inspired by the increased use of design-automation tools at the logic design
level. These tools emphasize optimization at the logic rather than the circuit level and put
a premium on robustness. Another argument is that static CMOS is more amenable to
voltage scaling than some of the other approaches discussed in this chapter.
6.4.2 Designing Logic for Reduced Supply Voltages
In Chapter 3, we projected that the supply voltage for CMOS processes will continue to
drop over the coming decade, and may go as low as 0.6V by 2010. To maintain perfor-
mance under those conditions, it is essential that the device thresholds scale as well. Fig-

--- Page Break ---

290 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
ure 6.72a shows a plot of the (VT, VDD) ratio required to maintain a given performance
level (assuming that other device characteristics remain identical).
This trade-off is not without penalty. Reducing the threshold voltage, increases the
subthreshold leakage current exponentially as we derived in Eq. (3.40) (repeated here for
the sake of clarity).
1.5 10-2
-3
10
1.25 VT = 0.1V
-4
10
t =645pS -5
1.0 tpd=420pS pd 10
-6 VT = 0.4 V
10
,V
0.75 t =840pS -7
DD pd , A10
V ID -8
10
0.5
-9
10
-10
0.25 10
-11
10
0.0 -12
0.05 0.15 0.25 0.35 0.45 10
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
VT, V
VGS, V
(a) VDD/VT for fixed performance 
(b) Leakage as a function of VT
Figure 6.72 Voltage Scaling (VDD/VT on delay and leakage)
VGS –VTh nVD S
------------------------ –------------
S  S 
I = I 10  1 – 10  (6.40)
leakage  S
 
with S the slope factor of the device. The subthreshold leakage of an inverter is the current
of the NMOS for Vin = 0V and Vout = VDD (or the PMOS current for Vin = VDD and Vout =
0). The exponential increase in inverter leakage for decreasing thresholds illustrated in
Figure 6.72b.
These leakage currents are particularly a concern for designs that feature intermit-
tent computational activity separated by long periods of inactivity. For example, the pro-
cessor in a cellular phone remains in idle mode for a majority of the time. While the
processor is shutdown mode, the system should ideally consume zero or near-zero power.
This is only possible if leakage is low—this is, the devices have a high threshold voltage.
This is in contradictory to the scaling scenario that we just depicted, where high perfor-
mance under low supply voltage means reduced thresholds. To satisfy the contradicting
requirements of high-performance during active periods, and low leakage during standby,
several process modifications or leakage-control techniques have been introduced in
CMOS processes. Most processes with feature sizes at and below 0.18 μm CMOS support
devices with different thresholds—typically a device with low threshold for high perfor-
mance circuits, and a transistor with high threshold for leakage control. Another approach
that is gaining ground is the dynamic control of the threshold voltage of a device by
exploiting the body effect of the transistor. To use this approach for the control of individ-
ual devices requires a dual-well process (see Figure 2.2).
Clever circuit design can also help to reduce the leakage current, which is a function
of the circuit topology and the value of the inputs applied to the gate. Since VT depends on
body bias (VBS), the sub-threshold leakage of an MOS transistor depends not only on the
gate drive (VGS), but also on the body bias. In an inverter with In = 0, the sub-threshold

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.4 Perspectives 291
leakage of the inverter is set by the NMOS transistor with its VGS = VBS = 0 V. In more
complex CMOS gates, the leakage current depends upon the input vector. For example,
the sub-threshold leakage current of a two-input NAND gate is the least when A = B = 0.
Under these conditions, the intermediate node X settles to,
VX ≈ Vth ln( 1 + n) (6.41)
The NAND gate sub-threshold leakage is then set by the top-most NMOS transistor with
VGS = VBS = -VX. Clearly, the sub-threshold leakage under this condition is slightly smaller
than that of the inverter. This reduction in sub-threshold leakage due to stacked transistors
is called the stack effect. Figure 6.73 shows the leakage components for a simple two-
input NAND gate.
VDD
A B VX ISUB
A B
P1 P2
0 0 Vth ln (1+n) INSUB (VGS = VBS = -VX)
0 1 0 INSUB (VGS = VBS = 0)
G 1 0 Vdd-VT INSUB (VGS = VBS = 0)
1 1 0 2 IPSUB (VSG = VSB = 0)
A
N1
VX
Figure 6.73 Sub-threshold leakage reduction due to stack effect
B in a two-input NAND gate.
N2
In short-channel MOS transistors, the sub-threshold leakage current depends not
only on the gate drive (VGS) and the body bias (VBS), but also depends on the drain voltage
(VDS). The threshold voltage of a short-channel MOS transistor decreases with increasing
VDS due to drain induced barrier lowering (DIBL). Typical value for DIBL can range
from 20-150 mV change in VT per volt change in VDS. Figure 6.74 illustrates the impact on
the sub-threshold leakage as a result of
• a decrease in gate drive—point A to B
• an increase in body bias—point A to C
• an increase in drain voltage—point A to D.
Because of the latter, the impact of the stack effect is even more significant for
short-channel transistors. The intermediate voltage reduces the drain-source voltage of the
top-most device, and hence reduces its leakage. Consider again the two-input NAND gate
of Figure 6.73, when both M1and M2 are off. From the simulated load lines shown in Fig-
ure 6.75, we see that VX settles to approximately 100 mV in steady state. The steady state
sub-threshold leakage in the NAND gate is hence due to VGS = VBS = -100 mV and VDS =
VDD - 100 mV, which is 20 times smaller than that leakage of a stand-alone NMOS tran-
sistor with VGS = VBS = 0 mV and VDS = VDD [Ye98].
In summary, the sub-threshold leakage in complex stacked circuits can be signifi-
cantly lower than in individual devices. Observe that the maximum leakage reduction
occurs when all the transistors in the stack are off, and the intermediate node voltage

--- Page Break ---

292 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Figure 6.74 Dependence of sub-
threshold leakage current on terminal
voltages for a typical 0.25 μm NMOS
Figure 6.75 Load line indicating the
steady state solution for the intermediate
node voltage in a transistor stack.
reaches its steady state value. Exploiting this effect requires a careful selection of the input
signals to every gate during standby or sleep mode.
Problem 6.8 Computing VX
Eq. (6.41) represents intermediate node voltage for a two-input NAND with less than 10%
error, when A = B = 0. Derive Eq. (6.41) assuming (i) VT and Io of M1 and M2 are approxi-
mately equal, (ii) NMOS transistors are identically sized, and (iii) n < 1.5. Explain the tem-
perature dependence of stack effect and leakage reduction due to stack effect using equation
(4.5).
6.5 Summary
In this chapter, we have extensively analyzed the behavior and performance of combina-
tional CMOS digital circuits with regard to area, speed, and power.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.6 To Probe Further 293
• Static complementary CMOS combines dual pull-down and pull-up networks, only
one of which is enabled at any time.
• The performance of a CMOS gate is a strong function of the fan-in. Techniques to
deal with fan-in include transistor sizing, input reordering, and partitioning. The
speed is also a linear function of the fan-out. Extra buffering is needed for large fan-
outs.
• The ratioed logic style consists of an active pull-down (up) network connected to a
load device. This results in a substantial reduction in gate complexity at the expense
of static power consumption and an asymmetrical response. Careful transistor sizing
is necessary to maintain sufficient noise margins. The most popular approaches in
this class are the pseudo-NMOS techniques and differential DCVSL, which requires
complementary signals.
• Pass-transistor logic implements a logic gate as a simple switch network. This
results in very simple implementations for some logic functions. Long cascades of
switches are to be avoided due to a quadratic increase in delay with respect to the
number of elements in the chain. NMOS-only pass-transistor logic produces even
simpler structures, but might suffer from static power consumption and reduced
noise margins. This problem can be addressed by adding a level-restoring transistor.
• The operation of dynamic logic is based on the storage of charge on a capacitive
node and the conditional discharging of that node as a function of the inputs. This
calls for a two-phase scheme, consisting of a precharge followed by an evaluation
step. Dynamic logic trades off noise margin for performance. It is sensitive to para-
sitic effects such as leakage, charge redistribution, and clock feedthrough. Cascad-
ing dynamic gates can cause problems, and should be addressed carefully.
• The power consumption of a logic network is strongly related to the switching activ-
ity of the network. This activity is a function of the input statistics, the network
topology, and the logic style. Sources of power consumption such as glitches and
short-circuit currents can be minimized by careful circuit design and transistor siz-
ing.
• Threshold voltage scaling is required for low-voltage operation. Leakage control is
critical for low-voltage operation
6.6 To Probe Further
The topic of (C)MOS logic styles is treated extensively in the literature. Numerous texts
have been devoted to the issue. Some of the most comprehensive treatments can be found
in [Weste93] and [Chandrakasan01]. Regarding the intricacies of high-performance
design, [Shoji96] and [Bernstein98] offer the most in-depth discussion of the optimization
and analysis of digital MOS circuits. The topic of power minimization is relatively new.
Excellent reference works are [Chandrakasan95] and [Rabaey95].

--- Page Break ---

294 DESIGNING COMBINATIONAL LOGIC GATES IN CMOS Chapter 6
Innovations in the MOS logic area are typically published in the proceedings of the
ISSCC Conference and the VLSI circuits symposium, as well as the IEEE Journal of Solid
State Circuits (especially the November issue).
REFERENCES
[Bernstein98] K. Bernstein et al., High-Speed CMOS Design Styles, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1998.
[Chandrakasan95] A. Chandrakasan and R. Brodersen, Low Power Digital CMOS Design, Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1995.
[Chandrakasan01] A. Chandrakasan, W. Bowhill, and F. Fox, ed., Design of High-Performance
Microprocessor Circuits, IEEE Press, 2001.
[Friedman84] V. Friedman and S. Liu, “Dynamic Logic CMOS Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid
State Circuits, vol. SC-19, no. 2, pp. 263–266, April 1984.
[Goncalvez83] N. Goncalvez and H. De Man, “NORA: A Racefree Dynamic CMOS Technique for
Pipelined Logic Structures,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-18, no. 3, pp.
261–266, June 1983.
[Heller84] L. Heller et al., “Cascade Voltage Switch Logic: A Differential CMOS Logic Family,”
Proc. IEEE ISSCC Conference, pp. 16–17, February 1984.
[Krambeck82] R. Krambeck et al., “High-Speed Compact Circuits with CMOS,” IEEE Journal of
Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-17, no. 3, pp. 614–619, June 1982.
[Lee86] C. M. Lee and E. Szeto, “Zipper CMOS,” IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine, pp. 10–16,
May 1986.
[Parameswar96] A.Parameswar, H.Hara, and T.Sakurai, “A swing restored pass-transistor logic-
based multiply and accumulate circuit for multimedia applications,” IEEE Journal of Solid State
Circuits, vol.SC-31, no.6, pp.805-809, June 1996.
[Rabaey95] J. Rabaey and M. Pedram, Ed., Low Power Design Methodologies, Kluwer, 1995.
[Radhakrishnan85] D. Radhakrishnan, S. Whittaker, and G. Maki, “Formal Design Procedures for
Pass-Transistor Switching Circuits,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-20, no. 2,
pp. 531–536, April 1985.
[Shoji88] M. Shoji, CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice Hall, 1988.
[Shoji96] M. Shoji, High-Speed Digital Circuits, Addison-Wesley, 1996.
[Sutherland99] I. Sutherland, B. Sproull, and D. Harris, Logical Effort, Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.
[Weste93] N. Weste and K. Eshragian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems Perspective,
Addison-Wesley, 1993.
[Yano90] K. Yano et al., “A 3.8 ns CMOS 16 × 16 b Multiplier Using Complimentary Pass-
Transistor Logic,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-25, no 2, pp. 388–395, April
1990.
[Ye98] Y. Ye, S. Borkar, and V. De, “A new technique for standby leakage reduction in high-perfor-
mance circuits,” Symposium on VLSI Circuits, pp 40-41, 1998.

--- Page Break ---

Section 6.6 To Probe Further 295

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 270 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
C H A P T E R
7
D E S I G N I N G S E Q U E N T I A L L O G I C
C I R C U I T S
Implementation techniques for flip-flops, latches, oscillators, pulse generators,
and Schmitt triggers
n
Static versus dynamic realization
n
Choosing clocking strategies
7.1 Introduction 7.5.1 Dynamic Transmission-Gate Based
Edge-triggred Registers
7.2 Timing Metrics for Sequential Circuits
7.5.2 C2MOS Dynamic Register: A Clock
7.3 Classification of Memory Elements Skew Insensitive Approach
7.4 Static Latches and Registers 7.5.3 True Single-Phase Clocked Register
(TSPCR)
7.4.1The Bistability Principle
7.6 Pulse Registers
7.4.2SR Flip-Flops
6.4.2 The C2MOS Latch
7.4.3Multiplexer Based Latches
7.8.2 NORA-CMOS— A Logic Style for
7.4.4Master-Slave Based Edge Triggered Pipelined Structures
Register 7.5.3 True Single-Phase Clocked Register
(TSPCR)
7.4.5Non-ideal clock signals
7.7 Sense-Amplifier Based Registers
7.4.6Low-Voltage Static Latches
7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential
7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers
circuits
270

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 271 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 271
7.8.1Latch- vs. Register-Based Pipelines
7.8.2NORA-CMOS— A Logic Style for Pipelined Structures
7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits
7.9.1The Schmitt Trigger
7.9.2Monostable Sequential Circuits
7.9.3Astable Circuits
7.10 Perspective: Choosing a Clocking Strategy
7.11 Summary
7.12 To Probe Further
7.13 Exercises and Design Problems

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 272 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
272 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
7.1 Introduction
Combinational logic circuits that were described earlier have the property that the output
of a logic block is only a function of the current input values, assuming that enough time
has elapsed for the logic gates to settle.Yet virtually all useful systems require storage of
state information, leading to another class of circuits calledsequential logic circuits. In
these circuits, the output not only depends upon the current values of the inputs, but also
upon preceding input values. In other words, a sequential circuit remembers some of the
past history of the system— it has memory.
Figure 7.1 shows a block diagram of a genericfinite state machine (FSM) that con-
sists of combinational logic and registers that hold thesystem state. The system depicted
here belongs to the class of synchronous sequential systems, in which all registers are
under control of a single global clock. The outputs of the FSM are a function of the current
Inputs and the Current State. The Next State is determined based on the Current State and
the current Inputs and is fed to the inputs of registers. On the rising edge of the clock, the
Next State bits are copied to the outputs of the registers (after some propagation delay),
and a new cycle begins. The register then ignores changes in the input signals until the
next rising edge. In general, registers can bepositive edge-triggered (where the input data
is copied on the positive edge) or negative edge-triggered (where the input data is copied
on the negative edge of the clock, as is indicated by a small circle at the clock input).
Inputs  Outputs
COMBINATIONAL
LOGIC
Current State  Next State
Registers
Q D
CLK
Figure 7.1 Block diagram of a finite state machine usingpositive edge-triggeredregisters.
This chapter discusses the CMOS implementation of the most important sequential
building blocks. A variety of choices in sequential primitives and clocking methodologies
exist; making the correct selection is getting increasingly important in modern digital cir-
cuits, and can have a great impact on performance, power, and/or design complexity.
Before embarking on a detailed discussion on the various design options, a revision of the
design metrics, and a classification of the sequential elements is necessary.
7.2 Timing Metrics for Sequential Circuits
There are three important timing parameters associated with a register as illustrated in Fig-
ure 7.2. The set-up time (tsu) is the time that the data inputs (D input) must be valid before
the clock transition (this is, the 0 to 1 transition for apositive edge-triggered register). The
hold time (thold) is the time the data input must remain valid after the clock edge. Assum-

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 273 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.3 Classification of Memory Elements 273
CLK
t Register
tsu thold D Q
D DATA CLK
STABLE t
tc-q
Figure 7.2 Definition of set-up
time, hold time, and propagation
Q DATA
STABLE t delay of a synchronous register.
ing that the set-up and hold-times are met, the data at theD input is copied to the Q output
after a worst-case propagation delay (with reference to the clock edge) denoted bytc-q.
Given the timing information for the registers and the combination logic, some sys-
tem-level timing constraints can be derived. Assume that the worst-casepropagation
delay of the logic equals tplogic, while its minimum delay (also called thecontamination
delay) is tcd. The minimum clock period T, required for proper operation of the sequential
circuit is given by
T ≥ tc-q + tp log ic + tsu (7.1)
The hold time of the register imposes an extra constraint for proper operation,
tcd register + tcd logic ≥ thold (7.2)
where tcdregister is the minimum propagation delay (or contamination delay) of the register.
As seen from Eq. (7.1), it is important to minimize thevalues of the timing parame-
ters associated with the register, as these directly affect the rate at whicha sequential cir-
cuit can be clocked. In fact, modern high-performance systems are characterized by a
very-low logic depth, and the register propagation delay and set-up times account for a
significant portion of the clock period. For example,the DEC Alpha EV6 microprocessor
[Gieseke97] has a maximum logic depth of 12 gates, and the register overhead stands for
approximately 15% of the clock period. In general, the requirement of Eq. (7.2) is not hard
to meet, although it becomes an issue when there is little or no logic between registers, (or
when the clocks at different registers are somewhat out of phase due to clock skew, as will
be discussed in a later Chapter).
7.3 Classification of Memory Elements
Foreground versus Background Memory
At a high level, memory is classified into background and foreground memory. Memory
that is embedded into logic is foreground memory, andis most often organized as individ-
ual registers of register banks. Large amounts of centralized memory coreare referred to
as background memory. Background memory, discussed later in this book, achieves

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 274 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
274 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
higher area densities through efficient use of array structures andby trading off perfor-
mance and robustness for size. In this chapter, we focus on foreground memories.
Static versus Dynamic Memory
Memories can be static or dynamic. Static memories preserve the state as long as the
power is turned on. Static memories are built using positive feedback or regeneration,
where the circuit topology consists of intentional connectionsbetween the output and the
input of a combinational circuit. Static memories are most useful when the register won’t
be updated for extended periods of time. An example of such is configuration data, loaded
at power-up time. This condition also holds for most processors that use conditional clock-
ing (i.e., gated clocks) where the clock is turnedoff for unused modules. In that case, there
are no guarantees on how frequently the registers will be clocked, and static memoriesare
needed to preserve the state information. Memory based on positive feedback fall under
the class of elements called multivibrator circuits. The bistable element, is its most popu-
lar representative, but other elements such as monostable and astable circuits are also fre-
quently used.
Dynamic memories store state for a short period of time— on the order of millisec-
onds. They are based on the principle of temporary charge storage on parasitic capacitors
associated with MOS devices. As with dynamic logic discussed earlier, the capacitors
have to be refreshed periodically to annihilate charge leakage. Dynamic memories tend to
simpler, resulting in significantly higher performance and lower power dissipation. They
are most useful in datapath circuits that require high performance levels and are periodi-
cally clocked. It is possible to use dynamic circuitry even when circuits are conditionally
clocked, if the state can be discarded when a module goes into idle mode.
Latches vs. Registers
A latch is an essential component in the construction of an edge-triggered register. It is
level-sensitive circuit that passes the D input to the Q output when the clock signal is high.
This latch is said to be in transparent mode. When the clock is low, the input data sampled
on the falling edge of the clock is held stable at the output for the entire phase, and the
latch is in hold mode. The inputs must be stable for a short period around the falling edge
of the clock to meet set-up and hold requirements. A latch operating under the above con-
ditions is a positive latch. Similarly, a negative latch passes the D input to the Q output
when the clock signal is low. The signal waveforms for a positive and negative latch are
shown in Figure 7.3. A wide variety of static and dynamic implementations exists for the
realization of latches.
Contrary to level-sensitive latches, edge-triggered registers only sample the input on
a clock transition — 0-to-1 for a positive edge-triggered register, and 1-to-0 for a negative
edge-triggered register. They are typically built using the latch primitivesof Figure 7.3. A
most-often recurring configuration is themaster-slave structure that cascades a positive
and negative latch. Registers can also be constructed using one-shot generators of the
clock signal (“glitch” registers), or using other specialized structures. Examples of these
are shown later in this chapter.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 275 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 275
Positive Latch Negative Latch
In D Q Out 
In D Q Out
G G
CLK
CLK
clk clk
In In
Out Out
Out Out Out Out
stable follows In  stable follows In
Figure 7.3 Timing of positive and negative latches.
7.4 Static Latches and Registers
7.4.1 The Bistability Principle
Static memories use positive feedback to create a bistable circuit — a circuit having two
stable states that represent 0 and 1. The basic idea is shown in Figure 7.4a, which shows
two inverters connected in cascade along with a voltage-transfer characteristic typical of
such a circuit. Also plotted are the VTCs of the first inverter, that is,Vo1 versus Vi1, and the
second inverter (Vo2 versus Vo1). The latter plot is rotated to accentuate that Vi2 = Vo1.
Assume now that the output of the second inverterVo2 is connected to the input of the first
Vi1, as shown by the dotted lines in Figure 7.4a. The resulting circuit has only three possi-
1
o 1
V o
= V 
i2
V
V = V
Vi1 o1  i2 V
o2
V i1  Vo2
Vo2 = Vi1 A
o1
(a) = V 
i2
V
C
Figure 7.4 Two cascaded inverters (a)
B
and their VTCs (b).
Vi1 = Vo2
(b)

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 276 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
276 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
ble operation points (A, B, and C), as demonstrated on the combined VTC. The following
important conjecture is easily proven to be valid:
Under the condition that the gain of the inverter in the transient region is larger than 1, onlyA
and B are stable operation points, and C is a metastable operation point.
Suppose that the cross-coupled inverter pair is biased at point C. A small deviation from
this bias point, possibly caused by noise, is amplified andregenerated around the circuit
loop. This is a consequence of the gain around the loop being larger than 1. The effect is
demonstrated in Figure 7.5a. A small deviationδ is applied to Vi1 (biased in C). This devi-
ation is amplified by the gain of the inverter. The enlarged divergence is applied to the
second inverter and amplified once more. The bias point moves away fromC until one of
the operation points A or B is reached. In conclusion, C is an unstable operation point.
Every deviation (even the smallest one) causes the operation point to run away from its
original bias. The chance is indeed very small that the cross-coupled inverter pair is biased
at C and stays there. Operation points with this property are termedmetastable.
A A
o1 o1
= V  = V 
i2 i2
V V
C C
B B
δ Vi1 = Vo2 δ Vi1 = Vo2
(b)
Figure 7.5 Metastability.(a) 
On the other hand, A and B are stable operation points, as demonstrated in Figure
7.5b. In these points, the loop gain is much smaller than unity. Even a rather large devi-
ation from the operation point is reduced in size and disappears.
Hence the cross-coupling of two inverters results in abistable circuit, that is, a cir-
cuit with two stable states, each corresponding to a logic state. The circuit serves as a
memory, storing either a 1 or a 0 (corresponding to positionsA and B).
In order to change the stored value, we must be able to bring the circuit from stateA
to B and vice-versa. Since the precondition for stability is that the loop gainG is smaller
than unity, we can achieve this by makingA (or B) temporarily unstable by increasingG to
a value larger than 1. This is generally done by applying a trigger pulse atVi1 or Vi2. For
instance, assume that the system is in positionA (Vi1 = 0, Vi2 = 1). Forcing Vi1 to 1 causes
both inverters to be on simultaneously for a short time and the loop gainG to be larger
than 1. The positive feedback regenerates the effect of the trigger pulse, and the circuit
moves to the other state (B in this case). The width of the trigger pulse need be only a little

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 277 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 277
larger than the total propagation delay around the circuit loop, which is twice the average
propagation delay of the inverters.
In summary, a bistable circuit has two stable states. In absence of any triggering, the
circuit remains in a single state (assuming that the power supply remains applied to the
circuit), and hence remembers a value. A trigger pulse must be applied to change the state
of the circuit. Another common name for a bistable circuit isflip-flop (unfortunately, an
edge-triggered register is also referred to as a flip-flop).
7.4.2 SR Flip-Flops
The cross-coupled inverter pair shown in the previous section provides an approach to
store a binary variable in a stable way. However, extra circuitry must be added to enable
control of the memory states. The simplestincarnation accomplishing this is the well-
know SR — or set-reset— flip-flop, an implementation of which is shown in Figure 7.6a.
This circuit is similar to the cross-coupled inverter pair with NOR gates replacing the
inverters. The second input of the NOR gates is connected to the trigger inputs (S and R),
that make it possible to force the outputs Q and Q to a given state. These outputs are com-
plimentary (except for theSR = 11 state). When both S and R are 0, the flip-flop is in a qui-
escent state and both outputs retain their value (a NOR gate with one of its input being 0
looks like an inverter, and the structure looks like a cross coupled inverter). If a positive
(or 1) pulse is applied to the S input, the Q output is forced into the 1 state (withQ going to
0). Vice versa, a 1 pulse on R resets the flip-flop and the Q output goes to 0.
S R Q Q
S
Q
S Q 0 0 Q Q
1 0 1 0
R Q
0 1 0 1
Q
R 1 1 0 0
Forbidden State
(a) Schematic diagram (b) Logic symbol (c) Characteristic table
Figure 7.6 NOR-based SR flip-flop.
These results are summarized in the characteristic table of the flip-flop, shown in
Figure 7.6c. The characteristic table is the truth table of the gate and lists the output states
as functions of all possible input conditions. When bothS and R are high, both Q and Q
are forced to zero. Since this does not correspond with our constraint thatQ and Q must be
complementary, this input mode is considered to be forbidden. An additional problem
with this condition is that when the input triggers return to their zero levels, the resulting
state of the latch is unpredictable and depends on whatever input is last to go low.Finally,
Figure 7.6 shows the schematics symbol of theSR flip-flop.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 278 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
278 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
Problem 7.1 SR Flip-Flop Using NAND Gates S
Q
An SR flip-flop can also be implemented using a
cross-coupled NAND structure as shown in Figure
7.7. Derive the truth table for a such an implemen- Q
R
tation.
Figure 7.7 NAND-based SR flip-flop.
The SR flip-flops discussed so far are asynchronous, and do not require a clock sig-
nal. Most systems operate in a synchronous fashionwith transition events referenced to a
clock. One possible realization of a clocked SR flip-flop— a level-sensitive positive
latch— s shown in Figure 7.8. It consists of a cross-coupled inverter pairi , plus 4 extra
transistors to drive the flip-flop from one state to another and toprovide clocked opera-
tion. Observe that the number of transistors is identical to the implementation of Figure
7.6, but the circuit has the added feature of being clocked. The drawbackof saving some
transistors over a fully-complimentary CMOS implementation is that transistor sizing
becomes critical in ensuring proper functionality. Consider the case where Q is high and
an R pulse is applied. The combination of transistors M4, M7, and M8 forms a ratioed
inverter. In order to make the latch switch, we must succeed in bringingQ below the
switching threshold of the inverter M1-M2. Once this is achieved, the positive feedback
causes the flip-flop to invert states. This requirement forces us to increase the sizes of tran-
sistors M5, M6, M7, and M8.
VDD
M2 M4
Q
Q
CLK M M CLK
6 8
M1 M
3
S M5 M7 R
Figure 7.8 CMOS clocked SR flip-flop.
The presented flip-flop does not consume any static power. In steady-state, one
inverter resides in the high state, while the other one is low. No static paths between VDD
and GND can exist except during switching.
Example 7.1 Transistor Sizing of Clocked SR Latch
Assume that the cross-coupled inverter pair is designed such that the inverter thresholdVM is
located at VDD/2. For a 0.25 μm CMOS technology, the following transistor sizes were
selected: (W/L)M1 = (W/L)M3 = (0.5μm/0.25μm), and (W/L)M2 = (W/L)M4 = (1.5μm/0.25μm).
Assuming Q = 0, we determine the minimum sizes ofM5, M6, M7, and M8 to make the device
switchable.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 279 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 279
To switch the latch from theQ = 0 to the Q = 1 state, it is essential that the low level of
the ratioed, pseudo-NMOS inverter (M5-M6)-M2 be below the switching threshold of the
inverter M3-M4 that equals VDD/2. It is reasonable to assume that as long as VQ > VM, VQ
equals 0, and the gate of transistor M2 is grounded. The boundary conditions on the transistor
sizes can be derived by equating the currents in the inverter forVQ = VDD / 2, as given in Eq.
(7.3) (this ignores channel length modulation). The currents are determined by the saturation
current since VSET = VDD = 2.5V and VM = 1.25V. We assume that M5 and M6 have identical
sizes and that W/L5-6 is the effective ratio of the series-connected devices. Under this condi-
tion, the pull-down network can be modeled by a single transistorM56, whose length is twice
the length of the individual devices.
2 2
 W  VDSATn   W  VDSATp
k′n ----- ( VDD – VTn)VDSATn – ----------------- = k′p ----- ( – VDD – VTp)VDSATp – ----------------- (7.3)
 L 5 –6 2   L 2 2 
Using the parameters for the 0.25 μm process, Eq. (7.3) results in the constraint that the
effective (W/L)M5-6 ≥ 2.26. This implies that the individual device ratio forM5 or M6 must be
larger that approximately 4.5. Figure 7.9a shows the DC plot ofVQ as a function of the indi-
vidual device sizes of M5 and M6. We notice that the individual device ratio of greater than 3
is sufficient to bring theQ voltage to the inverter switching threshold. The difference between
the manual analysis and simulation arises due to second order effects such as DIBL and chan-
nel length modulation. Figure 7.9b, which shows the transient response for different device
sizes. The plot confirms that an individualW/L ratio of greater than 3 is required to overpower
the feedback and switch the state of the latch.
2.0 3
Q S
1.5
W =0.5 μm
2
W =0.6 μm
1.0 W =0.7 μm
 (Volts) Volts
Q
1 W =0.8 μm
0.5
W =0.9 μm
W =1 μm
0.02.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 00 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
W /L 5and 6 time (nsec)
(a) (b)
Figure 7.9 Sizing issues for SR flip-flop. (a) DC output voltage vs. individual pulldown
device size of M5 and M6 with W/L2= 1.5μm/.25μm. (b) Transient response shows thatM5
and M6 must each have aW/L larger than 3 to swtich theSR flip-flop.
The positive feedback effect makes a manual derivation ofpropagation delay of the
SR latch non-trivial. Some simplifications are therefore necessary. Consider, for instance,
the latch of Figure 7.8, whereQ and Q are set to 0 and 1, respectively. A pulse is applied at
node S, causing the latch to toggle. In the first phase of the transient, nodeQ is being
pulled down by transistors M5 and M6. Since node Q is initially low, the PMOS deviceM2
is on while M1 is off. The transient response is hence determined by the pseudo-NMOS
inverter formed by (M5-M6) and M2. Once Q reaches the switching threshold of the CMOS
inverter M3-M4, this inverter reacts and the positive feedback comes into action, turning
M2 off and M1 on. This accelerates the pulling down of nodeQ. From this analysis, we can

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 280 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
280 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
derive that the propagation delay of node Q is approximately equal to the delay of the
pseudo-NMOS inverter formed by (M5-M6) and M2. To obtain the delay for node Q, it is
sufficient to add the delay of the complementary CMOS inverterM3-M4.
Example 7.2 Propagation Delay of Static SR Flip-Flop
The transient response of the latch in Figure 7.8, as obtained from simulation, is plotted in
Figure 7.10. The devices are sized as described in Example 7.1, and a load of a single inverter
is assumed for each latch output. The flip-flop is initially in the reset state, and anS-pulse is
applied. As we can observe, this results first in a discharging of theQ output while Q stays at
0. Once the switching threshold of the inverterM3-M4 is reached, the Q output starts to rise.
The delay of this transient is solely determined by theM3-M4 inverter, which is hampered by
the slow rise time at its input. From the simulation results, we can derive thattpQ and tpQ equal
120psec and 230psec, respectively.
3.0
2.0
SET Q Q
Volts
t pQ t pQ
1.0
Figure 7.10 Transient response
of SR flip-flop.
0.0
0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5
Time (ns)
Problem 7.2 Complimentary CMOS SR FF
Instead of using the modified SR FF of Figure 7.8, it is also possible to use complementary
logic to implement the clocked SR FF. Derive the transistor schematic (which consists of 12
transistors). This circuit is more complex, but switches faster and consumes less switching
power. Explain why.
7.4.3 Multiplexer Based Latches
There are many approaches for constructing latches. One very common technique
involves the use of transmission gate multiplexers. Multiplexer based latches can provide
similar functionality to theSR latch, but has the important added advantage that the sizing
of devices only affects performance and is not critical to the functionality.
Figure 7.11 shows an implementation of static positive and negative latches based
on multiplexers. For a negative latch, when the clock signal is low, the input 0 of the mul-

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 281 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 281
tiplexer is selected, and the D input is passed to the output. When the clock signal is high,
the input 1 of the multiplexer, which connects to the output of the latch, is selected. The
feedback holds the output stable while the clock signal is high. Similarly in the positive
latch, the D input is selected when clock is high, and the output is held (using feedback)
when clock is low.
Negative Latch Positive Latch
Q
1 Q 0
D 0 D 1
CLK CLK
Figure 7.11 Negative and positive latches based onmultiplexers.
A transistor level implementation of a positive latch based on multiplexers is shown
in Figure 7.12. When CLK is high, the bottom transmission gate is on and the latch is
transparent - that is, the D input is copied to the Q output. During this phase, the feedback
loop is open since the top transmission gate isoff. Unlike the SR FF, the feedback does not
have to be overridden to write the memory and hence sizing of transistors is not critical for
realizing correct functionality. The number of transistors that the clock touches is impor-
tant since it has an activity factor of 1. This particular latch implementation is not particu-
larly efficient from this metric as it presents a load of 4 transistors to theCLK signal.
CLK
Q
CLK
D Figure 7.12Transistor level implementation of
a positive latch built using transmission gates.
CLK
It is possible to reduce the clock load to two transistors by using implement multi-
plexers using NMOS only pass transistor as shown in Figure 7.13. The advantage of this
approach is the reduced clock load of only two NMOS devices. When CLK is high, the
latch samples the D input, while a low clock-signal enables the feedback-loop, and puts
the latch in the hold mode. While attractive for its simplicity, the use ofNMOS only pass
transistors results in the passing of a degraded high voltage ofVDD-VTn to the input of the
first inverter. This impacts both noise margin and the switching performance, especially in
the case of low values of VDD and high values of VTn. It also causes static power dissipa-
tion in first inverter, as already pointed out in Chapter 6. Since the maximum input-volt-
age to the inverter equals VDD-VTn, the PMOS device of the inverter is never turned off,
resulting is a static current flow.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 282 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
282 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
QM
CLK CLK
D QM
CLK
CLK
(a) Schematic diagram (b) Nonoverlapping clocks
Figure 7.13 Multiplexer based NMOS latch using NMOS only pass transistors for multiplexers.
7.4.4 Master-Slave Based Edge Triggered Register
The most common approach for constructing an edge-triggered register is to use a
master-slave configuration as shown in Figure 7.14. The register consists of cascading a
negative latch (master stage) with a positive latch (slave stage). A multiplexer based latch
is used in this particular implementation, though any latch can be used to realize the mas-
ter and slave stages. On the low phase of the clock, the master stage istransparent and the
D input is passed to the master stage output, QM. During this period, the slave stage is in
the hold mode, keeping its previous value using feedback. On the rising edge of the clock,
the master slave stops sampling the input, and the slave stage starts sampling. During the
high phase of the clock, the slave stage samples the output of the master stage (QM), while
the master stage remains in a hold mode. Since QM is constant during the high phase of the
clock, the output Q makes only one transition per cycle. The value ofQ is the value of D
right before the rising edge of the clock, achieving thepositive edge-triggered effect. A
negative edge-triggered register can be constructed using the same principle by simply
switching the order of the positive and negative latch (i.e., placing the positive latch first).
Slave
Master CLK
D
0 Q
1 QM
1
QM
D 0 Q
CLK
CLK
Figure 7.14 Positive edge-triggered register based on a master-slave configuration.
A complete transistor level implementation of a themaster-slave positive edge-trig-
gered register is shown in Figure 7.15. The multiplexer is implemented using transmission
gates as discussed in the previous section. When clock is low (CLK = 1), T1 is on and T2 is
off, and the D input is sampled onto nodeQM. During this period, T3 is off and T4 is on and
the cross-coupled inverters (I5, I6) holds the state of the slave latch. Whenthe clock goes
high, the master stage stops sampling the input and goes into ahold mode. T1 is off and T2

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 283 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 283
is on, and the cross coupled inverters I3 and I4 holds the state of QM. Also, T3 is on and T4
is off, and QM is copied to the output Q.
I T I I T I Q
2 2 3  5 4 6
QM
D
I1 T1 I4 T3
CLK
Figure 7.15 Transistor-level implementation of amaster-slave postive edge-triggered
register using multiplexers.
Problem 7.3Optimization of the Master Slave Register
It is possible to remove the inverters I1 and I2 from Figure 7.3 without loss of functional-
ity. Is there any advantage in including these inverters in the implementation?
Timing Properties of the multiplexer Bases Master-Slave Register. As discussed ear-
lier, there are three important timing metrics in registers: theset up time, the hold time and
the propagation delay. It is important to understand these factors that affect the timing
parameters and develop the intuition to manually estimate the parameters. Assume that the
propagation delay of each inverter is tpd_inv and the propagation delay of the transmission
gate is tpd_tx. Also assume that the contamination delay is 0 and the inverter delay to derive
CLK from CLK has a delay equal to 0.
The set-up time is the time before the rising edge of the clock that the input dataD
must become valid. Another way to ask the question is how long before the rising edge
does the D input have to be stable such that QM samples the value reliably. For the trans-
mission gate multiplexer-based register, the input D has to propagate through I1, T1, I3 and
I2 before the rising edge of the clock. This is to ensure that the node voltages on both ter-
minals of the transmission gate T2 are at the same value. Otherwise, it is possible for the
cross-coupled pair I2 and I3 to settle to an incorrect value. The set-up time is therefore
equal to 3 *tpd_inv + tpd_tx .
The propagation delay is the time for the value of QM to propagate to the output Q.
Note that since we included the delay ofI2 in the set-up time, the output of I4 is valid
before the rising edge of clock. Therefore the delaytc-q is simply the delay throughT3 and
I6 (tc-q = tpd_tx + tpd_inv).
The hold time represents the time that the input must be held stable after the rising
edge of the clock. In this case, the transmission gateT1 turns off when clock goes high and
therefore any changes in the D-input after clock going high are not seen by the input.
Therefore, the hold time is 0.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 284 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
284 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
Example 7.3 Timing analysis using SPICE.
To obtain the set-up time of the register using SPICE, we progressively skew the input with
respect to the clock edge until the circuit fails. Figure 7.16 shows the set-up time simulation
assuming a skew of 210 psec and 200 psec. For the 210 psec case, the correct value of inputD
is sampled (in this case, the Q output remains at the value ofVDD). For a skew of 200 psec, an
incorrect value propagates to the output (in this case, theQ output transitions to 0). Node QM
starts to go high while the output ofI2 (the input to transmission gate T2) starts to fall. How-
ever, the clock is enabled before the two nodes across the transmission gate (T2) settle to the
same value and therefore, results in an incorrect value written into the master latch.Theset-up
time for this register is therefore 210 psec.
3.0 3.0
Q
2.5 2.5
2.0 Q 2.0
M
I2-T2
 1.5 1.5 Q
CLK D CLK
D Volts
Volts1.0 1.0
QM
I2-T2
0.5 0.5
0.0 0.0
-0.5 -0.5
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
time(ns) time (ns)
(a) Tsetup = 0.21ns  (b) Tsetup = 0.20ns
Figure 7.16 Set-up time simulation.
In a similar fashion, the hold time can be simulated. The D input edge is once again
skewed relative to the clock signal till the circuit stop functioning. For this design, thehold
time is 0 - i.e., the inputs can be changed on the clock edge. Finally, for thepropagation
delay, the inputs are transitioned at least a set-up time before the rising edge of the clock and
the delay is measured from the 50% point of theCLK edge to the 50% point of the Q output.
From this simulation (Figure 7.17), tc-q (lh) was 160psec and tc-q(hl) was 180psec.
2.5
CLK
1.5
D
tc-q(lh)  t  Figure 7.17 Simulation of propagation delay.
c-q(hl)
Q
Volts
0.5
-0.5
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
time, ns

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 285 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 285
As mentioned earlier, the drawback of the transmission gate register is the high capacitive
load presented to the clock signal. The clock load per register is important since it directly
impacts the power dissipation of the clock network. Ignoring the overhead required to
invert the clock signal (since the buffer inverter overhead can be amortized over multiple
register bits), each register has a clock load of 8 transistors. One approach to reduce the
clock load at the cost of robustness is to make the circuit ratioed.Figure 7.18 shows that
the feedback transmission gate can be eliminated by directly cross coupling the inverters.
CLK CLK
D T1 I1 T2 I3 Q
I2 I4
CLK CLK
Figure 7.18 Reduced load clock load staticmaster-slave register.
The penalty for the reduced clock load is increased design complexity. The trans-
mission gate (T1) and its source driver must overpower the feedback inverter (I2) to switch
the state of the cross-coupled inverter.The sizing requirements for the transmission gates
can be derived using a similar analysis as performed for theSR flip-flop. The input to the
inverter I1 must be brought below its switching threshold in order to make a transition.If
minimum-sized devices are to be used in the transmission gates, it is essential that the
transistors of inverter I2 should be made even weaker. This can be accomplished by mak-
ing their channel-lengths larger than minimum. Using minimum or close-to-minimum-
size devices in the transmission gates is desirable to reduce the power dissipation in the
latches and the clock distribution network.
Another problem with this scheme is the reverse conduction — this is,the second
stage can affect the state of the first latch. When the slave stage ison (Figure 7.19), it is
possible for the combination ofT2 and I4 to influence the data storedin I1-I2 latch. As long
as I4 is a weak device, this is fortunately not a majorproblem.
VDD 0
I
D T1  1 T2 I3 Q
I2 I
4
0 VDD
Figure 7.19 Reverse conduction possible in the transmission gate.
7.4.5 Non-ideal clock signals
So far, we have assumed thatCLK is a perfect inversion ofCLK, or in other words, that the
delay of the generating inverter is zero.Even if this were possible, this would still not be a
good assumption. Variations can exist in the wires used to route the twoclock signals, or

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 286 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
286 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
the load capacitances can vary based on data stored in theconnecting latches. This effect,
known as clock skew is a major problem, and causes the two clock signals to overlap as is
shown in Figure 7.20b. Clock-overlap can cause two types of failures, as illustrated for the
NMOS-only negative master-slave register of Figure 7.20a.
X
CLK CLK Q
A
D
B
CLK CLK
(a) Schematic diagram
CLK
CLK Figure 7.20 Master-slave register based
on NMOS-only pass transistors.
(b) Overlapping clock pairs
• When the clock goes high, the slave stage should stop sampling the master stage
output and go into a hold mode. However, since CLK and CLK are both high for a
short period of time (the overlap period), both sampling pass transistors conduct and
there is a direct path from the D input to the Q output. As a result, data at the output
can change on the rising edge of the clock, which is undesired for anegative edge-
triggered register. The is know as a race condition in which the value of the output
Q is a function of whether the input D arrives at node X before or after the falling
edge of CLK. If node X is sampled in the metastable state, the output will switch to a
value determined by noise in the system.
• The primary advantage of the multiplexer-based register is that the feedback loop is
open during the sampling period, and therefore sizing of devices is not critical to
functionality. However, if there is clock overlap betweenCLK and CLK, node A can
be driven by both D and B, resulting in an undefined state.
Those problems can be avoided by using twonon-overlapping clocks PHI1 and PHI2
instead (Figure 7.21), and by keeping the nonoverlap time tnon_overlap between the clocks
large enough such that no overlap occurs even in the presence of clock-routing delays.
During the nonoverlap time, the FF is in the high-impedance state— the feedback loop is
open, the loop gain is zero, and the input is disconnected. Leakage will destroy the state if
this condition holds for too long a time. Hence the namepseudostatic: the register
employs a combination of static and dynamic storage approaches depending upon the state
of the clock.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 287 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.4 Static Latches and Registers 287
PHI1 PHI2 Q
D
PHI2 PHI1
(a) Schematic diagram
PHI1
PHI2
tnon_overlap
(b) Two-phase nonoverlapping clocks
Figure 7.21 Pseudostatic two-phaseD register.
Problem 7.4 Generating non-overlapping clocks
Figure 7.22 shows one possible implementation of the clock generation circuitry for generat-
ing a two-phase non-overlapping clocks. Assuming that each gate has a unit gate delay, derive
the timing relationship between the input clock and the two output clocks. What is the non-
overlap period? How can this period be increased if needed?
PHI1
CLK
Figure 7.22Circuitry for generating a
PHI2 two phase non-overlapping clock
7.4.6 Low-Voltage Static Latches
The scaling of supply voltages is critical for low power operation. Unfortunately,
certain latch structures don’t function at reduced supply voltages. For example, without
the scaling of device thresholds, NMOS only pass transistors (e.g., Figure 7.21) don’t
scale well with supply voltage due to its inherent threshold drop. At very low power sup-
ply voltages, the input to the inverter cannot be raised above the switching threshold,
resulting in incorrect evaluation. Even with the use of transmission gates, performance
degrades significantly at reduced supply voltages.
Scaling to low supply voltages hence requires the use of reduced threshold devices.
However, this has the negative effect of exponentially increasing the sub-threshold leak-
age power as discussed in Chapter 6. When the registers are constantly accessed, the leak-

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 288 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
288 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
age energy is typically insignificant compared to the switching power. However, with the
use of conditional clocks, it is possible that registers are idle for extended periods and the
leakage energy expended by registers can be quite significant.
Many solutions are being explored to address the problem of high leakage during
idle periods. One approach for this involves the use of Multiple Threshold devices as
shown in Figure 7.23 [Mutoh95]. Only the negative latch is shown here. The shaded
inverters and transmission gates are implemented in low-threshold devices. The low-
threshold inverters are gated using high threshold devices to eliminate leakage.
During normal mode of operation, the sleep devices are tunedon. When clock is
low, the D input is sampled and propagates to the output. When clock is high, the latch is
in the hold mode. The feedback transmission gate conducts and the cross-coupled feed-
back is enabled. Note there is an extra inverter, needed for storage of state when the latch
is in the sleep state. During idle mode, the high threshold devices in series with the low
threshold inverter are turned off (the SLEEP signal is high), eliminating leakage. It is
assumed that clock is in the high state when the latch is in the sleep state. The feedback
low-threshold transmission gate is turnedon and the cross-coupled high-threshold devices
maintains the state of the latch.
VDD
VDD VDD
SLEEP 
SLEEP High VT CLK High VT
D  Q
SLEEP High V
SLEEP High VT T
CLK
CLK
VDD
Figure 7.23 One solution for the leakage problem in low-voltage operation using MTCMOS.
Problem 7.5Transistor minimization in the MTCMOS register
Unlike combination logic, both flavors of high threshold devices in series are required to
eliminate the leakage of low threshold gates. Explain why this is the case. Hint: Eliminate
the high VT NMOS or high VT PMOS of the low threshold inverter on the right of Figure
7.23 and investigate potential leakage paths.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 289 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers 289
7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers
Storage in a static sequential circuit relies on the concept that a cross-coupled inverter pair
produces a bistable element and can thus be used to memorize binary values. This
approach has the useful property that a stored value remains valid as long as the supply
voltage is applied to the circuit, hence the name static. The major disadvantage of the
static gate, however, is its complexity. When registers are used in computational structures
that are constantly clocked such as pipelined datapath, the requirement that the memory
should hold state for extended periods of time can be significantly relaxed.
This results in a class of circuits based on temporary storage of charge on parasitic
capacitors. The principle is exactly identical to the one used in dynamic logic — charge
stored on a capacitor can be used to represent a logic signal. The absence of charge
denotes a 0, while its presence stands for a stored 1. No capacitor is ideal, unfortunately,
and some charge leakage is always present. A stored value canhence only be kept for a
limited amount of time, typically in the range of milliseconds. If one wants to preserve
signal integrity, a periodic refresh of its value is necessary. Hence the namedynamic stor-
age. Reading the value of the stored signal from a capacitor without disrupting the charge
requires the availability of a device with a high input impedance.
7.5.1 Dynamic Transmission-Gate Based Edge-triggred Registers
A fully dynamic positive edge-triggered register based on the master-slave concept is
shown in Figure 7.24. When CLK = 0, the input data is sampled on storage node 1, which
has an equivalent capacitance of C1 consisting of the gate capacitance of I1, the junction
capacitance of T1, and the overlap gate capacitance of T1. During this period, the slave
stage is in a hold mode, with node 2 in a high-impedance (floating) state. On the rising
edge of clock, the transmission gate T2 turns on, and the value sampled on node 1 right
before the rising edge propagates to the outputQ (note that node 1 is stable during the high
phase of the clock since the first transmission gate is turnedoff). Node 2 now stores the
inverted version of node 1. This implementation of anedge-triggered register is very effi-
cient as it requires only 8 transistors. The sampling switches can be implemented using
NMOS-only pass transistors, resulting in an even-simpler 6 transistor implementation.
The reduced transistor count is attractive for high-performance and low-power systems.
CLK CLK
1 2
D T I1 T I Q
1  2  3
C1 C2
CLK CLK Figure 7.24 Dynamic edge-triggered register.
The set-up time of this circuit is simply the delay of the transmission gate, and corre-
sponds to the time it takes node 1 to sample theD input. The hold time is approximately
zero, since the transmission gate is turned off on the clock edge and further inputs changes
are ignored. The propagation delay (tc-q) is equal to two inverter delays plus the delay of
the transmission gate T2.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 290 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
290 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
One important consideration for such a dynamic register is that the storage nodes
(i.e., the state) has to be refreshed at periodic intervals to prevent a loss due to charge leak-
age, due to diode leakage as well as sub-thresholdcurrents. In datapath circuits, the refresh
rate is not an issue since the registers are periodically clocked, and the storage nodes are
constantly updated.
Clock overlap is an important concern for this register. Consider the clock wave-
forms shown in Figure 7.25. During the 0-0 overlap period, the NMOS of T1 and the
PMOS of T2 are simultaneously on, creating adirect path for data to flow from theD input
of the register to the Q output. This is known as a race condition. The output Q can change
on the falling edge if the overlap period is large— obviously an undesirable effect for a
positive edge-triggered register. The same is true for the 1-1 overlap region, where an
input-output path exists through the PMOS of T1 and the NMOS of T2. The latter case is
taken care off by enforcing a hold time constraint. That is, the data must be stable during
the high-high overlap period. Theformer situation (0-0 overlap) can be addressed by mak-
ing sure that there is enough delaybetween the D input and node 2 ensuring that new data
sampled by the master stage does not propagate through to the slave stage. Generallythe
built in single inverter delay should be sufficient and the overlap period constraint is given
as:
toverlap 0 – 0 < tT1 + tI1 + tT2 (7.4)
Similarly, the constraint for the 1-1 overlap is given as:
thold > toverlap 1 –1 (7.5)
(0,0) overlap
CLK
(1,1) overlap
CLK
Figure 7.25 Impact of non-overlapping clocks.
2
7.5.2 C MOS Dynamic Register: A Clock Skew Insensitive Approach
2
The C MOS Register
Figure 7.26 shows an ingenious positive edge-triggered register based on the master-slave
2
concept which is insensitive to clock overlap. This circuit is called the CMOS (Clocked
CMOS) register [Suzuki73]. The register operates in two phases.
1. CLK = 0 (CLK = 1): The first tri-state driver is turned on, and the master stage acts
as an inverter sampling the inverted version ofD on the internal node X. The master
stage is in the evaluation mode. Meanwhile, the slave section is in a high-impedance
mode, or in a hold mode. Both transistors M7 and M8 are off, decoupling the output
from the input. The outputQ retains its previous value stored on the output capacitor
CL2.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 291 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers 291
VDD VDD
M2 M6
CLK M4 CLK M8
X
D Q
CL1 CL2
M3 CLK M7
CLK
M1 M
5
Master Stage Slave Stage
2
Figure 7.26 C MOS master-slave positive edge-triggered register.
2. The roles are reversed when CLK = 1: The master stage section is in hold mode (M3-
M4 off), while the second section evaluates (M7-M8 on). The value stored on CL1
propagates to the output node through the slave stage which acts as an inverter.
The overall circuit operates as a positive edge-triggered master-slave register —
very similar to the transmission-gate based register presented earlier. However, there is an
important difference:
2
A C MOS register with CLK-CLK clocking is insensitive to overlap, as long as the rise and
fall times of the clock edges are sufficiently small.
To prove the above statement, we examine both the (0-0) and (1-1) overlap cases
(Figure 7.25). In the (0-0) overlap case, the circuit simplifies to the network shown in Fig-
ure 7.27a in which both PMOS devices are on during this period. The question isdoes any
new data sampled during the overlap window propagate to the outputQ. This is not desir-
able since data should not change on the negative edge for apositive edge-triggered regis-
ter. Indeed new data is sampled on node X through the series PMOS devices M2-M4, and
node X can make a 0-to-1 transition during the overlap period. However,this data cannot
propagate to the output since the NMOS deviceM7 is turned off. At the end of the overlap
period, CLK=1 and both M7 and M8 turn off, putting the slave stage is in the hold mode.
Therefore, any new data sampled on the falling clock edge is not seenat the slave output
Q, since the slave state is off till the next rising edge of the clock. As the circuit consists of
a cascade of inverters, signal propagation requires one pull-up followed by a pull-down, or
vice-versa, which is not feasible in the situation presented.
The (1-1) overlap case (Figure 7.27b), where both NMOS devices M3 and M7 are
turned on, is somewhat more contentious. The question is again if new data sampled dur-
ing the overlap period (right after clock goes high) propagates to the Q output. A positive
edge-triggered register may only pass data that is presented at the input before the rising

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 292 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
292 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
edge. If the D input changes during the overlap period, node X can make a 1-to-0 transi-
tion, but cannot propagate to the output. However, as soon as the overlap period is over,
the PMOS M8 is turned on and the 0 propagates to output. This effect is not desirable. The
VDD VDD VDD VDD
M
M2 M6 2 M6
0 M4 0 M8
X X
D Q D Q
M
1 3 1 M7
M1 M5 M1 M5
(a) (0-0) overlap (b) (1-1) overlap
2
Figure 7.27 C MOS D FF during overlap periods. No feasible signal path can exist between
In and D, as illustrated by the arrows.
problem is fixed by imposing a hold time constraint on the input data, D, or, in other
words, the data D should be stable during the overlap period.
2
In summary, it can be stated that the CMOS latch is insensitive to clock overlaps
because those overlaps activate either the pull-up or the pull-down networks of the latches,
but never both of them simultaneously. If therise and fall times of the clock are suffi-
ciently slow, however, there exists a time slot where both the NMOS and PMOS transis-
tors are conducting. This creates a path between input and output that can destroy the state
of the circuit. Simulations have shown that the circuit operates correctly as long as the
clock rise time (or fall time) is smaller than approximately five times thepropagation
delay of the register. This criterion is not too stringent, and is easily met in practical
designs. The impact of the rise and fall times is illustrated in Figure 7.28, which plots the
2
simulated transient response of a CMOS D FF for clock slopes of respectively 0.1 and 3
nsec. For slow clocks, the potential for arace condition exists.
3.0
2.5
Q(3)
X(3)
2.0
CLK(3)
 1.5
X(0.1) Q(0.1)
CLK(0.1)
Volts1.0
0.5
Figure 7.28 Transient response of
0.0 2
C MOS FF for 0.1 nsec and 3 nsec
clock rise (fall) times assumingIn = 1.
-0.5
0 2 4 6 8
time (nsec)

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 293 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers 293
Dual-edge Triggered Registers
So far, we have focused on edge-triggered registers that sample the input data on
only one of the clock edges (rising or falling). It is also possibleto design sequential cir-
cuits that sample the input on both edges. The advantage of this scheme is that a lower fre-
quency clock (half of the original rate) is distributed for the same functional throughput,
resulting in power savings in the clock distribution network. Figure 7.29 shows a modifi-
2
cation of the C MOS register to enable sampling on both edges [REFERENCE]. It con-
sists of two parallel master-slave based edge-triggered registers, whose outputs are
multiplexed using the tri-state drivers.
When clock is high, the positive latch composed of transistorsM1-M4 is sampling
the inverted D input on node X. Node Y is held stable, since devices M9 and M10 are turned
off. On the falling edge of the clock, the top slave latchM5-M8 turns on, and drives the
inverted value of X to the Q output. During the low phase, the bottom master latch (M1,
M4, M9, M10) is turned on, sampling the inverted D input on node Y. Note that the devices
M1 and M4 are reused, reducing the load on the D input. On the rising edge, the bottom
slave latch conducts, and drives the inverted version of Y on node Q. Data hence changes
on both edges. Note that the slave latches operate in a complementary fashion — this is,
only one of them is turned on during each phase of the clock.
VDD VDD
M4
M8
n1
CLK M3 CLK
M7
X
D
CLK M2 CLK M
6
n2
M1 M
5
Q
VDD
n1 M14
CLK M
CLK M10 Y 13
CLK
CLK M9 M12
n2
M 2
11 Figure 7.29 C MOS based dual-edge triggered register.
Problem 7.6 Dual-edge Registers
Determine how the adoption of dual-edge registers influences the power-dissipation in the
clock-distribution network.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 294 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
294 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
7.5.3 True Single-Phase Clocked Register (TSPCR)
In the two-phase clocking schemes described above, care must be taken in routing the two
2
clock signals to ensure that overlap is minimized. While the CMOS provides a skew-tol-
erant solution, it is possible to designregisters that only use a single phase clock. TheTrue
Single-Phase Clocked Register (TSPCR) proposed by Yuan and Svensson uses a single
clock (without an inverse clock) [Yuan89]. The basic single-phase positive and negative
latches are shown in Figure 7.30. For the positive latch, whenCLK is high, the latch is in
VDD V VDD VDD
DD
Out
In In CLK CLK
CLK CLK 
Out
Negative Latch
Positive Latch
Figure 7.30 True Single Phase Latches.
the transparent mode and corresponds to two cascaded inverters; the latch is non-invert-
ing, and propagates the input to the output. On the other hand, whenCLK = 0, both invert-
ers are disabled, and the latch is in hold-mode. Only the pull-up networks are still active,
while the pull-down circuits are deactivated. As a result of the dual-stage approach, no
signal can ever propagate from the input of the latch to the output in thismode. A register
can be constructed by cascading positive and negative latches. The clock load is similar to
2
a conventional transmission gate register, or C MOS register. The main advantage is the
use of a single clock phase. The disadvantage is the slight increase in the number of tran-
sistors — 12 transistors are required.
TSPC offers an additional advantage: the possibility of embedding logic functional-
ity into the latches. This reduces the delay overhead associated withthe latches. Figure
7.31a outlines the basic approach for embedding logic, while Figure 7.31b shows an
example of a positive latch that implements the AND ofIn1 and In2 in addition to perform-
ing the latching function. While theset-up time of this latch has increased over the one
shown in Figure 7.30, the overall performance of the digital circuit (that is, the clock
period of a sequential circuit) has improved: the increase in set-up time is typically smaller
than the delay of an AND gate. This approach of embedding logic into latches has been
used extensively in the design of the EV4 DEC Alpha microprocessor [Dobberpuhl92]
and many other high performance processors.
Example 7.4 Impact of embedding logic into latches on performance
Consider embedding an AND gate into the TSPC latch, as shown in Figure 7.31b. In a 0.25
μm, the set-up time of such a circuit using minimum-size devices is 140 psec. A conventional
approach, composed of an AND gate followed by a positive latch has an effectiveset-up time
of 600 psec (we treat the AND plus latch as a black box that performs the AND+latching

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 295 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.5 Dynamic Latches and Registers 295
VDD VDD
VDD VDD
In1 In2
Q
PUN
Q
CLK CLK
In CLK CLK
In1
PDN
In2
(a) Including logic into the latch (b) AND latch
Figure 7.31 Adding logic to the TSPC approach.
functions). The embedded logic approach hence results in significant performance improve-
ments.
The TSPC latch circuits can be further reduced in complexity as illustrated in Figure
7.32, where only the first inverter is controlled by the clock. Besides the reduced number
of transistors, these circuits have the advantage that the clock load is reduced by half. On
the other hand, not all node voltages in the latch experience the full logic swing. For
instance, the voltage at node A (for Vin = 0 V) for the positive latch maximally equalsVDD
– V Tn, which results in a reduced drive for the output NMOS transistor and a loss in perfor-
mance. Similarly, the voltage on nodeA (for Vin = VDD) for the negative latch is only
driven down to |VTp|. This also limits the amount ofVDD scaling possible on the latch.
VDD VDD V V
DD DD
In Out
CLK In CLK A Out
A
(a) Positive Latch (b) Negative Latch
Figure 7.32 Simplified TSPC latch (also called split-output).
Figure 7.33 shows the design of a specialized single-phase edge-triggered register.
When CLK = 0, the input inverter is sampling the invertedD input on node X. The second
(dynamic) inverter is in the precharge mode, with M6 charging up node Y to VDD. The third
inverter is in the hold mode, since M8 and M9 are off. Therefore, during the low phase of
the clock, the input to the final(static) inverter is holding its previous value and the output
Q is stable. On the rising edge of the clock,the dynamic inverter M4-M6 evaluates. If X is
high on the rising edge, nodeY discharges. The third inverter M7-M8 is on during the high
phase, and the node value on Y is passed to the output Q. On the positive phase of the
clock, note that node X transitions to a low if theD input transitions to a high level. There-
fore, the input must be kept stable till the value on nodeX before the rising edge of the
clock propagates to Y. This represents the hold time of the register (note that the hold time
less than 1 inverter delay since it takes 1 delay for the input to affect nodeX). The propa-

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 296 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
296 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
gation delay of the register is essentially three inverters since the value on nodeX must
propagate to the output Q. Finally, the set-up time is the time for node X to be valid, which
is one inverter delay.
VDD VDD VDD
CLK Q
M3 M6 M9
Y 
Q
D CLK X CLK
M2 M5 M8
CLK
M1 M4 M7
Figure 7.33 Positive edge-triggered register
TSPC.
2
WARNING: Similar to the C MOS latch, the TSPC latch malfunctions when theslope of
the clock is not sufficiently steep. Slow clocks cause both the NMOS and PMOS clocked
transistors to be on simultaneously, resulting in undefined values of the states and race
conditions. The clock slopes should therefore be carefully controlled. If necessary, local
buffers must be introduced to ensure the quality of the clock signals.
Example 7.5 TSPC Edge-Triggered Register
Transistor sizing is critical for achieving correct functionality in theTSPC register. With
improper sizing, glitches may occur at the output due to a race condition when the clock tran-
sitions from low to high. Consider the case where D is low and Q=1 (Q=0). While CLK is
low, Y is pre-charged high turning on M7. When CLK transitions from low to high, nodes Y
and Q start to discharge simultaneously (throughM4-M5 and M7-M8, respectively). Once Y is
sufficiently low, the trend onQ is reversed and the node is pulled high anew through M9. In a
sense, this chain of events is comparable to what would happen if we chain dynamic logic
gates. Figure 7.34 shows the transient response of thecircuit of Figure 7.34 for different sizes
of devices in the final two stages.
3.0
QmodifiedQoriginal
2.0
M4, M5 M7, M8
Volts CLK Original 0.5 μm 2 μm
Width
1.0
Qoriginal Modified 1 μm 1 μm
Width
Qmodified
0.0
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
time (nsec)
Figure 7.34 Transistor sizing issues in TSPC (for the register ofFigure 7.33).
This glitch may be the cause of fatal errors, as it may create unwanted events (for
instance, when the output of the latch is used as a clock signal input to another register). It
also reduces the contamination delay of the register. The problem can be corrected by resiz-
ing the relative strengths of the pull-down paths through M4-M5 and M7-M8, so that Y dis-

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 297 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.6 Pulse Registers 297
charges much faster than Q. This is accomplished by reducing the strength of the M7-M8
pulldown path, and by speeding up the M4 -M5 pulldown path.
7.6 Pulse Registers
Until now, we have used the master-slave configuration to create an edge-triggered regis-
ter. A fundamentally different approach forconstructing a register uses pulse signals. The
idea is to construct a short pulse around the rising (or falling) edge of the clock. This pulse
acts as the clock input to a latch (e.g., a TSPC flavor is shown in Figure 7.35a), sampling
the input only in a short window. Race conditions are thus avoided by keeping the opening
time (i.e, the transparent period) of the latch very short. The combination of the glitch-
generation circuitry and the latch results in apositive edge-triggered register.
Figure 7.35b shows an example circuit for constructing a short intentional glitch on
each rising edge of the clock [Kozo96]. When CLK = 0, node X is charged up to VDD (MN
is off since CLKG is low). On the rising edge of the clock, there is a short period of time
when both inputs of the AND gate are high, causing CLKG to go high. This in turn acti-
vates MN, pulling X and eventually CLKG low (Figure 7.35c). The length of the pulse is
controlled by the delay of the AND gate and the two inverters. Note that thereexists also a
delay between the rising edges of the input clock (CLK) and the glitch clock (CLKG) —
also equal to the delay of the AND gate and the two inverters. If every register on the chip
uses the same clock generation mechanism,this sampling delay does not matter. However,
process variations and load variations may cause the delays through the glitch clockcir-
cuitry to be different. This must be taken into account when performing timing verifica-
tion and clock skew analysis (which is the topic of a later Chapter).
VDD VDD
M3 M6 VDD
CLK
Q 
MP  CLKG
D CLKG CLKG X
M2 M5
MN
M1 M4
(a) register (b) glitch generation
CLK
CLKG
(c) glitch clock
Figure 7.35 Glitch latch - timing generation and register.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 298 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
298 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
If set-up time and hold time are measured in reference to the rising edge of the glitch
clock, the set-up time is essentially zero, the hold time is equal to the length of the pulse (if
the contamination delay is zero for the gates), and the propagation delay (tc-q) equals two
gate delays. The advantage of the approach is the reduced clock load and thesmall number
of transistors required. The glitch-generation circuitry can be amortized over multiple reg-
ister bits. The disadvantage is a substantial increase in verification complexity. This has
prevented a wide-spread use. They do however provide an alternate approach to conven-
tional schemes, and have been adopted in some high performance processors (e.g.,
[Kozo96]).
Another version of the pulsed registeris shown in Figure 7.36 (as used in the AMD-
K6 processor [Partovi96]). When the clock is low, M3 and M6 are off and device P1 is
turned on. Node X is precharged to VDD, the output node (Q) is decoupled from X and is
held at its previous state. CLKD is a delay-inverted version of CLK. On the rising edge of
the clock, M3 and M6 turn on while devices M1 and M4 stay on for a short period, deter-
mined by the delay of the three inverters. During this interval, the circuit istransparent
and the input data D is sampled by the latch. Once CLKD goes low, node X is decoupled
from the D input and is either held or starts to precharge toVDD by PMOS device P2. On
the falling edge of the clock, node X is held at VDD and the output is held stable by the
cross-coupled inverters.
CLK P1 P3
x
Q
M6
M3
D
P2 M
M2 5
Figure 7.36 Flow-through positive
M edge-triggered register.
M1 4
CLKD
Note that this circuit also uses a one-shot, but the one-shot is integrated into the reg-
ister. The transparency period also determines the hold time of the register. The window
must be wide enough for the input data to propagate to theQ output. In this particular cir-
cuit, the set-up time can be negative. This is the case if the transparency window is longer
than the delay from input to output. This is attractive, as data can arrive at the register even
after the clock goes high, which means that time is borrowed from the previous cycle.
Example 7.6 Set-up time of glitch register
The glitch register of Figure 7.36 is transparent during the (1-1) overlap of CLK and CLKD.
As a result, the input data can actually change after the rising edge of the clock, resulting in a
negative set-up time (Figure 7.37). The D-input transitions to low after the rising edge of the
clock, and transitions high before the falling edge ofCLKD (this is, during the transparency
period). Observe how the output follows the input. The output Q does go to the correct value
of VDD as long as the input D is set up correctly some time before the falling edge ofCLKD.
When the negative set-up time is exploited, there can be no gurantees on the monotonic
behavior of the output. That is, the output can have multiple transitions around the rising
edge, and therefore, the output of the register should not be used as a clock to other registers.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 299 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.7 Sense-Amplifier Based Registers 299
3.0
2.5
D Q
2.0
1.5
Volts1.0
0.5 CLK CLKD
Figure 7.37 Simulation showing a
0.0 negative set-up time for the glitch
register.
-0.5
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
time (nsec)
Problem 7.7 Converting a glitch register to a conditional glitch register
Modify the circuit in Figure 7.36 so that it takes an additional Enable input. The goal is to
convert the register to a conditional register which latches only when the enable signal is
asserted.
7.7 Sense-Amplifier Based Registers
So far, we have presented two fundamental approaches towards building edge-triggered
registers: the master-slave concept and the glitch technique. Figure 7.38 introduces
another technique that uses a sense amplifier structure to implement an edge-triggered
register [Montanaro96]. Sense amplifier circuits accept small input signals and amplify
them to generate rail-to-rail swings. As we will see, sense amplifier circuits are used
extensively in memory cores and in low swing bus drivers to amplify small voltage swings
OUT OUT
VDD VDD
M9 M7 M8 M
10
L1 L2
M5 M
6
M4
L3 L4
IN IN
M M
2 VDD 3
M
CLK 1 Figure 7.38 Positive edge-triggered
register based on sense-amplifier.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 300 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
300 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
present in heavily loaded wires. There are many techniques to construct these amplifiers,
with the use of feedback (e.g., cross-coupled inverters) being one common approach. The
circuit shown in Figure 7.38 uses a precharged front-end amplifier that samples the differ-
ential input signal on the rising edge of the clock signal. The outputs of front-end are fed
into a NAND cross-coupled SR FF that holds the data and gurantees that the differential
outputs switch only once per clock cycle. The differential inputs in this implementation
don’t have to have rail-to-rail swing and hence this register can be used as a receiver for a
reduced swing differential bus.
The core of the front-end consists of a cross-coupled inverter (M5-M8) whose out-
puts (L1 and L2) are precharged using devices M9 and M10 during the low phase of the
clock. As a result, PMOS transistors M7 and M8 to be turned off and the NAND FF is
holding its previous state. Transistor M1 is similar to an evaluate switch in dynamic cir-
cuits and is turned off ensuring that the differential inputs don’t affect the output during
the low phase of the clock. On the rising edge of the clock, the evaluate transistor turnson
and the differential input pair (M2 and M3) is enabled, and the difference between the input
signals is amplified on the output nodes onL1 and L2. The cross-coupled inverter pair flips
to one of its the stable states based on the value of the inputs. For example, ifIN is 1, L1 is
pulled to 0, and L2 remains at VDD. Due to the amplifying properties of the input stage, it is
not necessary for the input to swing all the way up toVDD and enables the use of low-
swing signaling on the input wires.
Initially
L1
0 L
2
1
high
impedance
L3 0 1 0 L4
w/shorting
IN IN device
w/o shorting
1 0 0 1
device
Inputs Change (CLK still high)
L1
L1 0 0 L
2
0 1 L2 1 1
1 0
leakage path leakage path
L3 0 0 1 0 L4
L3 0 1 0 L4
IN IN
IN IN 1 0 0 1
1 0 0 1
L3 is isolated so charge accumu- The leakage current attempts to
lates until L1/L3 change state, charge L1/L3 but the DC path
causing L2 to change state as well. through the shorting transistor
As a result the flip-flop outputs change. allows it to leak away to ground.
Figure 7.39 The need for the shorting transistorM4.
The shorting transistor, M4, is used to provide a DC leakage path from either node
L3, or L4, to ground. This is necessary to accommodate the case where the inputs change
their value after the positive edge ofCLK has occurred, resulting in either L3 or L4 being
left in a high-impedance state with a logical low voltage level stored on the node. Without
the leakage path that node would be susceptible to charging by leakage currents. The latch

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 301 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits 301
could then actually change state prior to the next rising edge ofCLK! This is best illus-
trated graphically, as shown in Figure 7.39.
7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits
Pipelining is a popular design technique often used to accelerate the operation of the data-
paths in digital processors. The idea is easily explained with the example of Figure 7.40a.
The goal of the presented circuit is to computelog(|a − b|), where both a and b represent
streams of numbers, that is, the computation must be performed on a large set of input val-
ues. The minimal clock period Tmin necessary to ensure correct evaluation is given as:
Tmin = tc-q + tpd,logic + tsu (7.6)
where tc-q and tsu are the propagation delay and the set-up time of the register, respec-
tively. We assume that the registers are edge-triggered D registers. The term tpd,logic stands
for the worst-case delay path through the combinatorial network, which consists of the
adder, absolute value, and logarithm functions. In conventional systems (that don’t push
the edge of technology), the latter delay is generally much larger than the delays associ-
ated with the registers and dominates the circuit performance. Assume that eachlogic
module has an equal propagation delay. We note that each logic module is then active for
only 1/3 of the clock period (if the delay of the register is ignored). For example, the adder
unit is active during the first third of the period and remains idle— this is,it does no useful
computation— during the other 2/3 of the period. Pipelining is a technique to improve the
resource utilization, and increase the functional throughput. Assume that we introduce
registers between the logic blocks, as shown in Figure 7.40b. This causes the computation
for one set of input data to spread over a number of clock periods, as shown in Table 7.1.
a
REG
CLK . log Out
REG
(a) Nonpipelined version
b CLK
REG
CLK
a
REG
CLK . log Out
REG REG REG
CLK CLK CLK
b
REG
(b) Pipelined version
CLK
Figure 7.40 Datapath for the computation of log(|a + b|).

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 302 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
302 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
The result for the data set (a1, b1) only appears at the output after three clock-periods. At
that time, the circuit has already performed parts of the computations for the next data
sets, (a2, b2) and (a3,b3). The computation is performed in an assembly-line fashion, hence
the name pipeline.
Table 7.1 Example of pipelined computations.
Clock Period Adder Absolute Value Logarithm
1 a1 + b1
2 a2 + b2 |a1 + b1|
3 a3 + b3 |a2 + b2| log(|a1 + b1|)
4 a4 + b4 |a3 + b3| log(|a2 + b2|)
5 a5 + b5 |a4 + b4| log(|a3 + b3|)
The advantage of pipelined operation becomes apparent when examining the mini-
mum clock period of the modified circuit. The combinational circuit block has been parti-
tioned into three sections, each of which has a smallerpropagation delay than the original
function. This effectively reduces the value of the minimum allowable clock period:
Tmin ,pipe = tc-q + max ( tpd ,add,  tpd ,abs , tpd ,log) (7.7)
Suppose that all logic blocks have approximately the samepropagation delay, and
that the register overhead is small with respect to the logic delays. The pipelined network
outperforms the original circuit by a factor of three under these assumptions, orT min,pipe=
Tmin/3. The increased performance comes at the relatively small cost of two additional reg-
1 
isters, and an increased latency. This explains why pipelining is popular in the implemen-
tation of very high-performance datapaths.
7.8.1 Latch- vs. Register-Based Pipelines
Pipelined circuits can be constructed using level-sensitive latches instead of edge-trig-
gered registers. Consider the pipelined circuit of Figure 7.41. The pipeline system is
implemented based on pass-transistor-based positive and negative latches instead of edge-
triggered registers. That is, logic is introduced between the master and slave latches of a
master-slave system. In the following discussion, we use without loss of generality the
CLK-CLK notation to denote a two-phase clock system. Latch-based systems give signifi-
cantly more flexibility in implementing a pipelined system, and often offers higher perfor-
mance. When the clocks CLK and CLK are nonoverlapping, correct pipeline operation is
obtained. Input data is sampled on C1 at the negative edge of CLK and the computation of
logic block F starts; the result of the logic block F is stored on C2 on the falling edge of
CLK, and the computation of logic block G starts. The nonoverlapping of the clocks
1 
Latency is defined here as the number of clock cycles it takes for the data to propagate from the input to
the output. For the example at hand, pipelining increases the latency from 1 to 3. An increased latency is in gen-
eral acceptable, but can cause a global performance degradation if not treated with care.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 303 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits 303
CLK CLK CLK
Out
In 
F G
C1 C2 C
3
CLK
CLK
Figure 7.41 Operation of two-phase
pipelined circuit using dynamic registers.
Compute F compute G
ensures correct operation. The value stored on C2 at the end of the CLK low phase is the
result of passing the previous input (stored on the falling edge ofCLK on C1) through the
logic function F. When overlap exists between CLK and CLK, the next input is already
being applied to F, and its effect might propagate to C2 before CLK goes low (assuming
that the contamination delay of F is small). In other words, a race develops between the
previous input and the current one. Which value wins depends upon the logic functionF,
the overlap time, and the value of the inputs since thepropagation delay is often a func-
tion of the applied inputs. The latter factor makes the detection and elimination of race
conditions non-trivial.
7.8.2 NORA-CMOS— A Logic Style for Pipelined Structures
2
The latch-based pipeline circuit can also be implemented using CMOS latches, as shown
in Figure 7.42. The operation is similar to the one discussed above. This topology has one
additional, important property:
2
A C MOS-based pipelined circuit is race-free as long as all the logic functionsF (imple-
mented using static logic) between the latches are noninverting.
The reasoning for the above argument is similar to the argument made in the con-
2 2
struction of a C MOS register. During a (0-0) overlap between CLK and CLK, all C MOS
latches, simplify to pure pull-up networks (see Figure 7.27). The only way a signal can
race from stage to stage under this condition is when the logic functionF is inverting, as
illustrated in Figure 7.43, where F is replaced by a single, static CMOS inverter. Similar
considerations are valid for the (1-1) overlap.
Based on this concept, a logic circuit style called NORA-CMOS was conceived
2
[Goncalves83]. It combines C MOS pipeline registers and NORA dynamic logic function
blocks. Each module consists of a block of combinational logic that can be a mixture of
2
static and dynamic logic, followed by a CMOS latch. Logic and latch are clocked in such
a way that both are simultaneously in either evaluation, or hold (precharge) mode. A block

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 304 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
304 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
VDD V VDD
DD 
CLK CLK
CLK
In 
F G Out
CLK CLK CLK
C1 C2 C3
2
Figure 7.42 Pipelined datapath using CMOS latches.
VDD V V
DD DD
CLK CLK
0 
CLK CLK
Figure 7.43 Potential race condition
2
during (0-0) overlap in CMOS-based
design.
that is in evaluation during CLK = 1 is called a CLK-module, while the inverse is called a
CLK-module. Examples of both classes are shown in Figure 7.44 a and b, respectively.
The operation modes of the modules are summarized in Table 7.2.
Table 7.2 Operation modes for NORA logic modules.
CLK block CLK block
Logic Latch Logic Latch
CLK = 0 Precharge Hold Evaluate Evaluate
CLK = 1 Evaluate Evaluate Precharge Hold
A NORA datapath consists of a chain of alternatingCLK and CLK modules. While
one class of modules is precharging with its output latch in hold mode, preserving the pre-
vious output value, the other class is evaluating. Data is passed in a pipelined fashion from
module to module.
NORA offers designers a wide range of design choices. Dynamic and static logic
can be mixed freely, and bothCLKp and CLKn dynamic blocks can be used in cascaded or
in pipelined form. With this freedom of design, extra inverter stages, as required in
DOMINO-CMOS, are most often avoided.
Design Rules
In order to ensure correct operation, two important rules should always be followed:

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 305 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.8 Pipelining: An approach to optimize sequential circuits 305
VDD VDD VDD
CLK CLK
CLK
In1 PUN Out
In2 PDN
In3
CLK
CLK
CLK
Combinational logic Latch
(a) CLK-module
VDD VDD VDD VDD
CLK In4
CLK
In Out
1
In2 PDN
In3
CLK
CLK In
4
(b) CLK-module
Figure 7.44 Examples of NORA CMOS Modules.
• The dynamic-logic rule: Inputs to a dynamic CLKn (CLKp) block are only allowed to
make a single 0 → 1 (1 → 0) transition during the evaluation period (Chapter6).
2
• The C MOS rule: In order to avoid races, the number of static inversions between
2
C MOS latches should be even.
The presence of dynamic logic circuits requires the introduction of some extensions
to the latter rule. Consider the situation pictured in Figure 7.45a. During precharge (CLK =
0), the output register of the module has to be in hold mode, isolating the output node from
the internal events in the module. Assume now that a (0-0) overlap occurs. NodeA gets
precharged to VDD, while the latch simplifies to a pull-up network (Figure 7.45b). It can be
observed that under those circumstances the output node charges toVDD, and the stored
value is erased! This malfunctioning is caused by the fact that the number of static inver-
sions between the last dynamic node in the module and the latch is odd, which creates an
active path between the precharged node and the output. This translates into the following
rule: The number of static inversions between the last dynamic block in a logic function
2
and the C MOS latch should be even. This and similar considerations lead to a reformu-
2
lated C MOS rule [Goncalvez83].

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 306 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
306 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
VDD VDD VDD
VDD VDD VDD
CLK
CLK
A
A
CLK
CLK
Out
In Out In1
1
PDN
In PDN In2
2 CLK
CLK
CLK
CLK
(a) Circuit with odd number of static inversions (b) Same circuit during (0-0) clock overlap.
between dynamic logic stage and register
2
Figure 7.45 Extended CMOS rules.
2
Revised C MOS Rule
2
• The number of static inversions betweenC MOS latches should be even (in the absence
of dynamic nodes); if dynamic nodes are present, the number of static inverters between
a latch and a dynamic gate in the logic block should be even. The number of static inver-
sions between the last dynamic gate in a logic block and the latch should be even as well.
Adhering to the above rules is not always trivial and requires a careful analysis of
the logic equations to be implemented. This often makes the design of an operational
NORA-CMOS structure cumbersome. Its use should only be considered when maximum
circuit performance is a must.
7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits
In the preceding sections, we have focusedon one single type of sequential element, this is
the latch (and its sibling the register). The most important property of such a circuit is that
it has two stable states, and is hence called bistable. The bistable element is not the only
sequential circuit of interest. Other regenerative circuits can be catalogued as astable and
monostable. The former act as oscillators and can, for instance, be used for on-chip clock
generation. The latter serve as pulse generators, also called one-shot circuits. Another
interesting regenerative circuit is the Schmitt trigger. This component has the useful prop-
erty of showing hysteresis in its dc characteristics— its switching threshold is variable and
depends upon the direction of the transition (low-to-high or high-to-low). This peculiar
feature can come in handy in noisy environments.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 307 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits 307
7.9.1 The Schmitt Trigger
Definition
A Schmitt trigger [Schmitt38] is a device with two important properties:
1. It responds to a slowly changing input waveform with afast transition time at the
output.
2. The voltage-transfer characteristic of the device displaysdifferent switching thresh-
olds for positive- and negative-going input signals . This is demonstrated in Figure
7.46, where a typical voltage-transfer characteristic of the Schmitt trigger is shown
(and its schematics symbol). The switching thresholds for thelow-to-high and high-
to-low transitions are called VM+ and VM−, respectively. The hysteresis voltage is
defined as the difference between the two.
Vout VOH
In Out
VOL
(b) Schematic symbol
VM– VM+ Vin
(a) Voltage-transfer characteristic
Figure 7.46 Non-inverting Schmitt trigger.
One of the main uses of the Schmitt trigger is to turn a noisy or slowly varying input
signal into a clean digital output signal. This is illustrated in Figure 7.47. Notice how the
hysteresis suppresses the ringing on the signal. At the same time, the fast low-to-high (and
high-to-low) transitions of the output signal should be observed. For instance, steep signal
slopes are beneficial in reducing power consumptionby suppressing direct-path currents.
The “secret” behind the Schmitt trigger concept is the use of positive feedback.
Vin Vout
VM+
VM–
t0 t t0 + tp t
Figure 7.47 Noise suppression using a Schmitt trigger.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 308 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
308 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
CMOS Implementation
One possible CMOS implementation of the Schmitt trigger is shown in Figure 7.48. The
idea behind this circuit is that the switching threshold of a CMOS inverter is determined
by the (kn/kp) ratio between the NMOS and PMOS transistors. Increasing the ratio results
in a reduction of the threshold, while decreasing it results in an increase inVM. Adapting
the ratio depending upon the direction of the transition results in a shift in the switching
threshold and a hysteresis effect. This adaptation is achieved with the aid of feedback.
VDD
M2 M4
Vin X V
out
M1 M3
Figure 7.48 CMOS Schmitt trigger.
Suppose that Vin is initially equal to 0, so that Vout = 0 as well. The feedback loop
biases the PMOS transistor M4 in the conductive mode while M3 is off. The input signal
effectively connects to an inverter consisting of two PMOS transistors in parallel (M2 and
M4) as a pull-up network, and a single NMOS transistor (M1) in the pull-down chain. This
modifies the effective transistor ratio of the inverter tokM1/(kM2+kM4), which moves the
switching threshold upwards.
Once the inverter switches, the feedback loop turns offM4, and the NMOS device
M3 is activated. This extra pull-down device speeds up the transition and produces a clean
output signal with steep slopes.
A similar behavior can be observed for the high-to-low transition. In this case, the
pull-down network originally consists ofM1 and M3 in parallel, while the pull-up network
is formed by M2. This reduces the value of the switching threshold toVM–.
Example 7.7 CMOS Schmitt Trigger
Consider the schmitt trigger with the following device sizes. Devices M1 and M2 are
1μm/0.25μm, and 3μm/0.25μm, respectively. The inverter is sized such that the switching
threshold is around VDD/2 (= 1.25 V). Figure 7.49a shows the simulation of theSchmitt trig-
ger assuming that devices M3 and M4 are 0.5μm/0.25μm and 1.5μm/0.25μm, respectively. As
apparent from the plot, the circuit exhibits hysteresis. The high-to-low switching point (VM- =
0.9 V) is lower than VDD/2, while the low-to-high switching threshold (VM+ = 1.6 V) is larger
than VDD/2.
It is possible to shift the switching point by changing thesizes of M3 and M4. For
example, to modify the low-to-high transition, we need to vary the PMOS device. The high-
to-low threshold is kept constant by keeping the device width ofM3 at 0.5 μm. The device
width of M4 is varied as k * 0.5μm. Figure 7.49b demonstrates how the switching threshold
increases with raising values ofk.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 309 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits 309
2.5 2.5
2.0 2.0
V
1.5 M+ 1.5
)
V
(  (V)
X x 
V
1.0 VM- V 1.0
k=1 k=3
0.5 0.5 k=2 k=4
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
V in (V) Vin (V)
(a) Voltage-transfer characteristics with hysteresis. (b) The effect of varying the ratio of the
PMOS device M4. The width is k * 0.5μm.
Figure 7.49 Schmitt trigger simulations.
Problem 7.8 An Alternative CMOS Schmitt Trigger
Another CMOS Schmitt trigger is shown in Figure 7.50. Discuss the operation of the gate,
and derive expressions for VM− and VM+.
VDD
M4
M6
M3
In Out
M2
X
M5 VDD
M1
Figure 7.50 Alternate CMOS Schmitt trigger.
7.9.2 Monostable Sequential Circuits
A monostable element is a circuit that generates a pulse of a predetermined width every
time the quiescent circuit is triggered by a pulse or transition event. It is calledmonostable
because it has only one stable state (the quiescent one). A trigger event, which is either a
signal transition or a pulse, causes the circuit to go temporarily into another quasi-stable
state. This means that it eventually returns to its original state after a time period deter-
mined by the circuit parameters. This circuit, also called aone-shot, is useful in generating
pulses of a known length. This functionality is required in a wide range of applications.
We have already seen the use of a one-shot in the construction of glitch registers. Another

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 310 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
310 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
notorious example is the address transition detection (ATD) circuit, used for the timing
generation in static memories. This circuit detects a change in a signal, or group of signals,
such as the address or data bus, and produces a pulse to initialize the subsequent circuitry.
The most common approach to the implementation of one-shots is the use of a sim-
ple delay element to control the duration of the pulse. The concept is illustrated in Figure
7.51. In the quiescent state, both inputs to the XOR are identical, and the output is low. A
transition on the input causes the XOR inputs to differ temporarily and the output to go
high. After a delay td (of the delay element), this disruption is removed, and the output
goes low again. A pulse of length td is created. The delay circuit can be realized in many
different ways, such as anRC-network or a chain of basic gates.
In
DELAY
Out 
td t
d
Figure 7.51 Transition-triggered one-shot.
7.9.3 Astable Circuits
An astable circuit has no stable states. The output oscillates back and forth between two
quasi-stable states with a period determined by the circuit topology and parameters (delay,
power supply, etc.). One of the main applications of oscillators is the on-chip generation
of clock signals. This application is discussed in detail in a later chapter (on timing).
The ring oscillator is a simple, example of an astable circuit. It consists of an odd
number of inverters connected in a circular chain. Due to the odd number of inversions, no
stable operation point exists, and the circuit oscillates with a period equal to 2× tp × N,
with N the number of inverters in the chain andtp the propagation delay of each inverter.
Example 7.8 Ring oscillator
The simulated response of a ring oscillator with five stages is shown in Figure 7.52 (all gates
use minimum-size devices). The observed oscillation periodapproximately equals 0.5 nsec,
which corresponds to a gate propagation delay of 50 psec. By tapping the chain at various
points, different phases of the oscillating waveform are obtained (phases 1, 3, and 5 are dis-
3.0
v1 v3 v 5
2.5
2.0
1.5
Volts1.0
0.5
Figure 7.52 Simulated
0.0
waveforms of five-stage ring
-0.5 oscillator. The outputs of stages 1,
0.0  0.5 time (nsec)1.0  1.5 3, and 5 are shown.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 311 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.9 Non-Bistable Sequential Circuits 311
played in the plot). A wide range of clock signals with different duty-cycles and phases can be
derived from those elementary signals using simple logic operations.
The ring oscillator composed of cascaded inverters produces a waveform with a
fixed oscillating frequency determined by the delay of an inverter in the CMOS process.
In many applications, it is necessary to control the frequency of the oscillator. An example
of such a circuit is the voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), whose oscillation frequency is
a function (typically non-linear) of a control voltage. The standard ring oscillator can be
modified into a VCO by replacing the standard inverter with a current-starved inverter as
shown in Figure 7.53 [Jeong87]. The mechanism for controlling the delay of each inverter
is to limit the current available to discharge the load capacitance of the gate.
VDD
M2
In Out
M1
Iref
M Figure 7.53 Voltage-controlled oscillator based on
V 3
cntl current-starved inverters.
In this modified inverter circuit, the maximal discharge current of the inverter is lim-
ited by adding an extra series device. Note that the low-to-high transition on the inverter
can also be controlled by adding a PMOS device in series withM2. The added NMOS
transistor M3, is controlled by an analog control voltageVcntl, which determines the avail-
able discharge current. Lowering Vcntl reduces the discharge current and, hence, increases
tpHL. The ability to alter thepropagation delay per stage allows us to control the frequency
of the ring structure. The control voltage is generally set using feedback techniques. Under
low operating current levels, the current-starved inverter suffers from slow fall times at its
output. This can result in significant short-circuit current. This is resolved by feeding its
output into a CMOS inverter or better yet a Schmitt trigger. An extra inverter is needed at
the end to ensure that the structure oscillates.
Example 7.9 Current-Starved Inverter Simulation
Figure 7.54 show the simulated delay of the current-starved inverter as a function of the con-
trol voltage Vcntl. The delay of the inverter can be varied over a large range.When the control
voltage is smaller than the threshold, the device enters the sub-threshold region. This results
in large variations of the propagation delay, as the drive current is exponentially dependent
on the drive voltage. When operating in this region, the delay is very sensitive to variations in
the control voltage, and, hence, to noise.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 312 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
312 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
5.0
4.0
3.0
(nsec) 
 pHL2.0
t
Figure 7.54 tpHL of current-starved
1.0 inverter as a function of the control
voltage.
0.0
0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
Vctrl (V)
Another approach to implement the delay element is to use a differentialelement as
shown in Figure 7.55a. Since the delay cell provides both inverting and non-inverting out-
puts, an oscillator with an even number of stages can be implemented. Figure 7.55b shows
o 
a two-stage differential VCO, where the feedback loop provides 180 phase shift through
two gate delays, one non-inverting and the other inverting, therefore forming an oscilla-
tion. The simulated waveforms of this two stage VCO are shown in Figure 7.55c. The in-
phase and quadrature phase outputs are available simultaneously. The differential type
VCO has better immunity to common mode noise (for example, supply noise) compared to
the common ring oscillator. However, it consumes more power due to the increased com-
plexity, and the static current.
Vo- Vo+ v3
v1 i+ o+ i+ o+
in+ in-
v i- o- i- o-
2
v4
Vctrl
(a) delay cell (b) two stage VCO
3.0
v1 v2 v3 v4
2.5
2.0
1.5
Volts1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
0.5 1.5 2.5 3.5 Figure 7.55 Differential delay
time (nsec) element and VCO topology.
(c) simulated waveforms of 2-stageVCO

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 313 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.10 Perspective: Choosing a Clocking Strategy 313
7.10 Perspective: Choosing a Clocking Strategy
A crucial decision that must be made in the earliest phases of a chip design isto select the
appropriate clocking methodology. The reliable synchronization of the various operations
occurring in a complex circuit is one of the most intriguing challenges facing the digital
designer of the next decade. Choosing the right clocking scheme affects the functionality,
speed and power of a circuit.
A number of widely-used clocking schemes were introduced in this chapter. The
most robust and conceptually simple scheme is the two-phase master-slave design. The
predominant approach is use the multiplexer-based register, and to generate the two clock
phases locally by simply inverting the clock. More exotic schemessuch as the glitch regis-
ter are also used in practice. However, these schemes require significant hand tuning and
must only be used in specific situations. An example of such is the need for a negative set-
up time to cope with clock skew.
The general trend in high-performance CMOS VLSI design is therefore touse sim-
ple clocking schemes, even at the expense of performance. Most automated design meth-
odologies such as standard cell employ a single-phase, edge-triggered approach, based on
static flip-flops. But the tendency towards simpler clocking approaches is also apparent in
high-performance designs such as microprocessors. The use of latches between logic is
also very common to improve circuit performance.
7.11 Summary
This chapter has explored the subject of sequential digital circuits. The following topics
were discussed:
• The cross-coupling of two inverters creates a bistable circuit, called a flip-flop. A
third potential operation point turns out to be metastable; that is, any diversion from
this bias point causes the flip-flop to converge to one of the stable states.
• A latch is a level-sensitive memory element that samples data on one phase and
holds data on the other phase. A register (sometime also called aflip-flop) on the
other hand samples the data on the rising or falling edge. A register has three impor-
tant parameter the set-up time, the hold time, and the propagation delay. These
parameters must be carefully optimized since they may account for a significant
portion of the clock period.
• Registers can be static or dynamic. A static register holds state as long as the power
supply is turned on. It is ideal for memory that is accessedinfrequently (e.g., recon-
figuration registers or control information). Dynamic memory is based on temporary
charge store on capacitors. The primary advantage is the reduced complexity and
higher performance/lower power. However, charge on a dynamic node leaks away
with time, and hence dynamic circuits have a minimum clock frequency.
• There are several fundamentally different approaches towards building a register.
The most common and widely used approach is the master-slave configuration
which involves cascading a positive latch and negative latch (or vice-versa).

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 314 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
314 DESIGNING SEQUENTIAL LOGIC CIRCUITS Chapter 7
• Registers can also be constructed using the pulse or glitch concept. An intentional
pulse (using a one shot circuit) is used to sample the input around an edge. Gener-
ally, the design of such circuits requires careful timing analysis across all process
corners. Sense-amplifier based schemes are also used to construct registers and are
to be used when high performance or low signal swing signalling is required.
• Choice of clocking style is an important consideration. Two phase design can result
2
in race problems. Circuit techniques such as CMOS can be used to eliminate race
conditions in two-phase clocking. Another option is to use true single phase clock-
ing. However, the rise time of clocks must be carefully optimized to eliminate races.
• The combination of dynamic logic with dynamic latches can produce extremely fast
computational structures. An example of such an approach, the NORA logic style, is
very effective in pipelined datapaths.
• Monostable structures have only one stable state. They are useful as pulse generators.
• Astable multivibrators, or oscillators, possess no stable state. The ring oscillator is
the best-known example of a circuit of this class.
• Schmitt triggers display hysteresis in their dc characteristic and fast transitions in
their transient response. They are mainly used to suppress noise.
7.12 To Probe Further
The basic concepts of sequential gates can be found in many logic design textbooks (e.g.,
[Mano82] and [Hill74]). The design of sequential circuits is amply documented in most of
the traditional digital circuit handbooks.
References
[Dopperpuhl92] D. Dopperpuhl et al., “A 200 MHz 64-b Dual Issue CMOS Microprocessor,” IEEE
JSSC, vol. 27, no. 11, Nov. 1992, pp. 1555–1567.
[Gieseke97] B. Bieseke et al., “A 600MHz Superscalar RISC Microprocessor with Out-Of-Order
Execution,” IEEE ISSCC, pp. 176-177, Feb. 1997.
[Goncalves83] N. Goncalves and H. De Man, “NORA: a racefree dynamic CMOS technique for
pipelined logic structures,” IEEE JSSC, vol. SC-18, no. 3, June 1983, pp. 261–266.
[Haznedar91] H. Haznedar, Digital Microelectronics, Benjamin/Cummings, 1991.
[Hill74] F. Hill and G. Peterson, Introduction to Switching Theory and Logical Design, Wiley, 1974.
[Hodges88] D. Hodges and H. Jackson, Analysis and Design of Digital Integrated Circuits,
McGraw-Hill, 1988.
[Jeong87] D. Jeong et al., “Design of PLL-based clock generation circuits,”IEEE JSSC, vol. SC-22,
no. 2, April 1987, pp. 255–261.
[Kuzo96] S. Kuzo et al., “A 100MHz 0.4W RISC Processor with 200MHz Multiply-Adder, using
Pulse-Register Technique,” IEEE ISSCC, pp. 140-141, February 1996.
[Mano82] M. Mano, Computer System Architecture, Prentice Hall, 1982.
[Montanaro96] J. Montanaro et al., “A 160-MHz, 32-b, 0.5-W CMOS RISC Microprocessor,” IEEE
JSSC, pp. 1703-1714, November 1996.

--- Page Break ---

chapter7.fm Page 315 Tuesday, April 18, 2000 8:52 PM
Section 7.13 Exercises and Design Problems 315
[Mutoh95] S. Mutoh et al., “1-V Power Supply High-Speed Digital Circuit Technology with Multi-
threshold-Voltage CMOS,” IEEE JSSC , pp. 847-854, August 1995.
[Partovi96] H. Partovi, “Flow-Through Latch and Edge-Triggered Flip Flop Hybrid Elements,”
IEEE ISSCC, pp. 138-139, February 1996.
[Schmitt38] O. H. Schmitt, “A Thermionic Trigger,” Journal of Scientific Instruments, vol. 15, Jan-
uary 1938, pp. 24–26.
[Shoji88] M. Shoji, CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice Hall, 1988.
[Suzuki73] Y. Suzuki, K. Odagawa, and T. Abe, “Clocked CMOS calculator circuitry,”IEEE Jour-
nal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-8, December 1973, pp. 462–469.
[Veendrick92] H. Veendrick, MOS ICs: From Basics to ASICs, VCH, Weinheim, 1992.
[Yuan89] J. Yuan and Svensson C., “High-Speed CMOS Circuit Technique,” IEEE JSSC, vol. 24,
no. 1, February 1989, pp. 62–70.
7.13 Exercises and Design Problems
Ideas for problems - JK FF, TI 1-V FF, PWM generation, adding asyn. reset, Tom’s latch
- static in one phase, look in Hamid’s paper,
1. [E, None, 6.2] The indicated waveforms are applied to the JK master-slave flip-flop of Figure
7.56. For this problem, assume that gate delays are short compared to the input signal time scale.
a. Sketch the waveforms that appear at the QM and QS outputs of the master and slave
latches. Assume that the flip-flop is initially in the reset state.
b. Do the waveforms exhibit any 1’s-catching behavior?
J QM
QS
QS
K Q
M
φ
φ
J
Figure 7.56 JK master-slave
K flip-flop.
2. [M&D, SPICE, 6.2] Design the JK flip-flop of Figure 6.14 using static CMOS minimum-size
devices. VDD = 5 V.
a. Estimate the set-up and hold times and thepropagation delay in terms of gate delays. Find
these gate delays using SPICE under the appropriate loading conditions. Compare your
total estimated delay with a SPICE simulation.
b. Use progressive transistor sizing and appropriate ordering to improve the speed. Find the
new set-up and hold times and thepropagation delays using SPICE.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 42 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
C H A P T E R
10
T I M I N G  I S S U E S
I N  D I G I T A L  C I R C U I T S
Impact of clock skew and jitter on performance and functionality
n
Alternative timing methodologies
n
Synchronization issues in digital IC and board design
n
Clock generation
10.1 Introduction 10.5  Synchronizers and Arbiters*
10.2 Classification of Digital Systems 10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a
Phase-Locked Loop
10.3 Synchronous Design — An In-depth
Perspective 10.7  Future Directions
10.3.1Synchronous Timing Basics 10.8  Perspective: Synchronous versus
Asynchronous Design
10.3.2Sources of Skew and Jitter
10.9  Summary
10.3.3Clock-Distribution Techniques
10.10 To Probe Further
10.3.4Latch-Based Clocking
10.4 Self-Timed Circuit Design*
42

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 43 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
43  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
10.1  Introduction
All sequential circuits have one property in common—a well-defined ordering of the
switching events must be imposed if the circuit is to operate correctly. If this were not the
case, wrong data might be written into the memory elements, resulting in a functional fail-
ure. The  synchronous  system approach, in which all memory elements in the system are
simultaneously updated using a globally distributed periodic synchronization signal (that
is, a global clock signal), represents an effective and popular way to enforce this ordering.
Functionality is ensured by imposing some strict contraints on the generation of the clock
signals and their distribution to the memory elements distributed over the chip; non-com-
pliance often leads to malfunction.
This Chapter starts with an overview of the different timing methodologies. The
majority of the text is devoted to the popular synchronous approach. We analyze the
impact of spatial variations of the clock signal, called  clock skew, and temporal variations
of the clock signal, called  clock jitter,  and introduce techniques to cope with it. These vari-
ations fundamentally limit the performance that can be achieved using a conventional
design methodology.
At the other end of the design spectrum is an approach called  asynchronous design,
which avoids the problem of clock uncertainty all-together by eliminating the need for
globally-distributed clocks. After discussing the basics of  asynchronous design  approach,
we analyze the associated overhead and identify some practical applications. The impor-
tant issue of  synchronization, which is required when interfacing different clock domains
or when sampling an asynchronous signal, also deserves some in-depth treatment. Finally,
the fundamentals of on-chip clock generation using feedback is introduced along with
trends in timing.
10.2  Classification of Digital Systems
In digital systems, signals can be classified depending on how they are related to a local
clock [Messerschmitt90][Dally98]. Signals that transition only at predetermined periods
in time can be classified as synchronous, mesochronous, or plesiochronous with respect to
a system clock. A signal that can transition at arbitrary times is considered asynchronous.
10.2.1  Synchronous Interconnect
A synchronous signal is one that has the exact same frequency, and a known fixed phase
offset with respect to the local clock. In such a timing methodology, the signal is “synchro-
nized” with the clock, and the data can be sampled directly without any uncertainty. In
digital logic design, synchronous systems are the most straightforward type of intercon-
nect, where the flow of data in a circuit proceeds in lockstep with the system clock as
shown below.
Here, the input data signal  In  is sampled with register  R1  to give signal  C in, which is
synchronous with the system clock and then passed along to the combinational logic
block. After a suitable setting period, the output  C out becomes valid and can be sampled by

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 44 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.2  Classification of Digital Systems  44
CLK
Figure 10.1 Synchronous interconnect
In
Combinational  methodology.
R1 R2
Logic
Cin Cout Out
R2  which synchronizes the output with the clock. In a sense, the “certainty period” of sig-
nal  Cout, or the period where data is valid is synchronized with the system clock, which
allows register  R2  to sample the data with complete confidence. The length of the “uncer-
tainty period,” or the period where data is not valid,  places an upper bound on how fast a
synchronous interconnect system can be clocked.
10.2.2  Mesochronous interconnect
A mesochronous signal is one that has the same frequency but an unknown phase offset
with respect to the local clock (“meso” from Greek is middle). For example, if data is
being passed between two different clock domains, then the data signal transmitted from
the first module can have an unknown phase relationship to the clock of the receiving
module. In such a system, it is not possible to directly sample the output at the receiving
module because of the uncertainty in the phase offset. A (mesochronous) synchronizer can
be used to synchronize the data signal with the receiving clock as shown below. The syn-
chronizer serves to adjust the phase of the received signal to ensure proper sampling.
D3
Interconnect 
Block A  R1 R2 Block B
D1 Delay  D2 D4
ClkA ClkB
PD/
Control
Figure 10.2 Mesochronous communication approach using variable delay line.
In Figure 10.2, signal  D1  is synchronous with respect to  ClkA . However,  D1  and  D2
are mesochronous with  ClkB  because of the unknown phase difference between  ClkA  and
ClkB  and the unknown interconnect delay in the path between Block A and Block B. The
role of the synchronizer is to adjust the variable delay line such that the data signal  D3  (a
delayed version of  D 2) is aligned properly with the system clock of block B. In this exam-
ple, the variable delay element is adjusted by measuring the phase difference between the
received signal and the local clock. After register  R2  samples the incoming data during the
certainty period, then signal  D4  becomes synchronous with  ClkB.
10.2.3  Plesiochronous Interconnect
A plesiochronous signal is one that has nominally the same, but slightly different fre-
quency as the local clock (“plesio” from Greek is near). In effect, the phase difference

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 45 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
45  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
drifts in time. This scenario can easily arise when two interacting modules have indepen-
dent clocks generated from separate crystal oscillators. Since the transmitted signal can
arrive at the receiving module at a different rate than the local clock, one needs to utilize a
buffering scheme to ensure all data is received. Typically, plesiochronous interconnect
only occurs in distributed systems like long distance communications, since chip or even
board level circuits typically utilize a common oscillator to derive local clocks. A possible
framework for plesiochronous interconnect is shown in Figure 10.3.
Timing Clock C 2
Clock C 1
Recovery
C 3
Receiving
Originating 
FIFO Module
Module 
Figure 10.3 Plesiochronous communications using FIFO.
In this digital communications framework, the originating module issues data at
some unknown rate characterized by  C1 , which is plesiochronous with respect to  C2 . The
timing recovery unit is responsible for deriving clock  C3  from the data sequence, and buff-
ering the data in a FIFO. As a result,  C3  will be synchronous with the data at the input of
the FIFO and will be mesochronous with  C1 . Since the clock frequencies from the origi-
nating and receiving modules are mismatched, data might have to be dropped if the trans-
mit frequency is faster, and data can be duplicated if the transmit frequency is slower than
the receive frequency. However, by making the FIFO large enough, and periodically reset-
ting the system whenever an overflow condition occurs, robust communication can be
achieved.
10.2.4  Asynchronous Interconnect
Asynchronous signals can transition at any arbitrary time, and are not slaved to any local
clock. As a result, it is not straightforward to map these arbitrary transitions into a syn-
chronized data stream. Although it is possible to synchronize asynchronous signals by
detecting events and introducing latencies into a data stream synchronized to a local clock,
a more natural way to handle asynchronous signals is to simply eliminate the use of local
clocks and utilize a self-timed asynchronous design approach. In such an approach, com-
munication between modules is controlled through a handshaking protocol to perform the
proper ordering of commands.
Data Self-Timed Self-Timed
Reg  Logic Reg  Logic
Req I  DV  I DV
Interconnect Circuit Interconnect Circuit
Ack
handshaking
signals
Figure 10.4  Asynchronous design methodology for simple pipeline interconnect.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 46 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  46
When a logic block completes an operation, it will generate a completion signal  DV
to indicate that output data is valid. The handshaking signals then initiate a data transfer to
the next block, which latches in the new data and begins a new computation by asserting
the initialization signal  I. Asynchronous designs are advantageous because computations
are performed at the native speed of the logic, where block computations occur whenever
data becomes available. There is no need to manage clock  skew, and the design methodol-
ogy leads to a very modular approach where interaction between blocks simply occur
through  a  handshaking  procedure.  However,  these  handshaking  protocols  result  in
increased complexity and overhead in communication that can reduce performance.
10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective
10.3.1  Synchronous Timing Basics
Virtually all systems designed today use a periodic  synchronization  signal or clock. The
generation and distribution of a clock has a significant impact on performance and power
dissipation. For a positive  edge-triggered  system, the rising edge of the clock is used to
denote the beginning and completion of a clock cycle. In the ideal world, assuming the
clock paths from a central distribution point to each register are perfectly balanced, the
phase of the clock (i.e., the position of the clock edge relative to a reference) at various
points in the system is going to be exactly equal. However, the clock is neither perfectly
periodic nor perfectly simultaneous. This results in performance degradation and/or circuit
malfunction. Figure 10.5 shows the basic structure of a synchronous pipelined datapath. In
R1  R2
In  Combinational
D Q D Q
Logic 
CLK tCLK1  tCLK2
tc-q t
logic
tc-q, cd t
logic, cd
tsu, thold
Figure 10.5 Pipelined Datapath Circuit and timing parameters.
the ideal scenario, the clock at registers 1 and 2 have the same clock period and transition
at the exact same time. The following timing parameters characterize the timing of the
sequential circuit.
•  The contamination (minimum) delay  tc-q,cd, and maximum propagation delay of the
register  t c-q.
•  The set-up (t su) and hold time (t hold) for the registers.
•  The contamination delay  tlogic,cd  and maximum delay  t logic  of the combinational
logic.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 47 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
47  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
•  t clk1  and  tclk2, corresponding to the position of the rising edge of the clock relative to
a global reference.
Under ideal conditions (tclk1  =  tclk2), the worst case propagation delays determine the
minimum clock period required for this sequential circuit. The period must be long
enough for the data to propagate through the registers and logic and be set-up at the desti-
nation register before the next rising edge of the clock. This constraint is given by (as
derived in Chapter 7):
T > t c – q + t log ic + t su (10.1)
At the same time, the hold time of the destination register must be shorter than the mini-
mum propagation delay through the logic network,
t ho ld < t c – q cd, + t logic cd, (10.2)
The above analysis is simplistic since the clock is never ideal. As a result of process and
environmental variations, the clock signal can have  spatial  and  temporal  variations.
Clock Skew
The spatial variation in arrival time of a clock transition on an integrated circuit is com-
monly referred to as  clock skew. The  clock skew  between two points  i  and  j  on a IC is
given by δ  (i,j) =  t i-  tj, where  ti  and  tj are the position of the rising edge of the clock with
respect to a reference. Consider the transfer of data between registers  R1 and  R2  in Figure
10.5.  The clock skew can be positive or negative depending upon the routing direction and
position of the clock source. The timing diagram for the case with positive skew is shown
in Figure 10.6. As the figure illustrates, the rising clock edge is delayed by a positive δ  at
the second register.
TCLK + δ
T CLK
1
CLK1 3
δ
CLK2
2 4
δ + th
Figure 10.6  Timing diagram to study the impact of clock skew on performance and funcationality. In
this sample timing diagram, δ > 0.
Clock skew  is caused by static path-length mismatches in the clock load and by def-
inition skew is constant from cycle to cycle. That is, if in one cycle  CLK2  lagged  CLK1  by
δ, then on the next cycle it will lag it by the same amount. It is important to note that clock
skew does not result in clock period variation, but rather phase shift.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 48 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  48
T CLK + δ
TCLK
CLK1 1 3
CLK2 2 4
δ
Figure 10.7 Timing diagram for the case when  δ  < 0. The rising edge of  CLK2 arrives
earlier than the edge of CLK1.
Skew  has strong implications on performance and functionality of a sequential sys-
tem. First consider the impact of clock skew on performance. From Figure 10.6, a new
input In sampled by  R1  at edge  1  will propagate through the combinational logic and be
sampled by  R2  on edge  4. If the clock skew is positive, the time available for signal to
propagate from  R1  to  R2  is increased by the skew δ. The output of the combinational logic
must be valid one set-up time before the rising edge of  CLK2  (point  4). The constraint on
the minimum clock period can then be derived as:
T + δ ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su or T ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su – δ
(10.3)
The above equation suggests that clock skew actually has the potential to improve
the performance of the circuit. That is, the minimum clock period required to operate the
circuit reliably reduces with increasing clock skew! This is indeed correct, but unfortu-
nately, increasing skew makes the circuit more susceptible to race conditions may and
harm the correct operation of sequential systems.
As above, assume that input  In  is sampled on the rising edge of CLK1 at edge  1  into
R1. The new values at the output of  R1 propagates through the combinational logic and
should be valid before edge  4  at  CLK2. However, if the minimum delay of the combina-
tional logic block is  small, the inputs to  R2 may change before the clock edge  2, resulting
in incorrect evaluation. To avoid races, we must ensure that the minimum propagation
delay through the register and logic must be long enough such that the inputs to  R2 are
valid for a hold time after edge  2. The constraint can be formally stated as
δ + t hold < t ( c – q,cd) + t ( log ic,cd)
or
δ < t ( c – q,cd) + t ( log ic,cd) – t hold
(10.4)
Figure 10.7 shows the timing diagram for the case when  δ  < 0. For this case, the ris-
ing edge of  CLK2 happens before the rising edge of  CLK1. On the rising edge of  CLK1, a
new input is sampled by  R1. The new sampled data propagates through the combinational
logic and is sampled by  R2 on the rising edge of  CLK2, which corresponds to edge  4. As
can be seen from Figure 10.7 and Eq. (10.3), a negative skew directly impacts the perfor-
mance of sequential system. However, a negative skew implies that the system never fails,
since edge  2  happens before edge  1! This can also be seen from Eq. (10.4), which is
always satisfied since  δ  < 0.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 49 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
49  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
Example scenarios for positive and negative clock skew are shown in Figure 10.8.
R1  R2  R3
In  Combinational Combinational
D Q D Q D Q
Logic  Logic
t t
CLK CLK1  CLK2 tCLK3
delay  delay
(a) Positive skew
R1  R2  R3
In  Combinational Combinational
D Q D Q D Q
Logic  Logic
tCLK1  tCLK2 t CLK3
delay  delay CLK
(b) Negative skew
Figure 10.8 Positive and negative clock skew.
•  δ  > 0—This corresponds to a clock routed in the same direction as the flow of the data
through the pipeline (Figure 10.8a). In this case, the skew has to be strictly controlled
and satisfy Eq. (10.4). If this constraint is not met, the circuit does malfunction  indepen-
dent of the clock period. Reducing the clock frequency of an edge-triggered circuit
does not help get around skew problems! On the other hand, positive skew increases the
throughput of the circuit as expressed by Eq. (10.3), because the clock period can be
shortened by  δ. The extent of this improvement is limited as large values of  δ  soon pro-
voke violations of Eq. (10.4).
•  δ  < 0—When the clock is routed in the opposite direction of the data (Figure 10.8b), the
skew is negative and condition (10.4) is unconditionally met. The circuit operates cor-
rectly independent of the skew. The skew reduces the time available for actual computa-
tion so that the clock period has to be increased by  |δ|. In summary, routing the clock in
the opposite direction of the data avoids disasters but hampers the circuit performance .
Unfortunately, since a general logic circuit can have data flowing in both directions (for
example, circuits with feedback), this solution to eliminate races will not always work (Figure
10.9). The skew can assume both positive and negative values depending on the direction of
Negative skew
REG
CLK  Out
Logic Logic
REG Logic REG
In CLK  CLK
REG
Positive skew
CLK
Clock distribution
Figure 10.9  Datapath structure with feedback.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 50 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  50
the data transfer. Under these circumstances, the designer has to account for the worst-case
skew condition. In general, routing the clock so that only negative skew occurs is not feasible.
Therefore, the design of a low-skew clock network is essential.
Example 10.1  Propagation and Contamination Delay Estimation
Consider the logic network shown in Figure 10.10. Determine the propagation and contami-
nation delay of the network, assuming that the worst case gate delay is  tgate. The maximum
and minimum delays of the gates is made, as they are assumed to be identical.
The contamination delay is given by 2  tgate  (the delay through  OR 1  and  OR 2). On the
other hand, computation of the worst case propagation delay is not as simple as it appears. At
first glance, it would appear that the worst case corresponds to path  1  and the delay is 5t gate.
However, when analyzing the data dependencies, it becomes obvious that path  1  is never
exercised. Path  1  is called a  false path. If  A  = 1, the critical path goes through OR 1  and  OR 2.
If  A  = 0 and  B  = 0, the critical path is through  I1,OR 1  and  OR 2  (corresponding to a delay of 3
tgate). For the case when  A= 0 and  B  =1, the critical path is through  I1,OR 1 , AND 3 and OR 2.  In
other words, for this simple (but contrived) logic circuit, the output does not even depend on
inputs C and  D (that is, there is redundancy). Therefore, the propagation delay is 4  tgate. Given
the propagation and contamination delay, the minimum and maximum allowable skew can be
easily computed.
A path  2
OR1 
B  I OR2
1
path1
C AND
1
AND
AND2 3
D
Figure 10.10 Logic network for computation of performance.
WARNING:  The computation of the worst-case propagation delay for combinational
logic, due to the existence of  false paths, cannot be obtained by simply adding the propa-
gation delay of individual logic gates. The critical path is strongly dependent on circuit
topology and data dependencies.
Clock Jitter
Clock jitter  refers to the temporal variation of the clock period at a given point — that is,
the clock period can reduce or expand on a cycle-by-cycle basis. It is strictly a temporal
uncertainty measure and is often specified at a given point on the chip. Jitter can be mea-
sured and cited in one of many ways.  Cycle-to-cycle jitter  refers to time varying deviation

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 51 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
51  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
of a single clock period and for a given spatial location  i  is given as  T jitter,i(n) =  Ti,  n+1 -  Ti,n
-  T CLK, where Ti,n is the clock period for period  n,  Ti,  n+1 is clock period for period  n+1, and
T CLK is the nominal clock period.
Jitter  directly impacts the performance of a sequential system. Figure 10.11 shows
the nominal clock period as well as variation in period. Ideally the clock period starts at
edge  2and ends at edge  5  and with a nominal clock period of  T CLK. However, as a result
of  jitter, the worst case scenario happens when the leading edge of the current clock period
is delayed (edge  3), and the leading edge of the next clock period occurs early (edge  4).
As a result, the total time available to complete the operation is reduced by 2  t jiiter  in the
worst case and is given by
T CLK – 2t jitter ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su or T ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su + 2t jitter
(10.5)
The above equation illustrates that  jitter  directly reduces the performance of a sequential
circuit. Care must be taken to reduce jitter in the clock network to maximize performance.
2 T CLK
5
t
CLK 1 3  4 jitter
-tjitter 6
REGS Combinational
In 
Logic
CLK tlogic
tc-q , tc-q, cd
tlogic, cd
tsu, t hold
tjitter
Figure 10.11 Circuit for studying the impact of jitter on performance.
Impact of Skew and Jitter on Performance
In this section, the combined impact of  skew  and  jitter  is studied with respect to conven-
tional  edge-triggered  clocking. Consider the sequential circuit show in Figure 10.12.
Assume that nominally ideal clocks are distributed to both registers (the clock
period is identical every cycle and the  skew  is 0). In reality, there is static  skew  δ  between
the two clock signals (assume that  δ  > 0). Assume that  CLK1  has a jitter of  t jitter1  and
CLK2 has a jitter of  tjitter2. To determine the constraint on the minimum clock period, we
must look at the minimum available time to perform the required computation. The worst
case happen when the leading edge of the current clock period on  CLK1  happens late
(edge  3) and the leading edge of the next cycle of  CLK2  happens early (edge  ). This
results in the following constraint
T CLK + δ – t jitter1 – t jitter2 ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su
or T ≥ t c – q + t log ic + t su – δ + t jitter1 + t jitter2
(10.6)

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 52 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  52
R1  R2
In  Combinational
D Q D Q
Logic 
tCLK1  tCLK2
2 5 8 11
T CLK + δ
TCLK
t
CLK1 jitter1
1 3 7 9
δ t
jitter2
CLK2
4 6  12
Figure 10.12 Sequential circuit to study the impact of skew and jitter on  edge-triggered
systems. In this example, a positive skew (δ) is assumed.
As the above equation illustrates, while positive  skew  can provide potential perfor-
mance advantage,  jitter  has a negative impact on the minimum clock period. To formulate
the minimum delay constraint, consider the case when the leading edge of the  CLK1  cycle
arrives early (edge  1) and the leading edge the current cycle of  CLK2  arrives late (edge
6). The separation between edge  1  and  6  should be smaller than the minimum delay
through the network. This results in
δ + t hold + t jitter1 + t jitte r2 < t ( c – q,c d) + t ( log ic,cd)
or
δ < t ( c – q,cd) + t ( log ic,cd) – t hold – t jitter1 – t jitter2
(10.7)
The above relation indicates that the acceptable skew is reduced by the jitter of the two
signals.
Now consider the case when the skew is negative (δ  <0) as shown in Figure 10.13.
For the timing shown, |δ|  >  t jitter2. It can be easily verified that the worst case timing is
exactly the same as the previous analysis, with  δ  taking a negative value. That is, negative
skew reduces performance.
11
2 5  8
δ < 0
TCLK + δ
TCLK
t
CLK1 jitter1
3 6 9 12
t 
CLK2 jitter2
1 4 7 
Figure 10.13 Consider a negative clock  skew (δ) and the skew is assumed to be larger than the jitter.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 53 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
53  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
10.3.2  Sources of Skew and Jitter
A perfect  clock  is defined as perfectly periodic signal that is simultaneous triggered at var-
ious memory elements on the chip. However, due to a variety of process and environmen-
tal variations, clocks are not ideal. To illustrate the sources of skew and jitter, consider the
simplistic view of clock generation and distribution as shown in Figure 10.14. Typically, a
high frequency clock is either provided from off chip or generated on-chip. From a central
point, the clock is distributed using multiple  matched  paths to low-level memory ele-
ment.s registers. In this picture, two paths are shown. The clock paths include wiring and
the associated distributed buffers required to drive interconnects and loads. A key point to
realize in clock distribution is that the  absolute delay through a clock distribution path
is not important; what matters is the relative arrival time between the output of each path
at the register points (i.e., it is pefectly acceptable for the clock signal to take multiple
cycles to get from a central distribution point to a low-level register as long as all clocks
arrive at the same time to different registers on the chip).
Power Supply
4
3Interconnect 
6Capacitive Load
2
Devices
7Coupling to Adjacent Lines
5 Temperature
1 Clock Generation
Figure 10.14 Skew and jitter sources in synchronous clock distribution.
The are many reasons why the two parallel paths don’t result in exactly the same
delay. The sources of clock uncertainty can be classified in several ways. First, errors can
be divided into  systematic  or  random.  Systematic  errors are nominally identical from chip
to chip, and are typically predictable (e.g., variation in total load capacitance of each clock
path). In principle, such errors can be modeled and corrected at design time given suffi-
ciently good models and simulators. Failing that, systematic errors can be deduced from
measurements over a set of chips, and the design adjusted to compensate.  Random  errors
are due to manufacturing variations (e.g., dopant fluctuations that result in threshold vari-
ations) that are difficult to model and eliminate. Mismatch may also be characterized as
static  or  time-varying. In practice, there is a continuum between changes that are slower
than the time constant of interest, and those that are faster. For example, temperature vari-
ations on a chip vary on a millisecond time scale. A clock network tuned by a one-time
calibration or trimming would be vulnerable to time-varying mismatch due to varying
thermal gradients. On the other hand, to a feedback network with a bandwidth of several
megahertz, thermal changes appear essentially static. For example, the clock net is usually
by far the largest single net on the chip, and simultaneous transitions on the clock drivers
induces noise on the power supply. However, this high speed effect does not contribute to

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 54 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  54
time-varying mismatch because it is the same on every clock cycle, affecting each rising
clock edge the same way. Of course, this power supply glitch may still cause static mis-
match if it is not the same throughout the chip. Below, the various sources of  skew  and  jit-
ter,  introduced in Figure 10.14, are described in detail.
Clock-Signal Generation  (1)
The generation of the clock signal itself causes  jitter.  A typical on-chip clock generator, as
described at the end of this chapter, takes a low-frequency reference clock signal, and pro-
duces a high-frequency global reference for the processor. The core of such a generator is
a Voltage-Controlled Oscillator (VCO). This is an analog circuit, sensitive to intrinsic
device noise and power supply variations. A major problem is the coupling from the sur-
rounding noisy digital circuitry through the substrate. This is particularly a problem in
modern fabrication processes that combine a lightly-doped epitaxial layer and a heavily-
doped substrate (to combat latch-up). This causes substrate noise to travel over large dis-
tances on the chip. These noise source cause temporal variations of the clock signal that
propagate unfiltered through the clock drivers to the flip-flops, and result in  cycle-to-cycle
clock-period variations. This  jitter  causes performance degradation.
Manufacturing Device Variations  (2)
Distributed buffers are integral components of the clock distribution networks, as they are
required to drive both the register loads as well as the global and local interconnects. The
matching of devices in the buffers along multiple clock paths is critical to minimizing tim-
ing uncertainty. Unfortunately, as a result of process variations, devices parameters in the
buffers vary along different paths, resulting in static  skew. There are many sources of vari-
ations including oxide variations (that affects the gain and threshold), dopant variations,
and lateral dimension (width and length) variations. The doping variations can affect the
depth of junction and dopant profiles and cause variations in electrical parameters such as
device threshold and parasitic capacitances. The orientation of polysilicon can also have a
big impact on the device parameters. Keeping the orientation the same across the chip for
the clock drivers is critical.
Variation in the polysilicon critical dimension, is particularly important as it trans-
lates directly into MOS transistor channel length variation and resulting variations in the
drive current and switching characteristics. Spatial variation usually consists of wafer-
level (or within-wafer) variation and die-level (or within-die) variation. At least part of the
variation is systematic and can be modeled and compensated for. The random variations
however, ultimately limits the matching and  skew  that can be achieved.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 55 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
55  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
Interconnect Variations  (3)
Vertical and lateral dimension variations cause the interconnect capacitance and resistance
to vary across a chip. Since this variation is static, it causes  skew  between different paths.
One important source of interconnect variation is the  Inter-level Dielectric (ILD)  thickness
variations. In the formation of aluminum interconnect, layers of silicon dioxide are inter-
posed between layers of patterned metallization. The oxide layer is deposited over a layer
of patterned metal features, generally resulting in some remaining step height or surface
topography.  Chemical-mechanical polishing  (CMP) is used to “planarize” the surface and
remove topography resulting from deposition and etch (as shown in Figure 10.15a). While
at the feature scale (over an individual metal line), CMP can achieve excellent planarity,
there are limitations on the planarization that can be achieved over a global range. This is
primarily caused due to variations in polish rate that is a function of the circuit layout den-
sity and pattern effects. Figure 10.15b shows this effect where the polish rate is higher for
the lower spatial density region, resulting in smaller dielectric thickness and higher capac-
itance.
The assessment and control of variation is of critical importance in semiconductor
process development and manufacturing. Significant advances have been made to develop
analytical models for estimating the ILD thickness variations based on spatial density.
Since this component is often predictable from the layout, it is possible to actually correct
for the systematic component at design time (e.g., by adding appropriate delays or making
the density uniform by adding “dummy fills”). Figure 10.16 shows the spatial pattern den-
sity and ILD thickness for a high performance microprocessor. The graphs show that there
is clear correlation between the density and the thickness of the dielectric. So clock distri-
bution networks must exploit such information to reduce clock  skew.
Other interconnect variations include deviation in the width of the wires and line
spacing. This results from photolithography and etch dependencies. At the lower levels of
metallization, lithographic effects are important while at higher levels etch effects are
important that depend on width and layout. The width is a critical parameter as it directly
impacts the resistance of the line and the wire spacing affects the wire-to-wire capaci-
(a) Ideally (b) Reality
ρ1 =low  ρ2=high
t=t1
Oxide  Metal
t=t2
t=t3
Figure 10.15 Inter-level Dielectric (ILD) thickness variation due to density (coutersy of
Duane Boning).

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 56 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  56
tance, which the dominant component of capacitance. A detailed review of device and
interconnect variations is presented in [Boning00].
(a) Pattern Density  (b) ILD thickness variation
Figure 10.16 Pattern density and ILD thickness variation for a high performance microprocessor.
Environmental Variations  (4 and 5)
Environmental variations are probably the most significant and primarily contribute to
skew  and  jitter. The two major sources of environmental variations are temperature and
power supply. Temperature gradients across the chip is a result of variations in power dis-
sipation across the die. This has particularly become an issue with clock gating where
some parts of the chip maybe idle while other parts of the chip might be fully active. This
results in large temperature variations. Since the device parameters (such as threshold,
mobility, etc.) depend strongly on temperature, buffer delay for a clock distribution net-
work along one path can vary drastically for another path. More importantly, this compo-
nent is time-varying since the temperature changes as the logic activity of the circuit
varies. As a result, it is not sufficient to simulate the clock networks at worst case corners
of temperature; instead, the worst-case variation in temperature must be simulated. An
interesting question is does temperature variation contribute to  skew  or to  jitter? Clearly
the variation in temperature is time varying but the changes are relatively slow (typical
time constants for temperature on the order of milliseconds). Therefore it usually consid-
ered as a skew component and the worst-case conditions are used. Fortunately, using feed-
back, it is possible to calibrate the temperature and compensate.
Power supply variations on the hand is the major source of  jitter  in clock distribu-
tion networks. The delay through buffers is a very strong function of power supply as it
directly affects the drive of the transistors. As with temperature, the power supply voltage
is a strong function of the switching activity. Therefore, the buffer delay along one path is
very different than the buffer delay along another path. Power supply variations can be
classified into static (or slow) and high frequency variations. Static power supply varia-
tions may result from fixed currents drawn from various modules, while high-frequency
variations result from instantaneous IR drops along the power grid due to fluctuations in
switching activity. Inductive issues on the power supply are also a major concern since
they cause voltage fluctuations. This has particularly become a concern with clock gating
as the load current can vary dramatically as the logic transitions back and forth between
the idle and active states. Since the power supply can change rapidly, the period of the

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 57 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
57  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
clock signal is modulated on a cycle-by-cycle basis, resulting in  jitter. The  jitter  on two
different clock points maybe correlated or uncorrelated depending on how the power net-
work is configured and the profile of switching patterns. Unfortunately, high-frequency
power supply changes are difficult to compensate even with feedback techniques. As a
result, power supply noise fundamentally limits the performance of clock networks.
Capacitive Coupling  (✖and  ✗ )
The variation in capacitive load also contributes to timing uncertainty. There are two
major sources of capacitive load variations: coupling between the clock lines and adjacent
signal wires and variation in gate capacitance. The clock network includes both the inter-
connect and the gate capacitance of latches and registers. Any coupling between the clock
wire and adjacent signal results in timing uncertainty. Since the adjacent signal can transi-
tion in arbitrary directions and at arbitrary times, the exactly coupling to the clock network
is not fixed from cycle-to-cycle. This results in clock  jitter. Another major source of clock
uncertainty is variation in the gate capacitance related to the sequential elements. The load
capacitance is highly non-linear and depends on the applied voltage. In many latches and
registers this translates to the clock load being a function of the current state of the
latch/register (this is, the values stored on the internal nodes of the circuit), as well as the
next state. This causes the delay through the clock buffers to vary from cycle-to-cycle,
causing  jitter.
Example 10.2 Data-dependent Clock Jitter
Consider the circuit shown in Figure 10.17, where a minimum-sized local clock buffer drives
a register (actually, four registers are driven, though only one is shown here). The simulation
shows  CKb, the output of the first inverter for four possible transitions (00, 01, 10 and
11). The jitter on the clock based on data-dependent capacitance is illustrated. In general,
the only way to deal with this problem is to use registers that don’t exhibit a large variation in
load as a function of data — for example, the differential sense-amplifier register shown in
Chapter 7.
CK CKb
Q 2.5
D T1  I1  T2  I3
CKb CK 1.5 CKb
CLK
Voltage (V)
CKb 0.5
CLK CK
-0.5
0  0.1  0.2  0.3  0.4
time (ns)
Figure 10.17 Impact of data-dependent clock load on clock jitter for pass-transistor register.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 58 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  58
10.3.3  Clock-Distribution Techniques
It is clear from the previous discussion that clock  skew  and  jitter are major issues in digital
circuits, and can fundamentally limit the performance of a digital system. It is necessary to
design a clock network that minimizes  skew  and  jitter. Another important consideration in
clock distribution is the power dissipation. In most high-speed digital processors, a major-
ity of the power is dissipated in the clock network. To reduce power dissipation, clock net-
works must support clock conditioning — this is, the ability to shut down parts of the
clock network. Unfortunately, clock gating results in additional clock uncertainty.
In this section, an overview of basic constructs in high-performance clock distribu-
tion techniques is presented along with a case study of clock distribution in the Alpha
microprocessor. There are many degrees of freedom in the design of a clock network
including the type of material used for wires, the basic topology and hierarchy, the sizing
of wires and buffers, the rise and fall times, and the partitioning of load capacitances.
Fabrics for clocking
Clock networks typically include a network that is used to distribute a global reference to
various parts of the chip, and a final stage that is responsible for local distribution of the
clock while considering the local load variations. Most clock distribution schemes exploit
the fact that the absolute delay from a central clock source to the clocking elements is
irrelevant — only the relative phase between two clocking points is important. Therefore
one common approach to distributing a clock is to use balanced paths (or called trees).
The most common type of clock primitive is the  H-tree network  (named for the
physical structure of the network) as illustrated in Figure 10.18, where a 4x4 array is
shown. In this scheme, the clock is routed to a central point on the chip and balanced
paths, that include both matched interconnect as well as buffers, are used to distribute the
reference to various leaf nodes. Ideally, if each path is balanced, the clock skew is zero.
That is, though it might take multiple clock cycles for a signal to propagate from the cen-
tral point to each leaf node, the arrival times are equal at every leaf node. However, in
reality, as discussed in the previous section, process and environmental variations cause
clock  skew  and  jitter  to occur.
CLK
Figure 10.18  Example of an H-tree clock-distribution
network for 16 leaf nodes.
The  H-tree configuration is particularly useful for regular-array networks in which
all elements are identical and the clock can be distributed as a binary tree (for example,
arrays of identical tiled processors). The concept can be generalized to a more generic set-

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 59 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
59  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
Figure 10.19  An example RC-matched distribution for an
IBM Microprocessor [Restle98].
ting. The more general approach, referred to as routed RC trees, represents a floorplan that
distributes the clock signal so that the interconnections carrying the clock signals to the
functional sub-blocks are of equal length. That is, the general approach does not rely on a
regular physical structure. An example of a matched RC is shown in Figure 10.19. The
chip is partitioned into ten balanced load segments (tiles). The global clock driver distrib-
utes the clock to tile drivers located at the dots in the figure. A lower level RC-matched
tree is used to drive 580 additional drivers inside each tile.
Another important clock distribution template is the grid structure as shown in Fig-
ure 10.20 [Bailey00]. Grids are typically used in the final stage of clock network to dis-
tribute the clock to the clocking element loads. This approach is fundamentally different
from the balanced RC approach. The main difference is that the delay from the final driver
to each load is not matched. Rather, the absolute delay is minimized assuming that the grid
size is small. A major advantage of such a grid structure is that it allows for late design
changes since the clock is easily accessible at various points on the die. Unfortunately, the
penalty is the power dissipation since the structure has a lot of unnecessary interconnect.
It is essential to consider clock distribution in the earlier phases of the design of a
complex circuit, since it might influence the shape and form of the chip floorplan. Clock
distribution is often only considered in the last phases of the design process, when most of
the chip layout is already frozen. This results in unwieldy clock networks and multiple
GCLK
Driver
Driver
GCLK  GCLK
Driver
Figure 10.20 Grid structures allow a low skew
Driver distribution and physical design flexibility at the
cost of power dissipation [Bailey00].
GCLK

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 60 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  60
timing constraints that hamper the performance and operation of the final circuit. With
careful planning, a designer can avoid many of these problems, and clock distribution
becomes a manageable operation.
Case Study—The Digital Alpha Microprocessors
In this section, the clock distribution strategy for three generations of the Alpha micropro-
cessor is discussed in detail. These processors have always been at the cutting edge of the
technology, and therefore represent an interesting perspective on the evolution of clock
distribution.
The Alpha 21064 Processor.  The first generation Alpha microprocessor (21064 or EV4)
from Digital Equipment Corporation used a single global clock driver [Dobberpuhl92].
The distribution of clock load capacitance among various functional block shown in Fig-
ure 10.20, resulting in a total clock load of 3.25nF! The processor uses a single-phase
clock methodology and the 200Mhz clock is fed to a binary fanning tree with five levels of
buffering. The inputs to the clock drivers are shorted out to smooth out the asymmetry in
the incoming signals. The final output stage, residing in the middle of the chip, drives the
clock net. The clock driver and the associated pre-drivers account for 40% of the effective
switched capacitance (12.5nF), resulting in significant power dissipation. The overall
width of the clock driver was on the order of 35cm in a 0.75μm technology. A detail clock
skew simulation with process variations indicates that a clock uncertainty of less than
200psec (< 10%) was achieved.
Integer Unit Write
1129pF Buffer
ICache 82pF
clock driver
373pF
(35cm width) Data
Floating Unit Cache
803pF 208pF
Figure 10.21 Clock load for the .
The Alpha 21164 Processor .  The Alpha 21164 microprocessor (EV5) operates at a
clock frequency of 300 Mhz while using 9.3 million transistors on a 16.5 mm  ×  18.1 mm
die in a 0.5 μm CMOS technology [Bowhill95]. A single-phase clocking methodology
was selected and the design made extensive use of dynamic logic, resulting in a substantial
clock load of 3.75 nF. The clock-distribution system consumes 20 W, which is 40% of the
total dissipation of the processor.
The incoming clock signal is first routed through a single six-stage buffer placed at
the center of the chip. The resulting signal is distributed in metal-3 to the left and right
banks of final clock drivers, positioned between the secondary cache memory and the out-
side edge of the execution unit (Figure 10.22a). The produced clock signal is driven onto a
grid of metal-3 and metal-4 wires. The equivalent transistor width of the final driver
inverter equals 58 cm! To ensure the integrity of the clock grid across the chip, the grid
was extracted from the layout, and the resulting  RC-network was simulated. A three-
dimensional representation of the simulation results is plotted in Figure 10.22b. As evi-

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 61 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
61  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
Clock driver
(a) Chip microphotograph, showing position- (b) Clock skew simulation.
ing of clock drivers. 
Figure 10.22  Clock distribution and skew in 300 MHz microprocessor (Courtesy of Digital Equipment
Corporation).
dent from the plot, the skew is zero at the output of the left and right drivers. The maxi-
mum value of the absolute skew is smaller than 90 psec. The critical instruction and
execution units all see the clock within 65 psec.
Clock skew and race problems were addressed using a mix-and-match approach.
The clock skew problems were eliminated by either routing the clock in the opposite direc-
tion of the data at a small expense of performance or by ensuring that the data could not
overtake the clock. A standardized library of level-sensitive transmission-gate latches was
used for the complete chip. To avoid race-through conditions, a number of design guide-
lines were followed including:
•  Careful sizing of the local clock buffers so that their skew was minimal.
•  At least one gate had to be inserted between connecting latches. This gate, which
can be part of the logic function or just a simple inverter, ensures that the signal can-
not overtake the clock. Special design verification tools were developed to guaran-
tee that this rule was obeyed over the complete chip.
To improve the inter-layer dielectric uniformity, filler
polygons were inserted between widely spaced lines (Figure
10.23). Though this may increase the capacitance to nearby
signal lines, the improved uniformity results in lower variation
and clock uncertainty. The dummy fills are automatically
inserted, and tied to one of the power rails (VDD  or  GND). This
technique is used in many processors for controlling the clock
skew.
This example demonstrates that managing clock skew
Figure 10.23  Dummy
and clock distribution for large, high-performance synchro- fills reduce the ILD
variation and improve
clock skew.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 62 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  62
nous designs is a feasible task. However, making such a circuit work in a reliable way
requires careful planning and intensive analysis.
The Alpha 21264 Processor.  A hierarchical clocking scheme is used in the 600Mhz
Alpha 21264 (EV6) processor (in 0.35μm CMOS) as shown in Figure 10.24. The choice
of a hierarchical clocking scheme for this processor is significantly different than their
previous approaches, which did not have a hierarchy of clocks beyond the global clock
grid. Using a hierarchical clocking approach makes trade-off’s between power and skew
management. Power is reduced because the clocking networks for individual blocks can
be gated. As seen in previous generation microprocessors, the clock power contributes to a
large fraction of overall power consumption. Also the flexibility of having local clocks
provides the designers with more freedom with circuit styles at the module level. The
drawback of using a hierarchical clock network is that skew reduction becomes more dif-
ficult because clocks to various local registers may go through very different paths, which
may contribute to the skew. However, using timing verification tools, the skew can be
managed by tweaking of clock drivers.
Figure 10.24  Clock
hierarchy for the Alpha
21264 Processor.
The clock hierarchy consists of a global clock grid, called  GCLK, that covers the
entire die. State elements and clocking points exist from 0 to 8 levels past  GCLK. The on-
chip generated clock is routed to the center of the die and distributed using tree structures
to 16 distributed clock drivers (Figure 10.25). The global clock distribution network uti-
lizes a windowpane configuration, that achieves low skew by dividing up the clock into 4
regions -- this reduces the distance from the drivers to the loads. Each grid pane is driven
from four sides, reducing the dependence on process variations. This also helps the power
supply and thermal problems as the drivers are distributed through the chip.
Use of a grid-ded clock has the advantage of reducing the clock skew and provides
universal availability of clock signals. The drawback clearly is the increased capacitance
of the Global Clock grid when compared to a tree distribution approach. Beyond the
GCLK  is a major clock grid. The major clock grid are used to drive different large execu-
tion blocks within the chip including 1) Bus interface unit 2) integer issue and execution
units 3) floating point issue and execution units 4) instruction fetch and branch prediction
unit 5) load/store unit and 6) pad ring. The reason the major clocks were introduced was to
reduce power because the major clocks have localized loads, and can be sized appropri-
ately to meet the skew and edge requirements for the local loading conditions.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 63 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
63  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
Figure 10.25 Global clock-distribution network in a window-pane structure.
The last hierarchy of clocks in the Alpha processor are the local clocks, which are
generated as needed from any other clock, and typically can be customized to meet local
timing constraints. The local clocks provide great flexibility in the design of the local logic
blocks, but at the same time, makes it significantly more difficult to manage skew. For
example, local clocks can be gated in order to reduce power, can be driven with wildly dif-
ferent loads, and can even be tweaked to enable time borrowing between different blocks.
Furthermore, the local clocks are susceptible to coupling from data lines as well because
they are local and not shielded like the global grid-ded clocks. As a result, the local clock
distribution is highly dependent on it’s local interconnection, and has to be designed very
carefully to manage local clock skew.
Design Techniques—Dealing with Clock Skew and Jitter
To fully exploit the improved performance of logic gates with technology scaling, clock
skew  and  jitter  must be carefully addressed.  Skew  and  jitter  can fundamentally limit the
peformance of a digital circuits. Some guidelines for reducing of clock  skew  and  jitter  are
presented below.
1.  To minimize  skew, balance clock paths from a central distribution source to individ-
ual clocking elements using H-tree structures or more generally routed tree struc-
tures. When using routed clock trees, the effective clock load of each path that
includes wiring as well as transistor loads must be equalized.
2.  The use of local clock grids (instead of routed trees) can reduce  skew  at the cost of
increased capacitive load and power dissipation.
3.  If data dependent clock load variations causes significant  jitter, differential registers
that have a data independent clock load should be used. The use of gated clocks to
save also results in data dependent clock load and increased  jitter. In clock networks
where the fixed load is large (e.g., using clock grids), the data dependent variation
might not be significant.
4.  If data flows in one direction, route data and clock in opposite directions. This elmi-
nates races at the cost of perfomance.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 64 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  64
5.  Avoid data dependent noise by shielding clock wires from adjacent signal wires. By
placing power lines (VDD  or  GND) next to the clock wires, coupling from neighbor-
ing signal nets can be minimized or avoided.
6.  Variations in interconnect capacitance due to inter-layer dielectric thickness varia-
tion can be greatly reduced through the use of dummy fills. Dummy fills are very
common and reduce  skew  by increasing uniformity. Systematic variations should be
modeled and compensated for.
7.  Variation in chip temperature across the die causes variations in clock buffer delay.
The use of feedback circuits based on delay locked loops as discussed later in this
chapter can easily compensate for temperature variations.
8.  Power supply variation is a significant component of  jitter  as it impacts the cycle to
cycle delay through clock buffers. High frequency power supply variation can be
reduced by addition of on-chip decoupling capacitors. Unfortunately, decoupling
capacitors require a significant amount of area and efficient packaging solutions
must be leveraged to reduce chip area.
10.3.4  Latch-Based Clocking
While the use of registers in a sequential circuits enables a robust design methodology,
there are significant performance advantages to using a latch based design in which com-
binational logic is separated by transparent latches. In an edge-triggered system, the worst
case logic path between two registers determines the minimum clock period for the entire
system. If a logic block finishes before the clock period, it has to idle till the next input is
latched in on the next system clock edge. The use of a latch based methodology (as illus-
trated in Figure 10.26) enables more flexible timing, allowing one stage to pass slack to or
steal time from following stages. This flexibility, allows an overall performance increase.
Note that the latch based methodology is nothing more than adding logic between latches
of a master-slave flip-flop.
For the latch-based system in Figure 10.26, assume a two-phase clocking scheme.
Assume furthermore that the clock are ideal, and that the two clocks are inverted versions
of each other (for sake of simplicity). In this configuration, a stable input is available to
the combinational logic block A (CLB_A) on the falling edge of CLK1 (at edge  2) and it
has a maximum time equal to the  T CLK/2 to evaluate (that is, the entire low phase of
CLK1). On the falling edge of CLK2 (at edge  3), the output  CLB_A  is latched and the
computation of  CLK_B  is launched.  CLB_B  computes on the low phase of CLK2 and the
output is available on the falling edge of CLK1 (at edge  4). This timing appears equiva-
lent to having an edge-triggered system where  CLB_A  and  CLB_B  are cascaded and
between two edge-triggered registers (Figure 10.27). In both cases, it appears that the time
available to perform the combination of  CLB_A  and  CLB_B  is  T CLK.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 65 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
65  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
L1  L2  L1 L2
In  A CLB_A  B  CLB_B  C CLB_C 
D Q D Q D Q D Q
tpd,A  tpd,B  tpd,C
CLK1 CLK2  CLK1 CLK2
T CLK
compute
1  2 4
CLK1 CLB_A 3
launch C
launch A
compute
CLK2 CLB_B
launch B
Figure 10.26 Latch-based design in which transparent latches are separated by combinational logic.
However, there is an important performance related difference. In a latch based sys-
tem, since the logic is separated by level sensitive latches, it possible for a logic block to
utilize time that is left over from the previous logic block and this is referred to as  slack
borrowing  [Bernstein00]. This approach requires no explicit design changes, as the pass-
ing of slack from one block to the next is automatic. The key advantage of slack borrow-
ing is that it allows logic between cycle boundaries to use more than one clock cycle while
satisfying the cycle time constraint. Stated in another way, if the sequential system works
at a particular clock rate and the total logic delay for a complete cycle is larger than the
clock period, then unused time or  slack  has been implicitly borrowed from preceding
stages. This implies that the clock rate can be higher than the worst case critical path!
Slack passing happens due to the level sensitive nature of latches. In Figure 10.26,
the input to  CLB_A  should be valid by the falling edge of CLK1 (edge  2). What happens
if the combinational logic block of the previous stage finishes early and has a valid input
data for  CLB_A  before edge  2? Since the a latch is transparent during the entire high
phase of the clock, as soon as the previous stage has finished computing, the input data for
CLB_A  is valid. This implies that the maximum time available for  CLB_A is its phase time
(i.e., the low phase of CLK1) and any left over time from the previous computation. For-
mally state, slack passing has taken place if  T CLK <  t pd, A +  t pd, B and the logic functions cor-
rectly (for simplicity, the  delay associated with latches  are ignored).  An excellent
quantitative analysis of slack-borrowing is presented in [Bernstein00].
L1  L2  L1 L2
In 
D Q D Q CLB_A CLB_B  D Q D Q
CLB_C
CLK1 CLK2  CLK1 CLK2
Figure 10.27 Edge-triggered pipeline (back-to-back latches for edge-triggered registers) of the logic in Figure
10.26.
Consider the latch based system in Figure 10.28. In this example, point  a  (input to
CLB_A) is valid before the edge  2. This implies that the previous block did not use up the
entire high phase of CLK1, which results in slack time (denoted by the shaded area). By

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 66 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.3  Synchronous Design — An In-depth Perspective  66
construction,  CLB_A  can start computing as soon as point  a  becomes valid and uses the
slack time to finish well before its allocated time (edge  3). Since L2 is a transparent latch,
c  becomes valid on the high phase of CLK2 and  CLB_B  starts to compute by using the
slack provided by  CLB_A.  CLB_B  completes before its allocated time (edge  4) and
passes a small slack to the next cycle. As this picture indicates, the total cycle delay, that is
the sum of the delay for  CLB_A  and  CLB_B, is larger than the clock period. Since the
pipeline behaves correctly, slack passing has taken place and a higher throughput has been
achieved.
L1  L2  L1
In  CLB_A  CLB_B
D Q D Q D Q
a  tpd,A  b  c  tpd,B d  e
CLK1 CLK2  CLK1
TCLK
1  2
CLK1 3 4
CLK2
slack passed to next stage
t pd,A t DQ  t pd,B t DQ
e valid
a valid  b valid c valid  d valid
Figure 10.28 Example of slack-borrowing.
An important question related to slack passing relates to the maximum possible
slack that can be passed across cycle boundaries. In Figure 10.28, it is easy that see that
the earliest time that  CLB_A  can start computing is  1. This happens if the previous logic
block did not use any of its allocated time (CLK1 high phase) or if it finished by using
slack from previous stages. Therefore, the maximum time that can be borrowed from
the previous stage is 1/2 cycle or  T CLK/2. Similarly,  CLB_B  must finish its operation
by edge  4. This implies that the maximum logic cycle delay is equal to 1.5 *  T CLK.
However, note that for an  n-stage pipeline, the overall logic delay cannot exceed the
time available of  n  *  T CLK.
Example 10.3 Slack-passing example
First consider an edge-triggered pipeline of Figure 10.29. Assume that the primary input
In  is valid slightly after the rising edge of the clock. For this circuit, it is easy to see that
the minimum clock period required is 125ns. The latency is two clock cycles (actually, the
output is valid 2.5 cycles after the input settles). Note that for the first pipeline stage, 1/2

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 67 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
67  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
cycle is wasted as the input data can only be latched in on the falling edge of the clock.
This time can be exploited in a latch based system.
In a  CL1 b CL2 c  d CL3 e  CL4 f  Out
D  Q D  Q D  Q
75ns 50ns  75ns 50ns
CLK  CLK CLK
Figure 10.29 Conventional edge-triggered pipeline.
Figure 10.30 shows a latch based pipeline of the same sequential circuit. As the tim-
ing indicates, exactly the same timing can be achieve with a clock period of 100ns. This is
enabled by slack borrowing between logical partitions.
CL1 CL CL CL
In a  b  c 2 d e 3 f  g 4 h  Out
D Q D Q D Q D Q D Q
75ns 50ns 75ns 50ns
CLK CLK CLK CLK
CLK
TCLK = 100ns
CLK
tpd,CL1 tpd,CL2 tpd,CL3 tpd,CL4
f valid  g valid h valid Out valid
a valid b valid c valid d valid e valid 
Figure 10.30 Latch-based pipeline.
10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*
10.4.1  Self-Timed Logic - An Asynchronous Technique
The synchronous design approach advocated in the previous sections assumes that all cir-
cuit events are orchestrated by a central clock. Those clocks have a dual function.
•  They insure that the  physical timing constraints  are met. The next clock cycle can
only start when all logic transitions have settled and the system has come to a steady
state. This ensures that only legal logical values are applied in the next round of
computation. In short, clocks account for the worst case delays of logic gates,
sequential logic elements and the wiring.
•  Clock events serve as a  logical ordering mechanism  for the global system events. A
clock provides a time base that determines what will happen and when. On every

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 68 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  68
clock transition, a number of operations are initiated that change the state of the
sequential network.
Consider the pipelined datapath of Figure 10.31. In this circuit, the data transitions
through logic stages under the command of the clock. The important point to note under
this methodology is that the clock period is chosen to be larger than the worst-case delay
of each pipeline stage, or  T  > max (t pd1, t pd2, t pd3)  + t pd,reg. This will ensure satisfying the
physical constraint. At each clock transition, a new set of inputs is sampled and computa-
tion is started anew. The throughput of the system—which is equivalent to the number of
data samples processed per second—is equivalent to the clock rate. When to sample a new
input or when an output is available depends upon the  logical ordering  of the system
events and is clearly orchestrated by the clock in this example.
R1  R2  R3 R4
In  Logic  Logic Logic
D Q D Q D Q Block #3 D Q
Block #1 Block #2 
t t t t
CLK pd,reg  pd1 pd2  pd3
Figure 10.31  Pipelined, synchronous datapath.
The synchronous design methodology has some clear advantages. It presents a
structured, deterministic approach to the problem of choreographing the myriad of events
that take place in digital designs. The approach taken is to equalize the delays of all opera-
tions by making them as bad as the worst of the set. The approach is robust and easy to
adhere to, which explains its enormous popularity; however it does have some pitfalls.
•  It assumes that all clock events or timing references happen simultaneously over the
complete circuit. This is not the case in reality, because of effects such as clock  skew
and  jitter.
•  As all the clocks in a circuit transitions at the same time, significant current flows
over a very short period of time (due to the large capacitance load). This causes sig-
nificant noise problems due to package inductance and power supply grid resistance.
•  The linking of physical and logical constraints has some obvious effects on the per-
formance. For instance, the throughput rate of the pipelined system of Figure 10.31
is directly linked to the worst-case delay of the slowest element in the pipeline. On
the average, the delay of each pipeline stage is smaller. The same pipeline could
support an average throughput rate that is substantially higher than the synchronous
one. For example, the propagation delay of a 16-bit adder is highly data dependent
(e.g., adding two 4-bit numbers requires a much shorter time compared to adding
two 16-bit numbers).
One way to avoid these problems is to opt for an  asynchronous  design approach and
to eliminate all the clocks. Designing a purely asynchronous circuit is a nontrivial and
potentially hazardous task. Ensuring a correct circuit operation that avoids all potential
race conditions under any operation condition and input sequence requires a careful tim-
ing analysis of the network. In fact, the logical ordering of the events is dictated by the
structure of the transistor network and the relative delays of the signals. Enforcing timing

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 69 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
69  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
constraints by manipulating the logic structure and the lengths of the signal paths requires
an extensive use of CAD tools, and is only recommended when strictly necessary.
A more reliable and robust technique is the self-timed approach, which presents a
local solution to the timing problem [Seitz80]. Figure 10.32 uses a pipelined datapath to
illustrate how this can be accomplished. This approach assumes that each combinational
function has a means of indicating that it has completed a computation for a particular
piece of data. The computation of a logic block is initiated by asserting a  Start  signal. The
combinational logic block computes on the input data and in a data-dependent fashion
(taking the physical constraints into account) generates a  Done  flag once the computation
is finished. Additionally, the operators must signal each other that they are either ready to
receive a next input word or that they have a legal data word at their outputs that is ready
for consumption. This signaling ensures the logical ordering of the events and can be
achieved with the aid of an extra  Ack(nowledge) and  Req(uest) signal. In the case of the
pipelined datapath, the scenario could proceed as follows.
Req  Req  Req  Req
Ack  HS  Ack  HS  Ack  HS Ack
Start  Done Start  Done Start  Done
In R1  F1 R2  F2 R3  F3 Out
t pF1 tpF2 tpF3
Figure 10.32  Self-timed, pipelined datapath.
1.  An input word arrives, and a  Req(uest)  to the block  F1 is raised. If  F1 is inactive at
that time, it transfers the data and acknowledges this fact to the input buffer, which
can go ahead and fetch the next word.
2.  F1 is enabled by raising the  Start  signal. After a certain amount of time, dependent
upon the data values, the  Done  signal goes high indicating the completion of the
computation.
3.  A  Re(quest)  is issued to the  F2 module. If this function is free, an  Ack(nowledge)  is
raised, the output value is transferred, and  F1 can go ahead with its next computa-
tion.
The self-timed approach effectively separates the physical and logical ordering
functions implied in circuit timing. The completion signal  Done  ensures that the physical
timing constraints are met and that the circuit is in steady state before accepting a new
input. The logical ordering of the operations is ensured by the acknowledge-request
scheme, often called  a handshaking protocol.  Both interested parties synchronize with
each other by mutual agreement or, if you want, by shaking hands. The ordering protocol
described above and implemented in the module HS is only one of many that are possible.
The choice of protocol is important, since it has a profound effect on the circuit perfor-
mance and robustness.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 70 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  70
When compared to the synchronous approach, self-timed circuits display some
alluring properties.
•  In contrast to the global centralized approach of the synchronous methodology, tim-
ing signals are generated  locally. This avoids all problems and overheads associated
with distributing high-speed clocks.
•  Separating the physical and logical ordering mechanisms results in a potential
increase in performance. In synchronous systems, the period of the clock has to be
stretched to accommodate the slowest path over all possible input sequences. In self-
timed systems, a completed data-word does not have to wait for the arrival of the
next clock edge to proceed to the subsequent processing stages. Since circuit delays
are often dependent upon the actual data value, a self-timed circuit proceeds at the
average speed  of the hardware in contrast to the  worst-case  model of synchronous
logic.  For a ripple carry adder, the average length of carry-propagation is O(log
(N)). This is a fact that can be exploited in self-timed circuits, while in a synchro-
nous methodology, a worst case performance that varies linearly with the number of
bits O(N)) must be assumed.
•  The automatic shut-down of blocks that are not in use can result in power savings.
Additionally, the power consumption overhead of generating and distributing high-
speed clocks can be partially avoided. As discussed earlier, this overhead can be
substantial. It is also possible to reduce the average clock load in synchronous pro-
cessors through the use of gated clocks in which portions of the circuits that don’t
compute in a cycle are shut off.
•  Self-timed circuits are by nature robust to variations in manufacturing and operating
conditions such as temperature. Synchronous systems are limited by their perfor-
mance at the extremes of the operating conditions. The performance of a self-timed
system is determined by the actual operating conditions.
Unfortunately, these nice properties are not for free; they come at the expense of a
substantial circuit-level overhead, which is caused by the need to generate completion sig-
nals and the need for handshaking logic that acts as a local traffic agent to order the circuit
events (see block HS in Figure 10.32). Both of these topics are treated in more detail in
subsequent sections.
10.4.2  Completion-Signal Generation
A necessary component of self-timed logic is the circuitry to indicate when a particular
piece of circuitry has completed its operation for the current piece of data. There are two
common and reliable ways to generate the completion signal.
Dual-Rail Coding
One common approach to completion signal generation is the use of dual rail coding. It
actually requires the introduction of redundancy in the data representation to signal that a
particular bit is either in a transition or steady-state mode. Consider the redundant data

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 71 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
71  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
model presented in Table 10.1. Two bits (B0 and  B1) are used to represent a single data bit
B. For the data to be valid or the computation to be completed, the circuit must be in a
legal 0 (B0 = 0,  B1 = 1) or 1 (B0 = 1,  B1 = 0) state. The (B0 = 0,  B1 = 0) condition signals
that the data is non-valid and the circuit is in either a reset or transition mode. The (B0 = 1,
B1 = 1) state is illegal and should never occur in an actual circuit.
Table 10.1  Redundant signal representation to include transition state.
B  B0  B1
in transition (or reset)  0  0
0  0  1
1  1  0
illegal  1  1
A circuit that actually implements such a redundant representation is shown in Fig-
ure 10.33, which is a dynamic version of the DCVSL logic style where the clock is
replaced by the  Start  signal [Heller84]. DCVSL uses a redundant data representation by
nature of its differential dual-rail structure. When the  Start  signal is low, the circuit is pre-
charged by the PMOS transistors, and the output (B0,  B1) goes in the  Reset-Transition
state (0, 0). When the  Start  signal goes high, signaling the initiation of a computation, the
NMOS pull-down network evaluates, and one of the precharged nodes is lowered. Either
B0 or  B1—but never both—goes high, which raises  Done  and signals the completion of
the computation.
V DD  V DD
Start
B0
B0 B1 Done
B1
In1
In1
PDN PDN
In2
In2
Start Figure 10.33  Generation of a
completion signal in DCVSL.
DCVSL is more expensive in terms of area than a non-redundant circuit due to its
dual nature. The completion generation is performed in series with the logic evaluation,
and its delay adds directly to the total delay of the logic block. The completion signals of
all the individual bits must be combined to generate the completion for an  N-bit data word.
Completion generation thus comes at the expense of both area and speed. The benefits of
the dynamic timing generation often justify this overhead. Redundant signal presentations
other than the one presented in Table 10.1 can also be envisioned. One essential element is
the presence of a  transition state  denoting that the circuit is in evaluation mode and the
output data is not valid.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 72 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  72
Example 10.4  Self-Timed Adder Circuit
An  efficient  implementation  of  a  self-timed  adder  circuit  is  shown  in  Figure  10.34
[Abnous93]. A Manchester-carry scheme is used to boost the circuit performance. The pro-
posed approach is based on the observation that the circuit delay of an adder is dominated by
the carry-propagation path. It is consequentially sufficient to use the differential signaling in
the carry path only (Figure 10.34a). The completion signal is efficiently derived by combin-
ing the carry signals of the different stages (Figure 10.34b). This safely assumes that the sum
generation, which depends upon the arrival of the carry signal, is faster than the completion
generation. The benefit of this approach is that the completion generation starts earlier and
proceeds in parallel with sum generation, which reduces the critical timing path. All other sig-
nals such as  P(ropagate),  G(enerate),  K(ill),  and  S(um)  do not require completion generation
and can be implemented in single-ended logic. As shown in the circuit schematics, the differ-
ential carry paths are virtually identical. The only difference is that the  G(enerate)  signal is
replaced by a  K(ill). A simple logic analysis demonstrates that this indeed results in an
inverted carry signal and, hence, a differential signaling.
V DD
Start
P0 P1 P2 P3
C0  C1  C2  C3  C4  C 4
C0
G0 G1 G2  G3
C1out  C2out  C3out  C4out VDD
Start
Start 
Done
VDD
C4out C4out
Start C C
3out 3out
P0 P1 P2 P3
C0  C1  C2  C3  C4 C4
C2out C2out
C0
K0 K1 K2  K3
C1out C1out
C1out  C2out  C3out  C4out
Start Start
(a) Differential carry generation  (b) Completion signal
Figure 10.34  Manchester-carry scheme with differential signal representation.
Replica Delay
While the dual-rail coding above allows tracking of the signal statistics, it comes at the
cost of power dissipation. Every single gate must transition for every new input vector,
regardless of the value of the data vector. An attempt to reduce the overhead of completion
detection is to use a critical-path replica configured as a delay element, as shown in Figure

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 73 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
73  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
10.35. To start a computation, the  Start  signal is raised and the computation of the logic
network is initiated. At the same time, the start signal is fed into the replica delay line,
which tracks the critical path of the logic network. It is important that the replica is struc-
tured such that no glitching transitions occur. When the output of the delay line makes a
transition, it indicates that the logic is complete—as the delay line mimics the critical path.
In general, it is important to add extra padding in the delay line to compensate for possible
random process variations. The advantage of this approach is that the logic can be imple-
mented using a standard non-redundant circuit style such as complementary CMOS. Also,
if multiple logic units are computing in parallel, it is possible to amortize the overhead of
the delay line over multiple blocks. Note that this approach generates the completion sig-
nal after a time equal to the worst case delay through the network. As a result, it does not
exploit the statistical properties of the incoming data. However, it can track the local
effects of process variations and environmental variations (e.g., temperature or power sup-
ply variations). This approach is widely used to generate the internal timing of semicon-
ductor memories where self-timing is a commonly used technique.
In  LOGIC
Out
NETWORK
DELAY MODULE Figure 10.35  Completion-signal gener
Start  Done 
(CRITICAL PATH REPLICA) using delay module.
Example 10.5An alternate completion detection circuit using current sensing
Ideally, logic should be implemented using non-redundant CMOS (e.g., static CMOS) and
the completion signal circuitry should track data dependencies. Figure 10.36 shown an
example technique that attempts to realize the above [REF]. A current sensor is inserted in
series with the combinational logic, and monitors the current flowing through the logic.
The current sensor outputs a low value when no current flows through the logic (this is,
the logic is idle), and is high when the combinational logic is switching performing com-
putation. This signal effectively determines when the logic has completed its cycle. Note
that this approach tracks data-dependent computation times — if only the lower order bits
of an adder switch, current will stop flowing once the lower order bits switch to the final
value.
If the input data vector does not change from one cycle to the next, no current is
drawn from the supply for static CMOS logic. In this case, a delay element that tracks the
minimum delay through the logic and current sensor is used for signal completion. The
outputs of the current sensor and minimum delay element are then combined. This
approach is interesting, but requires careful analog design. Ensuring reliability while
keeping the overhead circuitry small is the main challenge. These concerns have kept the
applicability of the approach very limited, notwithstanding its great potential.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 74 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  74
VDD
Start
Inputs 
Static CMOS Logic Output tdelay
A
Input Register GNDsense t
Start overlap
Current Sensor A B
tMDG
Done t
Done pd-NOR
Min Delay Generator B
Output valid
tMDG  > min(t delay)  ⇒ t overlap  > 0
Figure 10.36  Completion-signal generation using current sensing.
10.4.3  Self-Timed Signaling
Besides the generation of the completion signals, a self-timed approach also requires a
handshaking protocol to logically order the circuit events avoiding races and hazards. The
functionality of the signaling (or handshaking) logic is illustrated by the example of Fig-
ure 10.37, which shows a  sender module  transmitting data to a  receiver  ([Sutherland89]).
2
Req
Req
Ack
SENDER  RECEIVER
Data 3
Ack
(a) Sender-receiver configuration
Data 1 1
cycle 1  cycle 2
Sender’s action
Figure 10.37  Two-phase handshaking protocol. Receiver’s action
(b) Timing diagram
The sender places the data value on the data bus  1  and produces an event on the  Req
control signal by changing the polarity of the signal  2. In some cases the request event is
a rising transition; at other times it is a falling one—the protocol described here does not
distinguish between them. Upon receiving the request, the receiver accepts the data when
possible and produces an event on the  Ack  signal to indicate that the data has been
accepted  3. If the receiver is busy or its input buffer is full, no  Ack  event is generated, and
the transmitter is stalled until the receiver becomes available by, for instance, freeing
space in the input buffer. Once the  Ack  event is produced, the transmitter goes ahead and
produces the next data word  1. The four events,  data change, request, data acceptance,

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 75 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
75  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
A  B  Fn+1
A
0 0 0
C F 0 1 Fn
B 1 0 Fn
1 1 1
Figure 10.38  Muller C-element.
(a) Schematic  (b) Truth table
and  acknowledge, proceed in a cyclic order. Successive cycles may take different amounts
of time depending upon the time it takes to produce or consume the data.
This protocol is called  two-phase, since only two phases of operation can be distin-
guished for each data transmission—the active cycle of the sender and the active cycle of
the receiver. Both phases are terminated by certain events. The  Req  event terminates the
active cycle of the sender, while the receiver’s cycle is completed by the  Ack  event. The
sender is free to change the data during its active cycle. Once the  Req  event is generated, it
has to keep the data constant as long as the receiver is active. The receiver can only accept
data during its active cycle.
The correct operation of the sender-receiver system requires a strict ordering of the
signaling events, as indicated by the arrows in Figure 10.37. Imposing this order is the task
of the handshaking logic which, in a sense, performs logic manipulations on events. An
essential component of virtually any handshaking module is the  Muller C-element. This
gate, whose schematic symbol and truth table are given in Figure 10.38, performs an
AND-operation on events. The output of the C-element is a copy of its inputs when both
inputs are identical. When the inputs differ, the output retains its previous value. Phrased
in a different way—events must occur at both inputs of a Muller C-element for its output
to change state and to create an output event. As long as this does not happen, the output
remains unchanged and no output event is generated. The implementation of a C-element
is centered around a flip-flop, which should be of no surprise, given the similarities in
their truth tables. Figure 10.39 displays two potential circuit realizations—a static and a
dynamic one respectively.
V DD
VDD  VDD
A B
A
S Q A F
F B
F
B B
R
B
A B
(a) Logic  (b) Majority Function
(c) Dynamic
Figure 10.39  Implementations of a Muller C-element.
Figure 10.40 shows how to use this component to enforce the two-phase handshak-
ing protocol for the example of the sender-receiver. Assume that  Req,  Ack,  and  Data
Ready  are initially 0. When the sender wants to transmit the next word, the  Data Ready
signal is set to 1,  which triggers the C-element because both its inputs are at 1.  Req  goes

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 76 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  76
high—this is commonly denoted as  Req↑.  The sender now resides in the wait mode, and
control is passed to the receiver. The C-element is blocked, and no new data is sent to
the data bus (Req  stays high) as long as the transmitted data is not processed by the
receiver. Once this happens, the  Data accepted  signal is raised. This can be the result
of many different actions, possibly involving other C-elements communicating with
subsequent blocks. An  Ack↑  ensues, which unblocks the C-element and passes the
control back to the sender. A  Data ready↓  event, which might already have happened
before  Ack↑, produces a  Req↓, and the cycle is repeated.
Data
Sender Receiver
logic logic
Data ready Data accepted
Req
C Figure 10.40  A Muller C-element
implements a two-phase handshake
Ack protocol. The circle at the lower input
of the Muller C-element stands for
inversion.
Handshake logic
Problem 10.1  Two-Phase Self-Timed FIFO
Figure 10.41 shows a two-phase, self-timed implementation of a FIFO (first-in first-out)
buffer with three registers. Assuming that the registers accept a data word on both positive-
and negative-going transitions of the  En  signals and that the  Done  signal is simply a delayed
version of  En, examine the operation of the FIFO by plotting the timing behavior of all sig-
nals of interest. How can you observe that the FIFO is completely empty (full)? (Hint: Deter-
mine the necessary conditions on the  Ack and  Req signals.)
In  Out
R1 R2  R3
En Done
Req i Req 
0
Figure 10.41  Three-stage
C  C C
self-timed FIFO, using a two-
phase signaling protocol.
Ack i Acko
The two-phase protocol has the advantage of being simple and fast. There is some
bad news, however. This protocol requires the detection of transitions that may occur in
either direction. Most logic devices in the MOS technology tend to be sensitive to levels or
to transitions in one particular direction. Event-triggered logic, as required in the two-
phase protocol, requires extra logic as well as state information in the registers and the
computational elements. Since the transition direction is important, initializing all the
Muller C-elements in the appropriate state is essential. If this is not done, the circuit might
dead-lock, which means that all elements are permanently blocked and nothing will ever

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 77 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
77  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
happen. A detailed study on how to implement event-triggered logic can be found in the
text by Sutherland on micropipelines [Sutherland89].
The only alternative is to adopt a different signaling approach, called four-phase sig-
naling, or  return-to-zero  (RTZ). This class of signaling requires that all controlling signals
be brought back to their initial values before the next cycle can be initiated. Once again,
this is illustrated with the example of the sender-receiver. The four-phase protocol for this
example is shown in Figure 10.42.
2 4 Sender’s action
Req
Receiver’s action
Ack
3 5
Data 1  1
Figure 10.42  Four-phase
Cycle 1  Cycle 2
handshaking protocol.
The protocol presented is initially the same as the two-phase one. Both the  Req  and
the  Ack  are initially in the zero-state, however. Once a new data word is put on the bus  1,
the  Req  is raised (Req↑  or  2) and control is passed to the receiver. When ready, the
receiver accepts the data and raises  Ack  (Ack↑  or  3).  So far, nothing new. The protocol
proceeds, now by bringing both  Req  (Req↓  or  4) and  Ack  (Ack↓  or  5) back to their initial
state in sequence. Only when that state is reached is the sender allowed to put new data on
the bus  1. This protocol is called four-phase because four distinct time-zones can be rec-
ognized per cycle: two for the sender; two for the receiver. The first two phases are identi-
cal to the two-phase protocol; the last two are devoted to resetting of the state. An
implementation of the protocol, based on Muller C-elements, is shown in Figure 10.43. It
is interesting to notice that the four-phase protocol requires two C-elements in series
(since four states must be represented). The  Data ready  and  Data accepted  signals must be
pulses instead of single transitions.
Data
Sender Receiver
logic logic
Data ready Data accepted
Req
S
C C
Ack
Handshake logic
Figure 10.43  Implementation of 4-phase handshake protocol using Muller C-elements.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 78 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  78
Problem 10.2  Four-Phase Protocol
Derive the timing diagram for the signals shown in Figure 10.43. Assume that the Data Ready
signal is a pulse and that the  Data Accepted signal is a delayed version of  Req.
The four-phase protocol has the disadvantage of being more complex and slower,
since two events on  Req  and  Ack  are needed per transmission. On the other hand, it has the
advantage of being robust. The logic in the sender and receiver modules does not have to
deal with transitions, which can go either way, but only has to consider rising (or falling)
transition events or signal levels. This is readily accomplished with traditional logic circuits.
For this reason, four-phase handshakes are the preferred implementation approach for most
of the current self-timed circuits. The two-phase protocol is mostly selected when the
sender and receiver are far apart and the delays on the control wires (Ack,  Req) are
substantial.
Example 10.6  The Pipelined Datapath—Revisited
We have introduced both the signaling conventions and the concepts of the completion-signal
generation. Now it is time to bring them all together. We do this with the example of the pipe-
lined data path, which was presented earlier. A view of the self-timed data path, including the
timing control, is offered in Figure 10.44. The logic functions  F1 and  F2 are implemented
using dual-rail, differential logic.
In Out
R1  F1 R2  F2
En  Start Done  En Start Done
Req i Req o
Reqint
C  C C  C
Ack i  Ack int Ack o
Figure 10.44  Self-timed pipelined datapath—complete composition.
To understand the operation of this circuit, assume that all  Req and  Ack signals, includ-
ing the internal ones, are set to 0, what means there is no activity in the data path. All  Start
signals are low so that all logic circuits are in precharge condition. An input request (Req i↑)
triggers the first C-element. The enable signal En of R1 is raised, effectively latching the input
data into the register, assuming a positive edge-triggered or a level-sensitive implementation.
Ack i↑  acknowledges the acceptance of the data. The second C-element is triggered as well,
since  Ack int is low. This raises the  Start  signal and starts the evaluation of  F1. At its comple-
tion, the output data is placed on the bus, and a request is initiated to the second stage
(Req int↑), which acknowledges its acceptance by raising Ack int.
At this point, stage 1 is still blocked for further computations. However, the input
buffer can respond to the  Acki↑ event by resetting  Req i to its zero state (Req i↓). In turn, this
lowers  En  and  Ack i. Upon receival of  Ack int↑,  Start  goes low, the pre-charge phase starts, and

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 79 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
79  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
F1 is ready for new data. Note that this sequence corresponds to the four-phase handshake
mechanism described earlier. The dependencies among the events are presented in a more
pictorial fashion in the  state transition diagram  (STG) shown in Figure 10.45. These STGs
can become very complex. Computer tools are often used to derive STGs that ensure proper
operation and optimize the performance.
Req i↑  Ack i↑  Req i↓ Ack ↓  C-element 1
i
Start↑ Start↓
Ack int↑  Ack ↓ C-element 2
Req int↑  Reqint↓  int
Figure 10.45  State transition diagram for pipeline stage 1. The nodes represent the signaling events,
while the arrows express dependencies. Arrows in dashed lines express actions in either the preceding or
following stage.
10.4.4  Practical Examples of Self-Timed Logic
As described in the previous section, self-timed circuits can provide significant perfor-
mance advantage. Unfortunately, the overhead circuits preclude widespread application in
general purpose digital computing. However, several applications exist that exploit the
key concepts of self-timed circuits. A few examples that illustrate the use of self-timed
concepts for either power savings or performance enhancement are presented below.
Glitch Reduction Using Self-timing
A major source of unnecessary switched capacitance in a large datapath such as bit-sliced
adders and multipliers, is due to spurious transitions caused by glitch propagation. Imbal-
ances in a logic network cause inputs of a logic gate or block to arrive at different times,
resulting in glitching transitions. In large combinational blocks such as multipliers, transi-
tions happens in waves as the primary input changes ripple through the logic. If a logic
block can be enabled after all of the inputs settle, then the number of glitching transitions
can be reduced. One approach for minimizing spurious transitions is the use of a self-
timed gating approach that involves partitioning each computational logic block into
smaller blocks and distinct phases. Tri-state buffers are inserted between each of these
phases to prevent glitches from propagating further in the datapath (Figure 10.46). Assum-
ing an arbitrary logic network in Figure 10.46, the outputs of logic block 1 will not be syn-
chronized. When the tri-state buffers at the output of logic block 1 are enabled, the the
computation of logic block 2 is allowed to proceed. To reduce glitching transitions, the tri-
state buffer should be enabled only when the outputs of logic block 1 are ensured to be sta-
ble and valid. The control of the tri-state buffer can be performed through the use of a self-
timed enable signal which is generated by passing the system clock through a delay chain

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 80 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.4  Self-Timed Circuit Design*  80
that models the critical path of the processor. The delay chain is then tapped at the points
corresponding to the locations of the buffers, and the resulting signals are distributed
throughout the chip. This technique succeeds in reducing the switched capacitance combi-
national logic blocks such as multipliers, even including the overhead of the delay chain,
gating signal distribution and buffers [Goodman98].
Logic out1 in2 Logic out2 in3 Logic
Block 1 Block 2 Block 3
delay chain CLKD1 CLKD2
. . . . .
CLK CLK
out1
in2
out2
in3
Figure 10.46 Application of self-timing for glitch reduction.
Post-Charge Logic
An interesting form of self-timed logic is self-resetting CMOS. This structure uses a dif-
ferent control structure than the conventional self-timed pipeline described earlier. The
idea is that instead of checking if all of the logic blocks have completed their operation
before transitioning to the reset stage, the idea is to precharge a logic block as soon as it
completes it operation. Since the precharge happens after operation instead of before eval-
uation, it is often termed  post-charge logic. A block diagram of post-charge logic is shown
in Figure 10.47 [Williams00]. As seen from this block diagram, the precharging of L1
completion completion completion
detection detection detection
(L1)  (L2) (L3)
Precharged Precharged Precharged
Logic Block Logic Block Logic Block
(L1)  (L2) (L3)
Figure 10.47 Self-resetting logic.
happen when the successor stage has finished evaluating. It is possible to precharge a
block based on the completion of its own output, but care must be taken to ensure that the
following stage has properly evaluated based on the output before it is precharged.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 81 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
81  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
It should be noted that unlike other logic VDD
styles, the signals are represented as pulses, and are
valid only for a limited duration. The pulse width
must be shorter than the reset delay or else, there int
would  be  a  contention  between  the  precharge
A  B C out
device and the evaluate switches. While this logic
style offers potential speed advantages, special care
Figure 10.48 Self-resetting
must be taken to ensure correct timing. Also, cir-
3-input OR.
cuitry that  converts level  signals  to pulses  are
required.  An  example  of  self-resetting  logic  is
shown in Figure 10.48 [Bernstein98]. Assume that all inputs are low, and  int  is initially
precharged. If  A  goes high,  int  will fall, causing out to go high. This causes, the gate to
precharge. When the PMOS precharge device is active, the inputs must be in a reset state
to avoid contention.
Clock-Delayed Domino
One interesting application of self-timed circuits using the delay-matching concept is
Clock-Delayed Domino. This is a style of dynamic logic, where there is no global clock
signal. Instead, the clock for one stage is derived from the previous stage. A block diagram
of this is shown in Figure 10.49. The two inverter delays along the clock path emulate the
worst case delay through the logic path (i.e., the Pulldown Network). Sometimes, there is
a transmission gate inserted between the two inverters to accomplish this (the transmission
gate is on with the gate terminal of NMOS tied to  VDD  and the PMOS to  GND). Clock-
delayed Domino was used in the IBM’s 1GHz Microprocessor and is used widely in high
speed Domino logic. There are several advantages of using such a self-clocked timing
abstraction. First, CD domino can provide both inverting and non-inverting function. This
alleviates a major limitation of conventional Domino that is only capable of non-inverting
logic. The inverter after the pulldown network is not essential as the clock arrives to the
next stage only after the current stage has evaluated. Also, notice that is possible to elimi-
nate the  “foot-switch”  in the later stages, as the clock-evaluation edge arrives only when
the input is stable. This provides significant speed up of the logic critical path. A careful
analysis of the timing shows that the short circuit power can be eliminated.
CLK1 CLK2  CLK3  CLK4
D1 Pulldown Pulldown Pulldown Pulldown
Network D2 Network D3  Network D4  Network Out
Evaluate occurs  Precharge occurs
C1
C2 Slow Figure 10.49 Clock Delayed Domino Logic. A
self-clocked logic style
C3
C4
Phase2 Clk1

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 82 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.5  Synchronizers and Arbiters*  82
10.5  Synchronizers and Arbiters*
10.5.1  Synchronizers—Concept and Implementation
Even though a complete system may be designed in a synchronous fashion, it must still
communicate with the outside world, which is generally asynchronous. An asynchronous
input can change value at any time related to the clock edges of the synchronous system,
as is illustrated in Figure 10.50.
fin
Synchronous system
Asynchronous
system f
CLK
Synchronization
Figure 10.50  Asynchronous-synchronous interface
Consider a typical personal computer. All operations within the system are strictly
orchestrated by a central clock that provides a time reference. This reference determines
what happens within the computer system at any point in time. This synchronous com-
puter has to communicate with a human through the mouse or the keyboard, who has no
knowledge of this time reference and might decide to press a keyboard key at any point in
time. The way a synchronous system deals with such an asynchronous signal is to sample
or poll it at regular intervals and to check its value. If the sampling rate is high enough, no
transitions will be missed—this is known as the Nyquist criterion in the communication
community. However, it might happen that the signal is polled in the middle of a transi-
tion. The resulting value is neither low or high but undefined. At that point, it is not clear
if the key was pressed or not. Feeding the undefined signal into the computer could be the
source of all types of trouble, especially when it is routed to different functions or gates
that might interpret it differently. For instance, one function might decide that the key is
pushed and start a certain action, while another function might lean the other way and
issue a competing command. This results in a conflict and a potential crash. Therefore, the
undefined state must be resolved in one way or another before it is interpreted further. It
does not really matter what decision is made, as long as a unique result is available. For
instance, it is either decided that the key is not yet pressed, which will be corrected in the
next poll of the keyboard, or it is concluded that the key is already pressed.
Thus, an asynchronous signal must be resolved to be either in the high or low state
before it is fed into the synchronous environment. A circuit that implements such a deci-
sion-making function is called a  synchronizer. Now comes the bad news—building a per-
fect synchronizer that always delivers a legal  answer is impossible!  [Chaney73,
Glasser85] A synchronizer needs some time to come to a decision, and in certain cases this
time might be arbitrarily long. An asynchronous/synchronous interface is thus always prone
to errors called  synchronization failures. The designer’s task is to ensure that the probability
of such a failure is small enough that it is not likely to disturb the normal system behavior.
Typically, this probability can be reduced in an exponential fashion by waiting longer before

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 83 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
83  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
making a decision. This is not too troublesome in the keyboard example, but in general,
waiting affects system performance and should therefore be avoided to a maximal extent.
To illustrate why waiting helps reduce the CLK
failure rate of a synchronizer, consider a synchro-
nizer as shown in Figure 10.51. This circuit is a int
D I1 Q
latch that is transparent during the low phase of
the clock and samples the input on the rising
I2
edge of the clock  CLK. However, since the sam- CLK
pled signal is not synchronized to the clock sig- Figure 10.51  A simple synchronizer.
nal, there is a finite probability that the set-up
time or hold time of the latch is violated (the probability is a strong function of the transi-
tion frequencies of the input and the clock). As a result, one the clock goes high, there is a
the chance that the output of the latch resides somewhere in the undefined transition zone.
The sampled signal eventually evolves into a legal 0 or 1 even in the latter case, as the
latch has only two stable states.
Example 10.7  Flip-Flop Trajectories
Figure 10.52 shows the simulated trajectories of the output nodes of a cross-coupled static
CMOS inverter pair for an initial state close to the metastable point. The inverters are com-
posed of minimum-size devices.
2.0
Vout
Figure 10.52  Simulated trajectory for a
1.0
simple flip-flop synchronizer.
0.0
0  100  200  300
time, ps
If the input is sampled such that cross-coupled inverter starts at the metastable point,
the voltage will remain at the metastable state forever in the absense of noise. If the data is
sampled with a small offset (positive or negative), the differential voltage will evolve in an
exponential form, with a time constant that is dependent on the strength of the transistor as
well as the parasitic capacitances. The time it takes to reach the acceptable signal zones
depends upon the initial distance of the sampled signal from the metastable point.
In order to determine the required waiting period, let us build a mathematical model
of the behavior of the bistable element and use the results to determine the probability of
synchronization failure as a function of the waiting period. This model is used to compute
the range of values for  v(0) that still cause an error, or a voltage in the undefined range,
after a waiting period  T. A signal is called undefined if its value is situated between  VIH
and  VIL.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 84 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.5  Synchronizers and Arbiters*  84
V MS – ( V MS – V IL)e –T /τ ≤ v ( 0) ≤ V MS + ( V IH – V MS)e –T /τ (10.8)
Eq. (10.8) conveys an important message: The range of input voltages that cause a
synchronization error decreases exponentially with the waiting period  T. Increasing the
waiting period from  2τ  to 4τ  decreases the interval and the chances of an error by a factor
of 7.4.
Some information about the asynchronous signal is required in order to compute the
probability of an error. Assume that  Vin  is a periodical waveform with an average period
Tsignal  between transitions and with identical rise and fall times  t r. Assume also that the
slopes of the waveform in the undefined region can be approximated by a linear function
(Figure 10.53). Using this model, we can estimate the probability  P init that  v(0),  the value
of  Vin  at the sampling time, resides in the undefined region.
V IH – V IL
 ---------------------- t 
r
  V swing 
P init = -------------------------------- (10.9)
T signal
The chances for a synchronization error to occur depend upon the frequency of the
synchronizing clock  φ. The more sampling events, the higher the chance of running into
an error. This means that the average number of synchronization errors per second  N sync(0)
equals Eq. (10.10) if no synchronizer is used.
P init
N sync ( 0)  = ---------- (10.10)
Tφ
where  Tφ  is  the sampling period.
From Eq. (10.8) we learned that waiting a time  T  before observing the output
reduces exponentially the probability that the signal is still undefined.
P init e –T /τ ( V IH – V IL)e –T /τ t r
N sync ( T)  = ----------------------  = --------------------------------------- --------------------- (10.11)
Tφ V swing T signal Tφ
The robustness of an asynchronous-synchronous interface is determined by the fol-
lowing parameters: signal switching rate and rise time, sampling frequency, and waiting
time  T.
Example 10.8  Synchronizers and Mean Time-to-Failure
Consider the following design example.  Tφ = 5 nsec, which corresponds to a 200 Mhz clock), T
= Tφ  = 5 nsec,  Tsignal  = 50 nsec,  tr =0.5 nsec, and  τ  = 150 psec (as obtained in Example 10.7).
V – V
IH  IL Vswing
(VIH – VIL) tr / Vswing
Figure 10.53  Linear approximation of
tr
signal slope.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 85 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
85  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
From the VTC of a typical CMOS inverter, it can be derived that  V IH  –  V IL  approximately
equals 0.5 V for a voltage swing of 2.5 V. Evaluation of Eq. (10.11) yields an error probability
–9 
of 1.38x 10 errors/sec. The inverse of N sync is called the mean time-to-failure, or the MTF, and
8
equals 7 × 10  sec, or 23 years. If no synchronizer was used, the MTF would only have been 2.5
μsec!
Design Consideration
When designing a synchronous/asynchronous interface, we must keep in mind the following
observations:
•  The acceptable failure rate of a system depends upon many economic and social factors
and is a strong function of its application area.
•  The exponential relation in Eq. (10.11) makes the failure rate extremely sensitive to the
value of τ. Defining a precise value of τ  is not easy in the first place. τ varies from chip to
chip and is a function of temperature as well. The probability of an error occurring can
thus fluctuate over large ranges even for the same design. A worst-case design scenario is
definitely advocated here. If the worst-case failure rate exceeds a certain criterion, it can
be reduced by increasing the value of  T. A problem occurs when  T  exceeds the sampling
period  Tφ. This can be avoided by cascading (or pipelining) a number of synchronizers,
as shown in Figure 10.54. Each of those synchronizers has a waiting period equal to  Tφ.
Notice that this arrangement requires the  φ-pulse to be short enough to avoid race condi-
tions. The global waiting period equals the sum of the  Ts of all the individual synchroniz-
ers. The increase in MTF comes at the expense of an increased latency.
In  O1  O2 Out
Sync  Sync  Sync
φ
Figure 10.54  Cascading synchronizers reduces the main time-to-failure.
•  Synchronization errors are very hard to trace due to their probabilistic nature. Making
the mean time-to-failure very large does not preclude errors. The number of synchroniz-
ers in a system should therefore be severely restricted. A maximum of one or two per
system is advocated.
10.5.2  Arbiters
Finally, a sibling of the synchronizer called the  arbiter,  interlock element, or mutual-
exclusion circuit, should be mentioned. An arbiter is an element that decides which of
two events has occurred first. Such components for instance allow multiple processors to
access a single resource, such as a large shared memory. A synchronizer is actually a

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 86 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop  86
special case of an arbiter, since it determines if a signal transition happened before or
after a clock event. A synchronizer is thus an arbiter with one of its inputs tied to the
clock.
An example of a mutual-exclusion circuit is shown in Figure 10.55. It operates on
two input-request signals, that operate on a four-phase signaling protocol; that is, the
Req(uest)  signal has to go back to the reset state before a new  Req(uest)  can be issued. The
output consists of two  Ack(nowledge)  signals that should be mutually exclusive. While
Requests  may occur concurrently, only one of the  Acknowledges  is allowed to go high.
The operation is most easily visualized starting with both inputs low—neither device issu-
ing a request—nodes  A  and  B  high, and both  Acknowledges  low. An event on one of the
inputs (e.g.,  Req1↑) causes the flip-flop to switch, node  A  goes low, and  Ack1↑. Concur-
rent events on both inputs force the flip-flop into the metastable state, and the signals  A
and  B  might be undefined for a while. The cross-coupled output structure keeps the output
values low until one of the NAND outputs differs from the other by more than a threshold
value  VT. This approach eliminates glitches at the output.
Req1 Ack1
Req1 A
Arbiter
Req2 Ack2 Ack2
Ack1  B
(a) Schematic symbol Req2
Req1
(b) Implementation
Req2
VT gap
A
B
Metastable
Ack1 
t
(c) Timing diagram
Figure 10.55  Mutual-exclusion element (or arbiter).
10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop
There are numerous digital applications that require the on-chip generation of a periodic
signal. Synchronous circuits need a global periodic clock reference to drive sequential ele-
ments. Current microprocessors and high performance digital circuits require clock fre-
quencies in the gigahertz range. Crystal oscillators generate accurate, low-jitter clocks
with a frequency range from 10’s of Megahertz to approximately 200MHz. To generate a
higher frequency required by digital circuits, a  phase-locked loop  (PLL) structure is typi-
cally used. A PLL takes an external low-frequency reference crystal frequency signal and
multiplies its frequency by a rational number  N  (see the left side of Figure 10.56).

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 87 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
87  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
PLLs are also used to perform synchronization of communication between chips.
Typically as shown in Figure 10.56, a reference clock is sent along with the parallel data
being communicated (in this example only the transmit path from chip 1 to chip 2 is
shown). Since chip-to-chip communication occurs at a lower rate than the on-chip clock
rate, the reference clock is a divided but in-phase version of the system clock. The refer-
ence clock synchronizes all input flip-flops on chip 2; this can present a significant clock
load for wide data busses. Introducing clock buffers to deal with this problem unfortu-
nately introduces skew between the data and sample clock. A PLL, using feedback, can be
align (i.e., de-skew) the output of the clock buffer with respect to the data. In addition, for
the configuration shown in Figure 10.56, the PLL can multiply the frequency of the
incoming reference clock, allowing the reference clock to be a fraction of the data rate.
Chip 1 Chip 2
Data
Digital
Digital
System
System
reference
f system = N * f crystal clock
Divider PLL
PLL Clock
Buffer
fcrystal < 200Mhz
Crystal
Oscillator
Figure 10.56Applications of Phase Locked Loops (PLL).
10.6.1  Basic Concept
Periodic signals of known frequency can be discribed exactly by only one parameter, their
phase. More accurately a set of two or more periodic signals of the same frequency can be
well defined if we know one of them and its phase with respect to the other signals, as in
Figure 10.57.Here  φ 1and  φ 2 represent the phase of the two signals. The relative phase is
defined as the difference between the two phases.
S
1
S
2
Time
φ φ ∆φ  = φ – φ
1  2  2  1
Figure 10.57Relative and absolute phase of two periodic signals

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 88 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop  88
A PLL is a complex, nonlinear feedback circuit, and its basic operation is under-
stood with the aid of Figure 10.58 [Jeong87]. The  voltage-controlled oscillator  (VCO)
takes an analog control input and generates a clock signal of the desired frequency. In gen-
eral, there is a non-linear relationship between the control voltage (v cont) and the output
frequency. To synthesize a system clock of a particular frequency, it necessary to set the
control voltage to the appropriate value. This is function of the rest of the blocks (i.e.,
feedback loop) in the PLL. The feedback loop is critical to tracking process and environ-
mental variations. The feedback also allows frequency multiplication.
The reference clock is typically generated off-chip from an accurate crystal refer-
ence. The reference clock is compared to a divided version of the system clock (i.e., the
local clock). The local clock and reference clock are compared using a phase detector that
compares the phase difference between the signals and produces an  Up  or  Down  signal
when the local clock lags or leads the reference signal. It detects which of the two input
signals arrives earlier and produces an appropriate output signal. Next, the  Up  and  Down
signals are fed into a charge pump, which translates the digital encoded control informa-
tion into an analog voltage [Gardner80]. An  Up  signal increases the value of the control
voltage and speeds up the VCO, which causes the local signal to catch up with the refer-
ence clock. A  Down  signal, on the other hand, slows down the oscillator and eliminates
the phase lead of the local clock.
Passing the output of the charge pump directly into the VCO creates a jittery clock
signal. The edge of the local clock jumps back and forth instantaneously and oscillates
around the targeted position. As discussed earlier,  clock jitter, is highly undesirable, since
it reduces the time available for logic computation and therefore should be kept within a
given percentage of the clock period. This is partially accomplished by the introduction of
the  loop filter. This low-pass filter removes the high-frequency components from the VCO
control voltage and smooths out its response, which results in a reduction of the jitter.
Note that the PLL structure is a feedback structure and the addition of extra phase shifts,
as is done by a high-order filter, may result in instability. Important properties of a PLL are
its  lock range—the range of input frequencies over which the loop can maintain function-
ality; the  lock time—the time it takes for the PLL to lock onto a given input signal; and the
jitter. When in lock, the system clock is N-times the reference clock frequency.
A PLL is an analog circuit and is inherently sensitive to noise and interference. This is
especially true for the loop filter and VCO, where induced noise has a direct effect on the
resulting clock jitter. A major source of interference is the noise coupling through the supply
Reference Up
v cont
clock Phase Charge Loop
VCO
detector pump filter 
Local Down
clock
Divide by
N
System
Clock
Figure 10.58  Composition of a phase-locked loop (PLL).

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 89 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
89  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
rails and the substrate. This is particularly a concern in digital environments, where noise is
introduced due to a variety of sources. Analog circuits with a high supply rejection, such as
differential VCOs, are therefore desirable [Kim90]. In summary, integrating a highly sensi-
tive component into a hostile digital environment is nontrivial and requires expert analog
design. Below a more detailed description of various components of a PLL is given.
10.6.2  Building Blocks of a PLL
Voltage Controlled Oscillator (VCO)
A VCO generates a periodic signal, whose frequency is a linear function of the input con-
trol voltage  vcont. In other words a VCO is characterized by, ω  = ω0 + K vco ⋅ v cont. As the
phase is the time integral of the frequency, the output phase of the VCO block is given by,
t
φout  = ω0 t + K vco ⋅ v cont dt (10.12)
∫
–∞
where K vco is the gain of the VCO given in rad/s/V, and  ω0 is a fixed frequency offset.
vcont  controls a frequency centered around ω0 . The output signal has the form
  t 
x t( )  = A ⋅ cos ω0 t + K vco ⋅ v cont dt (10.13)
∫
  –∞ 
Phase Detectors
The phase detector determines the relative phase difference between two incoming signals
and outputs a signal that is proportional to this phase difference. This output signal is then
used to adjust the output of the VCO and thus align the two inputs via a feedback network.
One of the inputs to the phase detector is a reference clock that is typically generated off-
chip while the other clock input is a divided version of the VCO. Two basic types of phase
detectors are commonly used. These include the XOR gate and the phase frequency detec-
tor (PFD).
XOR Phase Detector.  The XOR phase detector is the simplest phase detector. The XOR
is useful as a phase detector since the time when the two inputs are different (or same) rep-
resents the relative phase. Figure 10.59 shows the XOR of two waveforms. The output of

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 90 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop  90
the XOR is low pass filtered and acts as a control voltage to the VCO. The output (low
pass filtered) as a function of the phase error is also shown.
ref
ref
Output
local
clock
local
clock output
Output (Low pass filtered)
VDD
-180  -90  90  180 phase error (deg)
Figure 10.59  The XOR as a phase detector.
For this detector any deviation in a positive or negative direction from the the per-
fect in-phase condition (i.e., phase error of zero) produces the same change in duty factor
resulting in the same average voltage. Thus the linear phase range is only 180 degrees.
Using such a phase detector, a PLL will lock to a quadrature phase relationship (i.e., 1/4
cycle offset) between the two inputs. A drawback of the XOR phase detector is that it may
lock to a multiple of the clock frequency. If the local clock is a multiple of the reference
clock frequency, the output of the phase detector will still be a square wave of 50% duty
cycle, albeit at a different frequency. The filtered version of this signal will be identical to
that of the truly locked state and thus the VCO will operate at the nominal frequency.
Phase-Frequency Detector.  The phase-frequency detector (PFD) is the most commonly
used form of phase detector, and it solves several of the shortcomings of the detectors dis-
cussed above. As the name implies, the output of the PFD is dependent both on the phase
and frequency difference of the applied signals. Accordingly, it cannot lock to an incorrect

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 91 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
91  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
multiple of the frequency. The PFD takes two clock inputs and produces two outputs, UP
and DOWN as shown in Figure 10.60.
Rst  UP
B A
D  Q
B
A UP=0 UP=0 UP = 1 A
DN=1 DN=0  DN = 0
Rst
D  Q
DN A B
B
(a) schematic  (b) state transition diagram
A A
B B
UP UP
DN DN
(c) Timing waveforms
Figure 10.60  Phase-Frequency Detector. (a) Schematic (b) State Transition Diagram (c) Timing.
The PFD is a state machine with 3 states. Assume that both UP and DN outputs are
initially low. When input A leads B, the UP output is asserted on the rising edge of input
A. The UP signal remain in this state until a low-to-high transition occurs on input B. At
that time, the DN output is asserted, causing both flip-flops to reset through the asynchro-
nous reset signal. Notice that a short pulse proportional to the phase error is generated on
the DN signal, and that there is a small pulse on the DN output, whose duration is is equal
to the delay throught he AND gate and register reset delay. The pulse width of the UP
pulse is equal to the phase error between the two signal. The roles are reversed for the case
when input B lags A, and a pulse proportional to the phase error is generated on the DN
output. If the loop is in lock, short pulses will be generated on the UP and DN outputs.
A
B
UP
Figure 10.61 Timing of the PFD measuring
frequency error.
DN
The circuit also acts as a frequency detector, providing a measure of the frequency
error (Figure 10.61). For the case when A is at a higher frequency than B, the PFD gener-
ates a lot more UP pulses (with the average proportional to the frequency difference),

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 92 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.6  Clock Synthesis and Synchronization Using a Phase-Locked Loop  92
while the DN pulses average close to zero. The exactly the opposite is true for the case
when B has a frequency larger than A  —  many more pulses are generated on the DN out-
put than the UP output.
The phase characterisctics of the phase detector is shown in Figure 10.62. Notice
that the linear range has been expanded to 4π.
Average (UP-DN)
VDD
-2π
2π phase error (deg)
Figure 10.62 Phase detector characteristic.
V DD Charge Pump
The UP/DN pulses must be converted to an analog voltage
that controls the VCO. One possible implementation is
UP To VCO Control Input shown in Figure 10.63. A pulse on the UP signal adds a
charge packet proportional to the size of the UP pulse, and
DN
a pulse on the DN signal removes a charge packet propor-
tional to the DN pulse. If the width of the UP pulse is large
than the DN pulse, then there is a net increase in the control
voltage. This effectively increases the frequency of the
VCO.
Figure 10.63 Charge Pump.
Simulation
The settling time of a PLL is the time it takes it reach steady state behavior. The period of
the startup transient is strongly dependent on the bandwidth of the loop filter. Figure 10.64
shows a spice level simulation of a PLL (an ideal VCO is used to speed up the simulation)
implemented in 0.25μm CMOS. In this example a reference frequency of 100Mhz is cho-
sen and the PLL multiplies this frequency by 8 to 800Mhz. The figure illustrates the tran-
sient response and settling process of the control voltage to the VCO. Once the control
voltage reaches its final value, the output frequency (the clock to the digital system) settles
to its final value. The simulation on the right shows the reference frequency, the output of
the divider and the output frequency. As illustrated in this plot, the top graph show lock in
which  fout  = 8 *  f ref. The lower graph shows the waveforms during the locking process
where the output is not in phase with the input and the frequencies are not related through
the divide ratio
.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 93 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
93  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
ref
1.0
div
0.8
0.6 vco
0.4
Control Voltage (V)
ref
0.2
div
0.0
0  1  2  3  4  5
Time (μs)
vco
Figure 10.64 Spice simulation of a PLL. The control voltage of the VCO is shown along with
waveforms before lock and after lock.
Summary
In a short span of time, phased-locked loops have become an essential component of
any high-performance digital design. Their design requires considerable skill, integrating
analog circuitry into a hostile digital environment. Yet, experience has demonstrated that
this combination is perfectly feasible, and leads to new and better solutions.
10.7  Future Directions
This section highlights some of the trends in high-performance and low-power timing
optimization.
10.7.1  Distributed Clocking Using DLLs
A recent trend in high-performance clocking is the use of  Delay-Locked Loop  (DLL)
structures, a small variation of the PLL structure. A schematic of a DLL is shown in Fig-
ure 10.65 [Maneatis00]. The key component of a DLL is a  voltage-controlled delay line
(VCDL). It consists of a cascade of adjustable delay elements (for instance, a current-
starved inverter). The idea is to delay the output clock such that it perfectly lines up with
the reference. Unlike a VCO, there is no clock generator. The reference frequency is fed
into the input of the VCDL. Similar to a PLL structure, a phase-detector compares the ref-
erence frequency to the output of the delay line (F0), and generates an UP/DN error signal.
Note that only a phase detection is required instead of a PFD. When in lock there is no

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 94 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.7  Future Directions  94
error between the two clocks. The function of the feedback is to adjust the delay through
the VCDL such that the rising edge of the input reference clock (fREF), and the output
clock  fO  are aligned .
Figure 10.65 Delay-Locked Loop.
(a)
(b)
(c)
A qualitative sketch of the signals in the DLL is shown in Figure 10.66c. Initially,
the DLL is out of lock. Since the first edge of the output arrives before the reference edge,
an UP pulse of width equal to the error between the two signals. The role of the charge
pump is to generate a charge packet proportional to the error, increasing the voltage of the
VCDL control voltage. This causes the edge of the output signal to be delayed in the next
cycle (this implementation of the VCDL assumes that a large voltage results in larger
delay). After many cycles, the phase error is corrected, and the two signals are in lock.
Figure 10.67 shows the application of a DLL strcuture to clock distribution. The
chip is partitioned into many small regions (or tiles). A global clock is distributed to each
tile in a low-skew manner (e.g., this could be done through the package or using low skew
on-chip routing schemes). For purpose of simplicity, the Figure shows a two-tile chip, but
this is easily extended to many regions. Inside each tile, the global clock is buffered before
driving the digital load. In front of each buffer is a VCDL. The goal of the clock network
is to deliver a signal to the digital circuit with close-to-zero skew and jitter. Unfortunately,
the static and dynamic variations of the buffers cause the phase error between the buffered
clocks to be non-zero and time-varying. This is especially a concern since the delay
through the buffer chain can equal multiple clock cycles. The feedback inside each tile
adjusts the control voltage of VCDL, such that the buffered output is locked in phase to
the global input clock. The feedback loop compensates for both static process variations
and for slow dynamic variations (e.g., temperature). Such configurations have become
common in high performance digital microprocessors.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 95 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
95  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
VCDL Digital
Circuit
CP/LF
Phase
Detector
GLOBAL CLK VCDL Digital
Circuit
CP/LF
Phase
Detector
Figure 10.66  DLL Approach to Clock Distribution.
10.7.2  Optical Clock Distribution
It is clear that there are some fundamental problems associated with electrical synchroni-
zation techniques for future high-performance multi-GHz systems. The performance of a
digital is fundametally limited by process and environmental variations. Even with aggres-
sive active clock management schemes such as the use of DLLs and PLLs, the variations
in power supply and clock load result in unacceptable clock uncertainity. As a result, there
has been a major recent push towards the use of optics for system wide synchronization.
An excellent review of the rationale and trade-offs in optical interconnects vs. electrical
interconnect is given in [Miller00].
The potential advantage of optical technology for clock distribution is due to the fact
that the delay is not sensitive to temperature and the clock edges don’t degrade over long
distances (e.g., 10’s meters). In fact, it is possible to deliver an optical clock signal with
10-100ps of uncertanity for 10’s meters. Of course, the performance of an optical system
is limited by the speed of light. Optical clocks can distribution on-chip via waveguides or
freespace. Figure 10.67 shows the plot of an optical clock architecutre using waveguides.
The off-chip optical source is brought to the chip, distributed through waveguides, and
converted through receiver circuitry to a local electrical clock distribution network. The
chip is divided into small sections (or tiles) and each the global clock is distributed from
the photon source (the most popular choice being a laser for its ease of use) through
waveguides with splitters and bends to each of the sections. Notice that an H-treee is used
in distributing the optical clock. At the end of the waveguide is a photodetector (which can
be implemented using silicon or germanium).Once reaching the detector in each section,
the global clock optical pulses are converted into current pulses. These current pulses have
a very small magnitude (10’s  μA) and they are fed into a transimpedance amplifier of the

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 96 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.8  Perspective: Synchronous versus Asynchronous Design  96
optoelectronic circuitry that amplifes the signal into voltage levels appropriate for digital
processing. into voltage signals. The electrical clock is then distributed through conven-
tional techniques to the local load. Optics has the additional advantage that many of the
difficulties with electromagnetic wave phenomena are avoided (e.g., crosstalk or inductive
coupling). A common problem in electrical signals is reflection from the loads, often
requiring termination, hence increasing power dissipation. Optical clocks avoid this pro-
belm and don’t require termination [Miller00].
In such an approach, the skew of the global clock to the photodectors is virtually
zero. There are some variations in the arrival time of the optical signal (e.g., due to varia-
tions at bends cause different energy loss along different paths). However, the optical
receiver is typically composed of multiple stages to amplify the small current pulses and is
susseptible to process and environmental variations. The sources of variations are very
similar to a conventional electrical approach including threshold and device variations,
power supply and temperature variations, and variations in the local drivers.
Optical GCLK  Local Electrical
Distribution
Optical
Receiver
waveguides
Figure 10.67  Architecture for optical clock
distribution.
Optical clocking may an important future in high-performance systems. However,
the challenges of dealing with process variations in the opto-electronic circuitry must be
addressed for this to become a reality.
10.8  Perspective: Synchronous versus Asynchronous Design
The self-timed approach offers a potential solution to the growing clock-distribution prob-
lem. It translates the global clock signal into a number of local synchronization problems.
Independence from physical timing constraints is achieved with the aid of completion sig-
nals. Handshaking logic is needed to ensure the logical ordering of the circuit events and
to avoid race conditions. This requires adherence to a certain protocol, which normally
consists of either two or four phases.
Despite all its advantages, self-timing has only been used in a number of isolated
cases. Examples of self-timed circuits can be found in signal processing [Jacobs90], fast
arithmetic  units (such as self-timed dividers) [Williams87],  simple  microprocessors
[Martin89] and memory (static RAM, FIFOs). In general, synchronous logic is both faster
and simpler since the overhead of completion-signal generation and handshaking logic is
avoided. The design a fool-proof network of handshaking units, that is robust with respect
to races, live-lock, and dead-lock, is nontrivial and requires the availability of dedicated
design-automation tools.
On the other hand, distributing a clock at high speed becomes exceedingly difficult.
This was amply illustrated by the example of the 21164 Alpha microprocessor. Skew man-

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 97 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
97  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
agement requires extensive modeling and analysis, as well as careful design. It will not be
easy to extend this methodology into the next generation of designs. This observation is
already reflected in the fact that the routing network for the latest generation of massively
parallel supercomputers is completely implemented using self-timing [Seitz92]. For self-
timing to become a mainstream design technique however (if it ever will), further innova-
tions in circuit and signaling techniques and design methodologies are needed. Other alter-
native timing approaches might emerge as well. Possible candidates are fully asynchronous
designs or islands of synchronous units connected by an asynchronous network.
10.9  Summary
This chapter has explored the timing of sequential digital circuits.
•  An in-depth analysis of the synchronous digital circuits and clocking approaches
was presented. Clock  skew  and  jitter  has a major impact on the functionality and
performance of a system. Important parameters are the clocking scheme used and
the nature of the clock-generation and distribution network.
•  Alternative timing approaches, such as self-timed design, are becoming attractive to
deal with clock distribution problems. Self-timed design uses completion signals
and handshaking logic to isolate physical timing constraints from event ordering.
•  The connection of synchronous and asynchronous components introduces the risk of
synchronization failure. The introduction of synchronizers helps to reduce that risk,
but can never eliminate it.
•  Phase-locked loops are becoming an important element of the digital-designer’s tool
box. They are used to generate high speed clock signals on a chip. The analog nature
of the PLL makes its design a real challenge.
•  Important trends for clock distribution include the use of delay-locked loops to
actively adjust delays on a chip.
•  The key message of this chapter is that synchronization and timing are among the
most intriguing challenges facing the digital designer of the next decade.
10.10  To Probe Further
While system timing is an important topic, no congruent reference work is available in this
area. One of the best discussions so far is the chapter by Chuck Seitz in [Mead80, Chapter
7]. Other in-depth overviews are given in [Bakoglu90, Chapter 8], [Johnson93, Chapter
11], [Hatamian88], and [Chandrakasan00]. A collection of papers on clock distribution
networks is presented in [Friedman95]. Numerous other publications are available on this
topic in the leading journals, some of which are mentioned below.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 98 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
Section 10.10  To Probe Further  98
REFERENCES
[Abnous93] A. Abnous and A. Behzad, “A High-Performance Self-Timed CMOS Adder,”  in  EE241
Final Class Project Reports, by J. Rabaey, Univ. of California—Berkeley, May 1993.
[Bailey00] D. Bailey,  “Clock Distribution,”  in [Chandrakasan00].
[Bakoglu90] H. Bakoglu,  Circuits, Interconnections and Packaging for VLSI, Addison-Wesley,
pp. 338–393, 1980.
[Boning00] D. Boning, S. Nassif,  “Models of Process Variations in Device and Interconnect”  in
[Chandrakasan00].
[Bowhill95] W. Bowhill et al.,  “A 300 MHz Quad-Issue CMOS RISC Microprocessor,”  Technical
Digest of the 1995 ISSCC Conference, San Fransisco, February 1995.
[Bernstein98] K. Bernstein et. al,  High Speed CMOS Design Styles, Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1998.
[Bernstein00] K. Bernstein,  “Basic Logic Families”, in [Chandrakasan00].
[Chandrakasan00] A. Chandrakasan, W. Bowhill, and F. Fox,  Design of High-Performance Micro-
processor Circuits,  IEEE Press, 2000.
[Chaney73] T. Chaney and F. Rosenberger,  “Anomalous Behavior of Synchronizer and Arbiter Cir-
cuits,”  IEEE Trans. on Computers, vol. C-22, April 1973, pp. 421–422.
[Dally 98] W. Dally and J. Poulton, Digital Systems Engineering, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
[Dopperpuhl92] D. Dopperpuhl et al.,  “A 200 MHz 64-b Dual Issue CMOS Microprocessor,”  IEEE
Journal on Solid State Circuits, vol. 27, no. 11, Nov. 1992, pp. 1555–1567.
[Friedman95] E. Friedman, ed.,  Clock Distribution Networks in VLSI Circuits and Systems,  IEEE
Press, 1995.
[Gardner80] F. Gardner,  “Charge-Pump Phase-Locked Loops,”  IEEE Trans. on Communications,
vol. COM-28, November 1980, pp. 1849–1858.
[Glasser85] L. Glasser and D. Dopperpuhl,  The Design and Analysis of VLSI Circuits, Addison-
Wesley, 1985, pp. 360–365.
[Goodman98] J. Goodman, A. P. Dancy,  A. P. Chandrakasan, "An Energy/Security Scalable
Encryption Processor Using an Embedded Variable Voltage DC/DC Converter," IEEE Journal of
Solid-state Circuits, pp. 1799-1809, 1998.
[Gray93] P. Gray and R. Meyer,  Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits, 3rd ed., Wiley,
1993.
[Hatamian88] M. Hatamian,  “Understanding Clock Skew in Synchronous Systems,”  in  Concurrent
Computations, ed. S. Tewksbury et al., Plenum Publishing, pp. 86–96, 1988.
[Heller84] L. Heller et al.,  “Cascade Voltage Switch Logic: A Differential CMOS Logic Family,”
IEEE International Solid State Conference Digest, Feb. 1984, San Francisco, pp. 16–17.
[Jacobs90] G. Jacobs and R. Brodersen,  “A Fully Asynchronous Digital Signal Processor,”  IEEE
Journal on Solid State Circuits, vol. 25, No 6, December 1990, pp. 1526–1537.
[Jeong87] D. Jeong et al.,  “Design of PLL-Based Clock Generation Circuits”,  IEEE Journal on
Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-22, no 2, April 1987, pp 255–261.
[Johnson93] H. Johnson and M. Graham, High-Speed Digital Design—A Handbook of Black Magic,
Prentice-Hall, N.J, 1993.
[Kim90] B. Kim, D. Helman, and P. Gray,  “A 30 MHz Hybrid Analog/Digital Clock Recovery Cir-
cuit in 2  μm CMOS,”  IEEE Journal on Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-25, no. 6, December 1990,
pp. 1385–1394.

--- Page Break ---

chapter10_141.fm Page 99 Tuesday, April 16, 2002 9:12 AM
99  TIMING ISSUES IN DIGITAL CIRCUITS  Chapter 10
[Martin89] A. Matrin et. al,  “The First Asynchronous Microprocessor: Test Results,”  Computer
Architecture News, vol. 17 No 4, June 1989, pp. 95–110.
[Mead80] C. Mead and L. Conway, Introduction to VLSI Design, Addison-Wesley, 1980.
[Messerschmitt90] D. Messerschmidtt,  “Synchronization in Digital Systems,”  IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 8, No. 8, pp. 1404-1419, October 1990.
[Miller2000] D. Miller,  “Rationale and Challenges for Optical Interconnects to Electronic Chips,”
Proceedings of the IEEE, pp. 728-749, June 2000.
[Nielsen94] L Nielsen, C. Niessen, J. Sparso, K. van Berkel,  “Low-Power Operation Using Self-
Timed Circuits and Adaptive Scaling of Supply Voltage,”  IEEE Transactions on VLSI systems,
December 1994, pp 391-397.
[Restle98] P. Restle, K. Jenkins, A. Deutsch, P. Cook,  “Measurement and Modeling of On-chip
Transmission Line Effects in a 400MHz Microprocessor,”  IEEE Journal of Solid-state Circuits,
pp. 662-665, April 1998.
[Seitz80] C. Seitz,  “System Timing,”  in [Mead80], pp. 218–262, 1980.
[Seitz92] C. Seitz,  “Mosaic C: An Experimental Fine-Grain Multicomputer,”  in  Future Tendencies
in Computer Science, Control and Applied Mathematics, Proceedings International Conference
on the 25th Anniversary of INRIA, Springer-Verlag, Germany, pp. 69–85, 1992.
[Shoji88] M. Shoji,  CMOS Digital Circuit Technology, Prentice-Hall, 1988.
[Sutherland89] I. Sutherland,  “Micropipelines,”  Communications of the ACM, pp. 720–738, June
1989.
[Veendrick80] H. Veendrick,  “The Behavior of Flip Flops Used as Synchronizers and Prediction of
Their Failure Rates”,  IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, vol. SC-15, no 2, April 1980, pp.
169–176.
[Williams87] T. Williams et al.,  “A Self-Timed Chip for Division,”  in  Proc. of Advanced Research
in VLSI 1987, Stanford Conf., pp. 75–96, March 1987.
EXERCISES AND DESIGN PROBLEM
Please  refer  to  the  book  web-page  (http://bwrc.eecs.berkeley.edu/IcBook)  for
insightful and challenging exercises and design problems.