Teaching Digital Logic and Computer Architecture Using
Open Source Tools
Bill Siever
Michael Hall
James Feher
Roger Chamberlain
Bill Siever, Michael Hall, James Feher, and Roger Chamberlain, “Teaching
Digital Logic and Computer Architecture Using Open Source Tools,” in Proc.
of 22nd ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers Workshops
and Special Sessions, May 2025, pp. 53-56.
DOI: 10.1145/3706594.3726971
Presented at 3rd Open Source Hardware Workshop (OSHW), Cagliari,
Sardinia, Italy.
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering
and
Dept. of Electrical and Systems Engineering
Washington University in St. Louis

--- Page Break ---

Teaching Digital Logic and Computer Architecture Using Open
Source Tools
Bill Siever Michael Hall
Washington University in St. Louis Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, Missouri, USA St. Louis, Missouri, USA
bsiever@gmail.com mhall24@wustl.edu
James Feher Roger Chamberlain
Washington University in St. Louis Washington University in St. Louis
St. Louis, Missouri, USA St. Louis, Missouri, USA
jdfeher@wustl.edu roger@wustl.edu
Figure 1: Full adder visual simulation.
Abstract ACM Reference Format:
Bill Siever, Michael Hall, James Feher, and Roger Chamberlain. 2025. Teach-
A recent redesign of the digital logic and computer architecture
ing Digital Logic and Computer Architecture Using Open Source Tools. In
courses at Washington University in St. Louis exploits developer
22nd ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers (CF Companion
containers and open source tools to provide students with a low-
’25), May 28–30, 2025, Cagliari, Italy. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 4 pages.
cost, portable tool suite for hardware design. Here, we describe the
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706594.3726971
tool flow used by the students and articulate the motivation for and
benefits from utilizing this approach.
1 Introduction
CCS Concepts In the fall semester of 2024, the McKelvey School of Engineering at
• Hardware → Electronic design automation; • Software and Washington University in St. Louis engaged in a refresh of two of the
its engineering → Open source model; • Social and profes- fundamental courses in the BS Computer Engineering program: the
sional topics → Computer engineering education. introduction to digital logic course and the computer architecture
course. As part of that refresh, we decided to make a serious attempt
Keywords at using fully open source tools in the delivery of the course material.
The resulting tool suite was the subject of a demo at this year’s
Digital Logic, Computer Architecture, Field Programmable Gate Ar-
Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education [16].
rays, FPGAs, Developer Containers, Dev Containers, Visual Studio
Both of these courses are required for computer engineering
Code, VS Code, RISC-V
students, digital logic (a sophomore level course) is required for
electrical engineering students and is an optional technical elective
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or for computer science students, while computer architecture (typi-
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed cally taken in the junior year) is an optional technical elective for
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored. both electrical engineering and computer science students. Digital
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s). logic is taught both fall and spring (averaging just over 80 students
CF Companion ’25, Cagliari, Italy per semester this past year) and computer architecture is taught in
© 2025 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1393-4/25/05 the fall (with 25 students in the first offering since the refresh). As
https://doi.org/10.1145/3706594.3726971 part of the refresh effort, each of the offerings of both courses have
38

--- Page Break ---

CF Companion ’25, May 28–30, 2025, Cagliari, Italy Siever et al.
had two instructors assigned, all of whom are co-authors on this 3 Tool Flow
paper. Both the Department of Computer Science and Engineering Here we articulate the specific tools used in the design flow by the
and the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering share students, including containerization, design entry, HDL simulation,
curricular responsibility for the computer engineering program and synthesis, place & route, FPGA deployment, ISA-level simulation,
the contents of both courses. and high-level language compilation. The set of tools represents a
In this paper, we describe the tool flow used by the students to broad spectrum of open source contributions by the community
perform digital hardware design from design entry through simula- from around the world. The tool flow and hardware used rely heav-
tion, synthesis, place & route, to deployment on an FPGA. Almost ily on ideas from Bell [1].
100% of the infrastructure used to support this tool flow comes from
the open source community, and the number of distinct tools is
considerable. Detailed usage instructions are provided at [15]. 3.1 Containers
The use of development containers (or dev containers for short) are
central to the utility of the tool suite we have put together. One of
2 Past Practice and Present Motivation
the real challenges associated with supporting multiple execution
Both of the two courses are fairly traditional in the topics covered platforms (e.g., Linux, Windows, MacOS) is the complexity associ-
and their overall scope. The digital logic course covers binary num- ated with deploying a broad set of tools on each platform. Koskinen
ber systems, Boolean algebra, combinational and sequential system et al. [ 7] describe how containers are used throughout software
design, an introduction to a simple instruction set architecture, and engineering, and Pahl et al. [ 10 ] review the use of containers in the
a basic fetch-execute engine. The computer architecture course cloud.
covers single-cycle, multi-cycle, and pipelined implementations By deploying each of the tools described below in a dev container,
of an instruction set architecture in addition to topics in memory there are three options for students to utilize the tool flow.
subsystems (including virtual memory), I/O subsystems, and cache
coherence protocols. (1) The entire tool flow can be executed in the cloud, with the
Historically, these courses used VHDL as the hardware descrip- development environment accessed via a web browser.
tion language and the Xilinx proprietary FPGA tool flow for design (2) The entire tool flow can be executed natively on the student’s
and implementation of digital designs. A fresh redesign of the two local machine. As stated above, all of Linux, Windows, and
courses was triggered by 3 concurrent events: (1) a long-serving MacOS are supported.
member of the faculty who had taught both courses for a number (3) A blended execution option is available, in which the devel-
of years retired, (2) the textbook used in the computer architecture opment environment is run locally, yet the individual tools
course went out of print, and (3) the FPGA development boards are executed in the cloud.
(used in both courses) were discontinued by the manufacturer.
As part of the redesign, an early decision was to go in the di- The above options provide maximum flexibility for students, en-
rection of open source tools, which motivated a number of the abling the tools to be used in a wide variety of contexts.
follow-on decisions. The redesign team committed early to the use
of the RISC-V instruction set architecture (given that both the ISA
and any number of available designs are open source). Given the 3.2 Design Entry and HDL Simulation
proliferation of RISC-V designs in SystemVerilog, and its support Early in the digital logic course, students use schematic capture for
in the open source community, switching away from VHDL was design entry. They then move to the use of hardware description
deemed appropriate. The above choices led us to the Harris and languages, specifically SystemVerilog. The computer architecture
Harris text, Digital Design and Computer Architecture: RISC-V Edi- course explicitly uses SystemVerilog for design entry.
tion [4], which we are now using in both courses (supplementing The schematic capture and simulation tool used is JLS: Java Logic
with some additional material in the computer architecture course). Simulator. Originally authored by Poplawski [ 11], it has been up-
The above decisions made, we were next challenged to put to- dated and binaries are provided for Windows and MacOS, as well as
gether a tool flow guided by the following goals. First, authenticity, a generic JAR for all platforms [ 14]. Students use JLS for schematic-
have students use contemporary tools and deploy their designs on level designs of both combinational and sequential circuits. They
real hardware. Second, cost, use low-cost readily available hardware. can test the behavior and correctness of their work by applying
Third, complexity, keep the installation and tool use overheads low. test vectors. Moreover, JLS can be used for automated unit tests on
Fourth, focus, ensure the students are using their available cognitive student work.
load on the subject matter of the course, not on the distractions Once development moves to SystemVerilog, the students use
inherent in fully-featured commercial tools. Finally, portability, sup- an IDE, working extensively in VS Code with HDL support for
port the variety of execution platforms used by students, specifically syntax highlighting, etc., by Hiramori [ 5]. Linting and simulation
including Linux, Windows, and MacOS. A number of commercial is performed using Verilator [17] and/or Icarus Verilog [23].
tools are limited in the platforms they support. An important component in the use of hardware description lan-
The Harris and Harris text (and accompanying resource materi- guages is the utility of generating testbenches. Currently testbench
als) support the Intel Quartus development environment, and we generation is all done via SystemVerilog; however, we are investi-
explored the use of that tool suite, but ultimately decided that we gating the potential use of cocotb [2 ] to enable the development of
wanted to go the open source route, driven by the above goals. testbenches using Python.
39

--- Page Break ---

Teaching Digital Logic and Computer Architecture CF Companion ’25, May 28–30, 2025, Cagliari, Italy
Figure 2: Synthesized full adder.
3.3 Synthesis and Place & Route
Synthesis and place & route use Yosys + nextpnr [13 , 24]. Once
synthesized, DigitalJS [8] is used for visual interactive simulation
(see Figure 1). By clicking on inputs, students can see the effects of
the input changing through the circuit.
Figure 2 shows the synthesized full adder. Note that this repre-
sents a different implementation relative to the full adder of Figure 1,
using different primitive gates.
Figure 4: Wiring diagram for switch inputs (drawn using the
3.4 Deployment to an FPGA
fritzing [6] package).
The physical FPGA board that we use is the open source UPduino
platform [ 20 ]. The specific FPGA is a Lattice Semiconductor Ul-
traPlus ICE40UP5K. The board, shown in Figure 3, features an
on-board FPGA programmer, flash and LED with all 32 GPIO pins
on 0.1" headers.
Figure 3: UPduino Lattice UltraPlus iCE40 FPGA board [ 20].
Figure 5: Digital I/O board.
Image credit: Gregory Benjamin.
Once a bitstream file has been created, it is loaded onto the
UPduino using openFPGALoader [3], which has native installs for 3.5 RISC-V Tools
Linux, Windows, and MacOS. When the development environment The digital logic course implements a subset of the RISC-V ISA on
is running in the cloud, YoWASP [26 ] enables loading from the the FPGA, while the computer architecture course both expands
browser through the use of WebAssembly. this subset and includes the design and implementation of a cache
Initially, the students construct simple digital I/O features (e.g., (since the UPduino does not have an external memory, both main
switch inputs, LED outputs) to exercise their deployed bitstreams. memory and cache are deployed in on-chip memory resources). In
Figure 4 is an example from an assignment in the digital logic both cases, the students need to generate RISC-V instructions to
course. Subsequently, they graduate to a more full-featured I/O execute on their constructed processor(s).
board (see Figure 5), that contains 7-segment LEDs and multiple When studying the ISA and its associated assembly language,
buttons. It interfaces to the FPGA using the TM1638 driver chip the students utilize the Venus RISC-V instruction set simulator [ 21 ],
via a synchronous serial bus. A locally developed driver (available originally developed by Keyhan Vakil and more recently maintained
at [15 ]) provides digital input and output ports for a design on the by Steven K. (aka ThaumicMekanism). It has been integrated into VS
FPGA and transitions those ports to the physical inputs and outputs Code [22 ], facilitating ease of use for the students. RISC-V assembly
on the I/O board. support for syntax highlighting is provided by Sun [19].
40

--- Page Break ---

CF Companion ’25, May 28–30, 2025, Cagliari, Italy Siever et al.
For programs written in a high-level language, compilation from by Manta [ 9]. Finally, high-level synthesis compilers have recently
C and/or C++ is supported by the GNU RISC-V compiler [12]. gotten to the point that they are effective in many contexts, e.g.,
spacecraft [ 18 ]. Our group is exploring open source HLS compilers
4 Discussion such as ScaleHLS [25 ] in this area, and it would be of interest to
see these tools also incorporated into the undergraduate computer
The motivation for this work includes authenticity of the experience,
engineering curriculum.
cost to students, complexity of the tools, supporting a focus on the
task at hand, and portability across multiple platforms.
References
• Authenticity. All of the tools used here are effective at digital [1] Steven Bell. 2023. Reimagining the digital lab with $30 FPGAs. In Proc. of ASEE
system design and are used by a wide community, includ- Annual Conference & Exposition. 16 pages.
[2] Cocotb. Accessed Feb. 2025. COroutine based COsimulation TestBench. https:
ing many commercial firms. Even though some tools are
//www.cocotb.org/.
designed explicitly as teaching tools, they still perform the [3] Gwenhael Goavec-Merou et al. Accessed Feb. 2025. openFPGALoader: universal
functions appropriate to the task at hand. The result is a utility for loading FPGA. https://trabucayre.github.io/openFPGALoader/.
[4] Sarah Harris and David Harris. 2022. Digital Design and Computer Architecture,
learning experience for students that is effective at giving
RISC-V Edition. Morgan Kaufmann.
them an authentic design experience. [5] Masahiro Hiramori. Accessed Feb. 2025. Verilog-HDL/SystemVerilog/Bluespec
• Cost. The only cost incurred by students is the physical SystemVerilog support for VS Code. https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?
itemName=mshr-h.VerilogHDL.
hardware, as almost all of the software is open source and the [6] André Knörig, Reto Wettach, and Jonathan Cohen. 2009. Fritzing: a tool for
rest is free to use. For example, if executing the tools in the advancing electronic prototyping for designers. In Proc. of 3rd International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction. 351–358.
cloud, the cloud provider, Microsoft, provides a modest time
[7] Mikael Koskinen, Tommi Mikkonen, and Pekka Abrahamsson. 2019. Containers
budget to students at no charge. In addition, the hardware is in software development: A systematic mapping study. In Proc. of International
quite inexpensive, with the UPduino costing under $40 and Conference on Product-Focused Software Process Improvement. Springer, 176–191.
[8] Marek Materzok. 2019. DigitalJS: A visual Verilog simulator for teaching. In Proc.
the I/O board available for under $10.
of 8th Computer Science Education Research Conference. ACM, 110–115.
• Complexity. The installation and tool use overheads are held [9] Fischer Moseley. Accessed Feb. 2025. Manta: A Configurable and Approach-
to a minimum through the effective use of containers, which able Tool for FPGA Debugging and Rapid Prototyping. https://github.com/
fischermoseley/manta.
are designed for that very purpose. [10] Claus Pahl, Antonio Brogi, Jacopo Soldani, and Pooyan Jamshidi. 2017. Cloud
• Focus. While our desire is to put together a tool suite that container technologies: a state-of-the-art review. IEEE Transactions on Cloud
Computing 7, 3 (2017), 677–692.
does what needs to be done, but not lots of other things to
[11] David A Poplawski. 2007. A pedagogically targeted logic design and simulation
distract the students, this is inherently a difficult task. The tool. In Proc. of Workshop on Computer Architecture Education. 1–7.
current collection of tools is somewhat more organized (i.e., [12] RISC-V Collaboration. Accessed Feb. 2025. RISC-V GNU Compiler Toolchain.
https://github.com/riscv-collab/riscv-gnu-toolchain/.
separate tools for separate tasks). However, the inherent
[13] David Shah, Eddie Hung, Clifford Wolf, Serge Bazanski, Dan Gisselquist, and
differences that are present in the tasks to be performed Miodrag Milanovic. 2019. Yosys+ nextpnr: an open source framework from Ver-
(and the fact that they were developed by a diverse set of ilog to bitstream for commercial FPGAs. In Proc. of 27th International Symposium
on Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM). IEEE, 1–4.
individuals) imply that there are variations in user interfaces [14] Bill Siever. Accessed Feb. 2025. JLS: Java Logic Simulator. https://github.com/
that can be confusing. In our opinion, this is the one area bsiever/JLS/.
[15] Bill Siever. Accessed Mar. 2025. Tools for Digital Logic and Computer Design.
where we were not uniformly satisfied with the end result,
https://github.com/digital-logic-and-computer-design/upduino-devcontainer.
but we came away with a better understanding of its inherent [16] Bill Siever, Michael Hall, Jim Feher, and Roger Chamberlain. 2025. Digital Logic,
challenges, and we also believe the result is an improvement Computer Architecture, and Dev Containers: Supporting Schools from Little to
Large. In Proc. of 56th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education,
on commercial tools.
Vol. 2. 1737.
• Portability. With containerization, the entire tool flow can [17] Wilson Snyder. 2018. Verilator 4.0: open simulation goes multithreaded. In Open
run natively on Linux, Windows, MacOS, or the cloud. This Source Digital Design Conference (ORConf).
[18] Marion Sudvarg, Chenfeng Zhao, Ye Htet, Meagan Konst, Thomas Lang, Nick
is considerably broader coverage than is typically supported Song, Roger D. Chamberlain, Jeremy Buhler, and James H. Buckley. 2024. HLS Tak-
by many of the commercial tools. ing Flight: Toward Using High-Level Synthesis Techniques in a Space-Borne In-
strument. In Proc. of 21st Int’l Conference on Computing Frontiers. ACM, 11 pages.
[19] Shao-Ce Sun. Accessed Feb. 2025. Most Comprehensive RISC-V ASM Highlight-
5 Conclusions and Future Work ing. https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=sunshaoce.RISC-V.
[20] UPduino. Accessed Feb. 2025. UPduino-v3.0 and 3.1. https://github.com/digital-
The result of this effort is a suite of FPGA development tools that logic-and-computer-design/UPduino-v3.0/.
are multi-platform (and therefore portable), inexpensive (thirteen [21] Venus. Accessed Feb. 2025. Venus RISC-V instruction set simulator built for
of which are open source, all of which are free to use), and effective education. https://github.com/ThaumicMekanism/venus.
[22] Venus – VS Code. Accessed Feb. 2025. RISC-V Venus Simulator embedded in VS
for the task at hand. These features enable their use in a broad set Code. https://github.com/hm-riscv/vscode-riscv-venus.
of contexts, ranging from large schools with plenty of instructional [23] Stephen Williams. Accessed Feb. 2025. The ICARUS Verilog Compilation System.
https://github.com/steveicarus/iverilog.
support, to small schools where the instructor is also responsible for
[24] Clifford Wolf, Johann Glaser, and Johannes Kepler. 2013. Yosys-a free Verilog
tools used in the classroom. See [15 ] for detailed usage instructions synthesis suite. In Proc. of 21st Austrian Workshop on Microelectronics (Austrochip).
and pointers to all the tools. 6 pages.
[25] Hanchen Ye, HyeGang Jun, Hyunmin Jeong, Stephen Neuendorffer, and Deming
There are a number of directions we would like to expand this Chen. 2022. ScaleHLS: A scalable high-level synthesis framework with multi-level
effort. We have already mentioned the desire to enable testbench de- transformations and optimizations. In Proc. of 59th ACM/IEEE Design Automation
velopment in Python, which is supported by cocotb [ 2]. In addition, Conference. ACM, 1355–1358.
[26] YoWASP. Accessed Feb. 2025. Unofficial WebAssembly-based packages for Yosys,
the ability to observe internal signals in hardware via in-circuit nextpnr, and more. https://yowasp.org/.
debugging support can be extremely helpful, a capability supported
41