
--- Page Break ---
- 
3      CAUIFORNIA, 
swns 
m    m 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
A    TEXT-BOOK 
OF 
COAL-MINING, 

--- Page Break ---
Stanbarb  Worfca. 
ORE  AND  STONE  MINING  (A  Text-Book  of).  By  C.  LE  NEVE FOSTER,  D.Sc.,  F.R.S.,  F.G.S.,  Professor  of  Mining,  Royal  College  of  Science, 
H.M.  Inspector  of  Mines,  Llandudno.  In  Large  8vo,  with  numerous  Illustrations. 
Second  E&Mon,  with  Illustrations,  10*.  Qd. 
PRACTICAL  GEOLOGY  (AIDS  IN).  With  a  Section  on  Palseontology. 
By  GKKHVILLB  A.  J.  COLE,  F.G.S.,  Professor  of  Geology  in  the  Royal  College  of Science  lor  Ireland. 
"  Full  of '  aids,'  and  in  the  highest  degree  '  practical.'  "—Nature. 
"  Will  be  of  the  GREATEST  POSSIBLE  USE  to  Explorers  and  Miners  in  their  search  after ores  and  minerals."— Industries. 
In  8vo,  with  numerous  Illustrations,  Third  Edition,  cloth,  7s.  Qd. 
MINE  SURVEYING  (A  Text-Book  of).     For  the   Use  of  Managers  of Mines  and  Collieries,  &c.   By  BENNETT  H.  BROCGH,  F.G.S.,  Instructor  of  Mine 
Surveying,  Royal  College  of  Science. 
"  No  Mining  Agent  will  consider  his  Technical  Library  complete  without  it." — Nature. 
In  Large  8vo,  with  numerous  Illustrations,  handsome  cloth,  10s.  Qd. 
BLASTING  I  A  Hand-book  for  the  use  of  Engineers  and  others  engaged in  Mining,  Tunnelling,  Quarrying,  &c.    By  OSCAB  GPTTMANIT,  A.M.  last.  C.E. 
"We  especially  commend  it  to  Mining  Engineers,  to  whom  it  should  prove  a  VADE- MECUM."—  Iron  and  Coal  Trades  Review. 
"  Thoroughly  practical,  and  a  book  which  we  can  unhesitatingly  recommend." Industrie* 
Second  Edition,  with  70  Plates  and  numerous  other  Illustrations,  cloth. 
HYDRAULIC  POWER  AND  HYDRAULIC  MACHINERY,  for  the use  of  Practical  Engineers  and  Students.    By  H.  ROBINSON,  M.  Inst.  C.E., 
Professor  of  Civil  Engineering,  King's  College,  London. 
"  A  bOOk  Of  OHEAT   PROFESSIONAL   USEFULNESS."— Iron. 
By  W.    J.   MACQUORN    RANKINE,    C.E.,   LL.D.,    F.R.8. 
Late  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Engineering  in  the  University  of  Glasgow. 
In  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  with  numerous  Tables  and  Diagrams. 
I.  APPLIED  MECHANICS.     Thirteenth  Edition.     12s.  Qd. 
II.  CIVIL  ENGINEERING.    Eighteenth  Edition.    16s. 
III.  THE  STEAM  ENGINE.     Thirteenth  Edition.    12s.  Qd. 
IV.  MACHINERY  AND  MILL-WORK.    Seventh  Edition.    12s.  Qd. 
V.  USEFUL  RULES  AND  TABLES.    Seventh  Edition.    10s.  Qd. 
VI.  A  MECHANICAL  TEXT-BOOK.    Fourth  Edition.    9s. 
VII.  PROFESSOR   RANKINE'S  MISCELLANEOUS  SCIENTIFIC PAPERS.    With  Memoir  by  Professor  TAIT,  M.A.,  and  Fine  Portrait  on  Steel. 
Koyal  8vo,  handsome  cloth,  31s.  6d. 
LONDON  :  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.,  LIMITED,  EXETER  ST.,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
A    TEXT-BOOK 
OF 
COAL-MINING. 
FOR  THE   USE   OF   COLLIERY   MANAGERS 
AND   OTHERS. 
UNIVESITY 
BY 
HEEBEET    W.     HUGHES, 
iSSOCIATE  OF  THE  ROYAL  SCHOOL  OP  MINES;  FELLOW  OF  THK  GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY  j 
ASSOCIATE  MEMBER  OF  THE  INSTITUTION  OF  CIVIL  ENGINEERS;  CERTIFICATED 
COLLIERY  MANAGER;  PAST-PRESIDENT  OF  THE  BRITISH  SOCIETY 
OF   MINING  STUDENTS. 
SECOND    EDITION. 
WITH     VERY    NUMEROUS     ILLUSTRATIONS. 
LONDON: 
CHARLES   GRIFFIN   &  COMPANY,   LIMITED, 
EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 
1893. 
(All  rights  reserved.) 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
PREFACE. 
IN  the  preparation  of  this  volume  my  aim  has  been  to 
supply  a  text-book  of  moderate  dimensions,  giving  all  the 
information  with  which  the  student  and  the  practical  miner 
should  be  familiar.  In  order,  however,  to  economise  space, 
I  have  had  to  omit  reference  to  many  appliances  which  have 
become  obsolete  from  their .  antiquity,  or  by  reason  of  their 
failure  in  practice. 
Although  it  is  impossible  within  the  limits  of  the  book  to 
furnish  exhaustive  descriptions  on  all  points,  yet  the  details 
of  general  colliery  work  have  been  fully  described,  on  the 
ground  that  collieries  are  more  often  made  remunerative 
by  perfection  in  small  matters,  than  by  bold  strokes  of 
engineering.  All  modern  collieries  are  practically  identical 
so  far  as  general  machinery  and  arrangements  are  concerned ; 
nevertheless,  it  frequently  happens,  in  particular  localities, 
that  the  adoption  of  a  combination  of  small  improvements 
any  one  of  which  viewed  separately  may  be  of  apparently 
little  value,  turns  an  unprofitable  concern  into  a  paying  one. 
At  the  end  of  each  chapter  will  be  found  a  carefully 
selected  list  of  Memoirs  in  which  fuller  information  can  be 
sought  This  will,  it  is  hoped,  prove  a  novel  and  useful 

--- Page Break ---
vi  PREFACE. 
feature  in  a  treatise  on  coal-mining,  for,  scattered  through 
the  pages  of  the  Transactions  of  the  Mining  Institutes, 
numerous  valuable  papers  exist ;  but,  owing  to  the  lack  of 
general  indexes,  they  are  unfortunately  not  consulted  so 
much  as  they  deserve  to  be. 
All  the  figures  elucidating  the  text  have  been  specially 
drawn  for  this  work,  the  majority  having  been  reduced  from 
original  working  drawings. 
In  conclusion,  I  have  to  express  my  cordial  thanks  to  the 
many  friends  who  have  rendered  valuable  help  in  the 
preparation  of  the  work.  Especially,  I  am  indebted  to  Mr. 
B.  H.  Brough,  Assoc.  E.S.M.,  F.G.S.,  Mr.  H.  G.  Graves, 
Assoc.  E.S.M.,  and  Mr.  H.  F.  Bulman,  for  important 
suggestions  and  able  assistance  while  the  volume  was 
passing  through  the  press. 
HERBEET  W.   HUGHES, 
CONEYGRE  COLLIERY,  DUDLEY, 
September,  1892. 
PEEFATOEY  NOTE  TO   THE   SECOND  EDITION. 
So  short  a  time  has  elapsed  since  the  issue  of  the  First 
Edition,  that  any  extensive  alterations  in  the  text  are  not 
required ;  but  opportunity  has  been  taken  to  correct  a  few 
literal  errors,  and  in  several  cases  to  make  additions.  Four 
of  the  figures  have  been  redrawn,  and  the  Bibliography  has 
been  extended. 
H.  W.  H. 
DUDLEY, 
May,  1893. 

--- Page Break ---
lieft 
(I  UNIVERSITY 
GENERAL    CONTENTS 
CHAPTER  I. — GEOLOGY. 
The  Study  of  Geology  . Rocks .           
Classes  of  Rocks 
Aqueous     and      Metamorphic Rocks 
Igneous  Rocks. Stratification    . 
Laminae    . 
Intrusive  Rocks 
Induration 
Segregation Fossilisation 
PAGE 
Inclination  of  Strata  ...  3 
Faults    3 
Reversed  Faults        ...  4 
Trough  Faults  ....  5 Conformable  and  Unconformable 
Strata            ....  5 
Joints  in  Rocks   .  •  .         .5 Cleavage .         .         .         .         .  6 Order  of  Succession     ...  6 
Carboniferous  System  in  Britain  7 Fossils    7 
Bibliography         ....  8 
Definition  of  Coal 
Formation  of  Coal 
Classification  of  Coal 
Lignite Bituminous  Coal 
CHAPTER  II. — COAL. 
9 
9 10 
10 10 
Steam'  Coal Cannel  Coal 
Anthracite 
Commercial  Value  of  Coal 
Gases  Occluded  in  Coal 
ii 
ii 
12 
12 
15 
CHAPTER  III. — SEARCH  FOR  COAL. 
Prospecting   18 
Boring   18 
Choice  of  Site  .        .        .        .     19 
Various    Appliances     used    in 
Boring        .         .         .         .     19 
(a)  Bits   19 
(b)  Rods         .        .        .        .19 
(c)  Guides      .        .  .20 
(a)  Clearing  Instruments      .     21 
(e)  Levers      .        .        .        .21 
(/)  Spring  Poles   .        .        .21 
(#)  Frames     .         .         .         .22 
Devices  Employed  to  meet  Diffi- culties of  Deep  Boring       .     22 
(a)  Lighter  Rods  .         .        .22 
(&)  Free-Falling  Cutters        .    23 
Obtaining  Cores        .         .         .24 
Special  Methods  of  Boring       .     24 
(a)  Mather  and  Platt's  Sys- tem     24 
(6)  American  System    .        .     26 
(c)  Diamond  Boring      .         .     27 Accidents  in  Boring          .         -31 
(a)  Accidents    arising    from 
the    Boring    Tools    them- selves        .  .     32 
(6)  Accidents  arising  out  of the  Nature  of  the  Ground      32 
Lining   32 
Widening  Holes  .  .  -33 Withdrawal  of  Casing  .  .  33 
Record  of  Boring  .  .  '34 

--- Page Break ---
viii  CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  III. — SEARCH  FOR  COAL — (continued). 
Boring — Cost  of  Boring  . 
Surveying  Bore-holes Uses  of  Bore-holes    . 
Tapping  Water      . 
34 35 
36 
36 
Keleasing  Gas        .        .        .36 
Proving  Faults      ...     36 
Steam  and  Rope-ways  .        .    36 
Bibliography         .        .        .        .37 
CHAPTER  IV. — BREAKING  GROUND. 
Contracts      .        .  .        .38 
Hastening  Work  .  .     38 
Tools  Used   .        .  .        .39 
Shovels      .  .     39 
Picks         .        .        .-       .        .39 
Dressers    .        .  .     41 
Wedges     .  .         .    41 
Hammers  .  *        .    41 
Drills         .  .    42 
Percussive  Hand-tools      .        .    42 
Scrapers    .        .  .        .44 
Tamping  or  Ramming       .         .     44 
Hand  Machine  Drills         .         .     45 
Transmission  of  Power         .         .     48 
Compressed  Air         .        .        .48 
Air  Compressors    .         .         -49 
Valves        .         .         .         .52 
Dancing  of  Valves     .         .     54 
Conduits        ....        .55 
Receivers       .        .        .        •     55 
Motors   55 
Electricity         .        .        .        -56 
Alternating  and  Continuous 
Currents    .        .        .        .56 
Terms  Used  .         .         .         .57 
Preventing  Sparking     .        .     58 
Efficiency       .         .         .         -59 
Power  Machine  Drills  .        .         .60 
Ingersoll  Drill  .         .         .         .61 Adelaide  Drill  .         .         .         .62 
Brandt's  Drill    .         .         .         .63 Supports   64 
Electric  Percussive  Drills  .  65 Forms  of  Bits  .  .  .  .66 
Use  of  Water  in  Boring  Holes  .  66 Cost  of  Machine  and  Hand 
Drilling      .         .         .         .67 
Coal  cutting  by  Machinery          .     67 
Machines    Worked    by    Com- 
pressed Air        .         .         .68 
Gillot  and  Copley          .         .     68 
Rigg  and  Meiklejohn    .         .     68 
Baird   69 
Harrison  .  .  .  .69 
Ingersoll-Sergeant  .  .  70 
Legg  .....  70 
Machines  Worked  by  Electricity  7 1 
Goolden        .        ...     72 
Jeffrey.         .         .         .         .72 
Van  Depoele         .         .         .72 
Cost  of  Coal-cutting         .         .     74 
Stanley's  Heading  Machine      .     74 Boring  Cross  Cuts    .         .         -75 
Explosives  .....  75 
Gunpowder  .  .  .  -75 
Nitro-glycerine  .  .  .76 
Dynamite  .  .  .  .  76 
Blasting  Gelatine  .  .  .77 
Gelatine-Dynamite  .  .  -77 
Rackarock  .  .  .  -77 
Blasting  in  Dry  and  Dusty  Mines  77 
Water  Cartridge  .  .  -77 
Roburite  .  .  .  .  .78 
Ardeer  Powder  .  .  .  79 
Carbonite  .  .  .  .79 
Tonite   79 
Ammonite        .         .         .         -79 
Firing  the  Charge        .         .         .80 
Squibs,  or  Germans Fuses 
Blasting  by  Electricity Tension  Fuses 
Quantity  Fuses 
Comparison      .... Frictional  Machines 
Magneto-Machines  . Simultaneous  Blasting 
Bickford's  Volley  Fuse    . Position  of  Holes 
Blown-out  Shots 
Various   Methods    to    supersede 
Blasting        .... 
Elliot  Multiple  Wedge     . 
Haswell    Mechanical     Coal- 
getter  ..... 
Burnett's  Roller  Wedge 
Hydraulic  Wedges  . 
Lime  Cartridges 
Bosseyeuse       .... 
Prohibition  of  Blasting 
Bibliography        ...» 
80 
80 
82 
82 
83 83 
83 
84 
84 
85 
85 
86 
87 87 
89 89 
90 

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  Y. — SINKING. 
PAGE 
Position  of  Shaft  ...  92 
Form  of  Shaft  .  .  .  .92 
Size  of  Shaft  .  .  .  -93 
Operation  of  Getting  Down  to 
"  Stone  Head "  .         -93 
(a)  Where  the  Ground  is  Mod- 
erately Hard      .         .         -93 
(6)  Where  the  Ground  is  Loose     94 
(1)  Pile  Driving    .          .         •     94 
(2)  Drums     .         .         .         -97 
(a)  Wood  .         .         .         -97 
(6)  Iron      .         .         .         .98 
Method  of  Proceeding  Afterwards  99 
Keeping  the  Shaft  Vertical  .  100 
Winding  Debris  .  .  .  101 
Covering  over  Pit-top  .  .  102 Guides   102 
Lining  Shafts  ....  104 
Bricks   104 
Number  of  Bricks  Kequired  104 
Mortar   105 
Thickness  of  Brickwork  .  .105 
Ordinary  Curbs  .  .  .106 
Water  Rings     . 
Walling  Stages 
Supporting  Curbs    . Ventilation 
Lighting      .... 
Dealing  with  Water    . 
Keeping  out  Water  by  Tubbing 
Coffering  .... Iron  Tubbing  . 
Strength  of  Tubbing 
Corrosion 
Cost  of  Tubbing 
Sinking  by  Boring 
Kind-Chaudron's  Method 
Lippmann's  Method Sinking  through  Quicksand 
Triger's  Method Poetsch's  Method 
Deepening  Pits  already  Sunk 
Widening  Shafts 
Cost  of  Sinking  . Bibliography 
PAGE 1 06 
107 
109 109 109 
no 
III III 
112 116 
117 117 
118 118 120 
121 
I2£ 
121 
122 
125 
I2S 
127 
CHAPTER  VI. — PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
Underground  Roads    . 
Means  of  Keeping  Direction 
Means  of  Keeping  Gradient 
Operation  of  Driving Ventilation 
Supporting  Roof. 
Timbering 
Joints  . 
129 
129 
130 
132 
133 
135 
Chocks  or  Cogs     .         .         .135 
Double  Timbering         .         .136 
Driving  through  Loose  Ground  136 
Iron  and  Steel  Supports  .         .137 
Masonry   140 
Arrangement  of  Inset          .         .145 
Bibliography        .         .         .         .148 
CHAPTER  VII. — METHODS  OF  WORKING. 
The  Two  Main  Systems       .  .149 
Shaft  Pillar  and  Subsidence  .   149 
Arrangement  of  Labour       .  .    151 
Bord  and  Pillar  Working     .  .152 
Lancashire  Method      .         .  .156 
Long  wall  Method        .         *  .156 Double  Stall  Method  .        \  .161 
Working  Steep  Seams          .  .162 
Working    Thick     Seams— South 
Staffordshire         .         .  .164 
(a)  Square  Work      .         .  .165 
(b)  Longwall     .         .         .  .166 
Pennsylvania   .         .         .         .168 
Working      Seams      lying     near 
Together       .         .         .         . 
Spontaneous  Combustion     .        . 
(a)  Oxidation  of  the  Organic Constituents          .         .         . 
(6)  Iron  Pyrites        .         .         . 
(c)  Friction  from  Slippings       . 
Development    .         .         .         . Prevention        .         .         .         . 
Bibliography        .         .         .         . 
169 
170 
170 
171 
171 
171 
172 
173 

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER    VIII. — HAULAGE. 
PAGE 
Primitive  Methods    .        .         .  175 
PAGB 
Transmission  of  Power        .         .195 
Kails  ......   175 Compressed  Air        .         .         .197 
Length  of  Rails         .                      177 Electricity        .         .         .         .198 
Gauge     ...                      177 Different  Systems  of  Haulage      .   198 
Method  of  Laying  Rails                177 Direct  Acting  Haulage     .         .198 
Fish-  Plates                                       178 Size  of  Engines  Required      .    198 
Sleepers                                            1  78 Main  and  Tail-rope  Haulage     .    199 
Wood                                            178 Devices  for  throwing  Drums 
Iron                                      ,         179 In  and  Out  of  Gear   .         .   200 
Steel                                            i  79 
Switches                                           180 Methods  of  Working  Branches  201 
Endless  Chain.         .         .         .  202 
Plates               181 Attachment  of  Tubs     .         .  203 Turntables       181 Driving  Pulleys     .         .         .  203 Tuds         182 Taking  up  Slack  .         .         .   204 Bobies          182 Working       Branches       and Curves       ....  204 
Height      . .   183 Minimising  Breakages  .         .  205 Size. 
.   184 
Endless  Rope  Haulage     .         .  205 Wheels  and  Axles 
.   184 
Driving  Appliances       .         .  205 Drawbars 
.   185 
(a)  Clip  Pulleys         .         .  205 Pedestals .    185 
(6)  C-pulleys     .         .         .207 Lubrication .   1  86 (c)  Grooved  Pulleys  .         .  207 
Haulage  by  Horses 
.   187 
Taking  Up  Slack  Rope          .   211 Feeding .   187 
Clutches        for        Working 
Cost  of  Feeding 
.    189 Branches  .         .         .         .  212 
Cost  and  Life  of  Hor.se-; 
.   189 
Brakes  for  Branches     .         .214 
Cost     of      Corn-cutting and Arrangement  of  Tubs   .         .215 Ostlers 
.    189 
One  or  Two  Road  Systems    .  215 Shoeing 
.    189 
Rails  at  Junctions         .         .216 
Arrangement  of  Stables .    190 Clips        217 
Cost  of  Horse  Haul  age .   191 Clips  for  Under  Haulage  .   217 
Self-acting  inclines .   192 Clips  for  Over  Haulage      .  218 
Arrangement  of  Rails .   192 Automatic  Detachers    .         .  220 
Blocks  or  Stops 
•   193 
Threading  the  Rope      .         .   224 
Drums  and  Pulleys  .     , .   *93 Comparison  ....  224 Brakes .   194 Locomotives     ....  226 
Electric  Locomotives   .         .  226 
Junctions         .        .         .         .195 Bibliography        .         .        »         .227 
CHAPTER  IX.  —  WINDING. 
Wire  Ropes      .         .         .            245 
Wood           231 Conductors  between  Cages  .            246 
Iron           .....   233 Guide  Shoes         .         .         .            246 
Pulleys             233 Guide  Troughs     .         .         .             247 
Skips  and  Cages  ....  234 Engines       ....            248 
Shape  and  Construction  .         .  234 Position  of  Engine-house     .            250 
Means   for  Keeping  Tubs    on Drums          ....            250 
Cages      239 Brakes          ....            252 
Counterbalancing        .         .            254 
Wire  Ropes      ....   237 Tapering  Ropes        .         .            256 
Attachment  to  Cage         .         .  239 Flat  Ropes        .         .         .            256 
Cage  Chains      ....   240 Conical  and  Spiral  Drums            256 
Method  of  Taking  off  Strain        .  241 Tail  Rope  beneath  Cages              256 
Guides          .....  243 
Rails                                           .  24  ^ Meinicke's  System           .            257 Expansion   .                                       25? 

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  IX. — WINDING — (continued). 
Condensation       .  . 
Compound  Engines 
Special  Methods 
Blanchet  Pneumatic  System 
Koepe  System . 
Prevention  of  Over- winding 
PAGE 
260 
26l 
262 
262 
263 Catcb  es  at  Pit  Top      . 
Changing  Tubs    . Fencing  the  Pit  Top   . 
Tub-controllers   . 
Signalling    . 
PAG* .  270 
.272 
.  279 
.  281 .  28? 
266 Bibliography       . .         .  284 
CHAPTER  X. — PUMPING. 
Pumps             286 Davey  Differential  Engine  . 296 
Bucket  Pumps                               286 Direct-acting  Steam  Pumps &y\j 298 
Plunger  Pumps 
287 
Worthington  Pumps   . 
300 
Hollow  Plungers 
287 
Pumps  for  Sinking 
300 
Stocks  or  Trees    . 288 Arrangement  of  Supply-pipes,  &c. 
301 
Joints  . 288 Air  Vessels.          .... 
302 
Supporting  Pipes  in  S laft 
289 
Condensing  Arrangements  . 303 
Spear  Rods  . 
289 
Calculations  as  to  Size  of  Pumps 304 
Guiding  the  Rods 291 Effect  of  Acid  Water  . 3°5 
Counterbalancing 291 Draining  Deep  Workings     . 
305 
Connections  to  Rods 291 Hydraulic  Power 307 Valves 292 Moore's  Arrangement  . 
308 
Quadrants  . 
293 
Electricity        .... 
309 Suspended  Lifts  . 
293 
Pulsometer       .... 
310 
Cornish  Pumping  Engine 29"? 311 Bull  Engine 
sj 
296 Bibliography       .... 
OA  *• 
312 
CHAPTER  XI. — VENTILATION. 
Importance 
Quantity  of  Air   . Gases  Met  with  in  Mines     . 
Carbonic  Acid 
Carbonic  Oxide 
Sulphuretted  Hydrogen   . 
Light  Carburetted  Hydrogen 
After- damp Coal-dust    .... 
Action  of  Moisture  . 
Laws  of  Friction. 
Production  of  Air  Currents 
Natural  Ventilation          . 
Furnace  Ventilation 
Steam  Jet         .         .         . 
Mechanical  Ventilators    . 
Guibal . 
Waddle 
Schiele 
Cockson 
Capell  . 
313 
3i3 
3H 
3H 
315 
322 
324 
327 
327 
327 
329 
330 
330 
333 
333 
333  I 
Walker          .         . 
Walker's  Shutter     . 
Driving  by  Straps  and  Ropes 
Arrangement  of  Engines Determination       of       useful 
Effect   
Efficiency  of  Fans    . 
Comparison   of  Furnaces  and Fans   
Distribution  of  the  Air  Current  . 
Stoppings         .... 
Regulating  Doors  .  .  .  343 
Air  Crossings  ....  343 
Loss  in  Circulation  .  .  .  344 
Measurement  of  Air  Currents  .  345 
Anemometers  ....  345 
Barometer  and  Thermometer  .  347 
Water  Gauges ....  348 
Bibliography       .        .        .        .  349 

--- Page Break ---
xii CONTENTS. 
CHAPTER  XII. — LIGHTING. 
Naked  Lights      .        ..       . 
Safety  Lamps      .         .        » 
Davy's  Invention     .    '     • 
PAGE 
•     352 
•     352 
-     352 
.    Wl 
'  Wick  .... PAGK 
361; 
36; 
Locking  Lamps  . 
Magnetic  Locks Lead  Rivets      . 
Kyder's  Lock    . Casting  Rivets         f 
Relighting  Lamps 
Cleaning  Lamps  . 
Electric  Light  Undergrounc 
Secondary  Batteries 
Primary  Batteries     . 
Delicate  Indicators      . 
Pieler  Lamp     .         .  - 
Ashworth's  Lamp    . Coloured  Glass 
Liveing's  Indicator  . Hydrogen  Flame Bibliography 
VORKS  AT  SURFACE. 
Coating  Steam  Pipes  . 
Workshops  .... 
[ON   OF   Co\L    FOR   MARKET. 
Loading  Shoots   . 
Typical  Illustrations   . Pemberton  Colliery  . 
Brinsop  Hall  Colliery 
Hilda  Colliery  . 
Hewlett  Pit      . 
Aniche  Colliery,  France  . 
No.  5  Pit,  Bascoup  . Cross   Creek  Collieries,   Pei svlvania 
366 366 366 366 
367 
368 
369 
370 370 371 371 371 372 372 372 
373 
374 
.  380 
.  381 
•  403 
•  404 •  405 
-  405 
.  406 
.  408 .  408 
.  409 
in- 
.  412 
Stephenson Mueseler  .        .        •        . 
Design  of  Lamps 
Modern  Lamps   . 
Hepplewhite-Gray  . Bonneted  Mueseler  . 
Ashworth's  Mueseler 
Morgan    .... Marsaut  .... 
Deflector. 
•  353 
•  354 •  352 
-  356 .  356 -  359 
'  3I9 
•  360 
'  3*' 
.    ;6i 
Tin-can  Davy  .         .         » 
Thorneburry    .     '  » Sight  Lamp      .         .         • Conclusions          .         .        , 
Oil                        ... 
'  3*3 .  363 
•  364 
'  3*4 
CHAPTER  XIII.  —  \ 
Mechanical  Stoking     .         .         .377 
Coal  Conveyors  .        .  -^T;,-     .  379 
CHAPTER  XIY.  —  PREPARAT 
General  Considerations        .         .  382 
Circulation  of  Tubs     .         .         .  383 
Tipplers                .         .         .         -  sftc 
Front  Tipplers 
Back  Tipplers  . 
Side  Tipplers  . 
Duplex  Tippler 
•  385 
.  386 
.  386 •  389 
Movable  Bar  Screens 
Jigging  Screens 
.Revolving  Screens    .         . 
Spiral  Screens  . 
Greenwell's  Screen  . 
Varying    the    Sizes    made Screens Plating 
Combs  .... 
Variable  Crossbars 
Belts      
Kevolving  Tables 
INDEX 
•  39i <  394 
•  395 
•  395 
•  396 
by 
•  397 
•  397 
•  397 
•  398 
.  400 
.  402 
Sizing  Apparatus 
Trough  Washers 
Robinson's  Washer  . 
Coppee  Machine       .      ,. Conclusions 
Dry  Coal  Cleaning 
-  414 
•  4H 
.  415 
.  416 
.  419 
.  420 .  420 
Bibliography       . .  422 
.  424 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
ABBEEVIATIONS. 
THE  following  abbreviations  have  been  used  to  denote  the  publi- 
cations most  frequently  quoted  in  this  work. 
The  Roman  numerals  designate  the  volume,  and  the  ordinary 
figures  the  page.     For.  Abs.  =  Foreign  Abstracts. 
SO.    WALES  INST.  . 
BOO.   IND.    MIN.      . 
CHES.    INST.  . 
TED.    INST.     .  . 
BRIT.    SOC.    MIN.    STUD. 
N.    E.    I. 
N.  STAFF.  INST.  . 
INST.  C.  E.  .  .. 
AMEE.  INST.  M.  E. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC.  . 
ENG.  AND  MIN.  JOUR.  . 
SO.    STAFF.    INST.  . 
REV.    UNIV.    . 
MIN.    INST.   SCOT. 
MID.    INST.     . 
ANN.    DES  MINES  . 
Transactions  of  the  South  Wales  Institute  of 
Engineers. 
Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de  1' Industrie  Minerale  de Saint  Etienne. 
Transactions   of  the  Chesterfield  and   Midland 
Counties  Institution  of  Engineers. 
Transactions   of    the   Federated  Institution   of 
Mining  Engineers. 
Journal     of    the    British    Society    of    Mining Students. 
Transactions  of  the  North  of  England  Institute 
of  Mining  and  Mechanical  Engineers. 
Transactions  of  the  North  Staffordshire  Institute 
of  Mining  and  Mechanical  Engineers. 
Minutes  of  Proceedings  of  the   Institution  of 
Civil  Engineers. 
Transactions  of  the  American  Institute  of  Mining 
Engineers. 
Transactions    of    the    Manchester    Geological Society. 
The  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal,  New  York. 
Transactions  of  the  South  Staffordshire  and  East 
Worcestershire  Institute  of  Mining  Engineers. 
Eevue  Universelle  des  Mines. 
Transactions  of  the  Mining  Institute  of  Scotland. 
Transactions  of  the  Midland  Institute  of  Mining, 
Civil,  and  Mechanical  Engineers. 
Annales  des  Mines. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
CHAPTER  I. 
GEOLOGY. 
The  Study  of  Geology  may  be  divided  into  two  parts,  one  of 
which  treats  of  inorganic  matter,  the  laws  to  which  such  matter  is 
subject,  and  the  chemical  and  physical  changes  through  which  the 
crust  of  the  earth  has  passed ;  the  other  deals  with  and  inves- 
tigates the  order,  character,  and  succession  of  organic  life,  and  the relation  which  the  various  forms  bear  to  each  other.  As  no  written 
records  exist,  which  go  back  to  the  remote  times  when  life  first 
existed  on  our  globe,  the  geologist  has  interpreted  the  changes 
which  have  taken  place  by  careful  observations  of  phenomena 
met  with ;  and  as  histories  of  extinct  races  have  been  built  up  from 
the  interpretation  of  hieroglyphics  on  monuments,  so  by  similar 
results  has  the  order  of  succession  of  geological  strata  been 
established  from  observations  of  the  life  forms  preserved  in  a  fossil state  in  the  rocks  which  constitute  the  crust  of  the  earth. 
Bocks. — By  this  term  is  meant,  not  only  large  masses  of coherent  matter,  as  limestone,  which  build  up  mountains,  but  also 
the  soft  and  loose  gravels,  or  clay,  which  are  found  associated  with them. 
Classes  of  Rocks. — Bocks  are  divided  into  three  classes — 
aqueous  or  stratified,  metamorphic,  and  igneous  or  ejected. 
Aqueous  and  Metamorphic  Rocks. — These  are  made  up  of 
regular  beds,  or  strata,  and  are  probably  all  produced  from  the 
denudation  of  igneous  rocks,  although  they  appear  to  differ 
greatly  from  them.  The  great  agent  of  disintegration  is  the 
atmosphere,  and  the  rain  which  is  precipitated  from  it. 
Igneous  Rocks. — These  rocks  may  be  broadly  divided  into 
four  divisions,  according  to  the  quantity  of  silica  they  contain. 
First,  they  are  separated  into  acid  and  basic;  a  third  class  is  formed 

--- Page Break ---
2  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
of  rocks  containing  an  intermediate  amount  of  silica  ;  while  last  of 
all  there  is  a  small,  but  important,  class  called  "  ultra-basic."  To the  acid  type,  containing  on  an  average  about  74  per  cent,  silica, 
belong  granite  and  porphyry ;  while  the  basic  type,  containing  an 
average  of  50  per  cent,  silica,  is  represented  by  gabbro  and 
basalts.  The  intermediate  class  (syenite,  diorite,  and  some 
obsidians)  contain  on  an  average  60  per  cent,  silica  (the  ultra-basic, 
39  per  cent,  silica)  and  a  high  proportion  of  alkaline  earths  and 
oxide  of  iron.  Glassy  varieties  are  common  in  the  acid  series, 
rarer  in  the  intermediate  series,  and  still  rarer  in  the  basic division. 
Stratification. — When  the  fragments  are  large,  the  stratifica- 
tion, or  bedding,  is  very  imperfect,  but  if  the  particles  are  small,  it 
is  very  perfect. 
Laminse. — When  we  have  very  close  stratification,  and  get 
the  thinnest  paper-like  layers  in  the  planes  of  deposit  of  a stratified  rock,  it  is  said  to  be  laminated. 
Intrusive  Rocks. — These  are  sometimes  great  masses  forced 
up  through  the  surrounding  strata  in  no  definite  direction,  or  fre- 
quently, intrusive  matter  is  forced  along  definite  planes,  forming 
dykes,  where  the  sides  are  fairly  parallel ;  a  good  example  of  this 
is  the  great  whin-dyke  of  the  North  of  England  coal-field,  which 
proceeds  nearly  ninety  miles  in  a  straight  line.  These  intrusions 
were  originally  forced  into  their  present  position  in  a  molten 
condition,  evidence  of  which  is  afforded  by  the  way  they  have 
altered  the  adjoining  strata,  coal  seams  in  many  instances  being 
charred  and  rendered  worthless  for  several  yards  on  either  side. 
It  may  happen  that  only  the  upper  side  of  the  stratified  rocks 
below  the  igneous  bed  will  show  signs  of  baking,  from  which 
it  is  seen  that  the  lava-flow  was  contemporaneous  or  interbedded 
with  the  rocks,  while,  if  both  the  upper  and  lower  surfaces  of 
the  beds  are  affected,  the  lava-bed  was  certainly  intrusive. 
The  rocks  of  the  globe  present  very  different  appearances  to  the 
gravels  and  sands  which  are  formed  every  day  on  our  sea-shores and  at  the  mouth  of  rivers.  All  the  stratified  rocks  have  been 
originally  deposited  in  a  manner  similar  to  that  now  going  on, 
but  changes  have  taken  place  in  them  subsequent  to  formation. 
i.  Induration. — In  the  depths  of  the  earth's  crust,  by  the  long- 
continued  pressure  of  "miles"  of  strata  above  a  bed  composed of  finely  divided  particles,  the  effect  is  very  great.  In  this  way^ 
muds  pass  into  finely  laminated  clays,  and  finally  into  shales. The  effect  of  induration  is  well  shown  in  the  white  limestone  of 
Antrim,  which  was  originally  formed  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  English  chalk,  but,  owing  to  the  superposition  of  at  least 
2000  feet  of  basalt,  has  been  hardened  into  a  hard  splintery 
rock,  showing  no  trace  of  chemical  action.  Induration  is,  how- 
ever, greatly  aided  by  chemical  action,  the  particles  forming  the 
rock  being  cemented  together  by  substances  deposited  from  solu- 

--- Page Break ---
GEOLOGY.  3 
tion  in  water.  At  great  depths  the  rocks  are  undoubtedly 
saturated  with  water,  and  this  facilitates  jthe  deposition  of  mate- 
rials round  the  rock  particles,  or,  as  in  the  case  of  limestones, 
<fcc.,  the  solution  of  some  of  the  rock  materials  themselves,  which 
are  afterwards  crystallised  out  from  their  solution  in  the  water. 
Disintegration  usually  undoes  all  this  work ;  the  cementing  mate- 
rial first  yields,  is  removed,  and  the  particles  of  the  rock  are  set 
free  again. 
2.  Segregation. — Again,  segregation  may  be  going  on,  par- ticles of  the  rock  separating  from  the  remainder  and  segregating 
together,  this  being  especially  well  seen  in  limestone  containing 
silica  ;  the  particles  of  silica  are  drawn  together  by  this  action, 
forming  the  flints  and  cherts  of  the  chalk. 
Possilisation. — This  is  merely  a  case  of  segregation  round 
organic  matter.  In  many  clay  ironstones,  the  nodules  of  iron 
have  been  formed  by  the  segregation  of  the  mineral  round  fossil 
remains,  and,  on  breaking  open  the  nodule,  the  fossil  is  found 
inside,  generally  in  a  beautiful  state  of  preservation. 
Inclination  of  Strata. — Generally  speaking,  strata  were  laid down  in  a  horizontal  position,  this  being  shown  by  the  lie  of 
pebbles  in  rocks,  and  by  the  position  of  fossil  trees.  It  is,  however, 
very  rare  to  find  the  beds  retaining  this  position,  though  the  folding 
may  be  of  the  slightest.  If  a  bed  is  at  all  inclined,  it  must  reach 
the  surface  somewhere,  and  the  space  where  this  happens  is  said  te 
be  the  outcrop  of  the  bed.  The  nature  of  the  outcrop  and  its 
width,  depend  on  the  thickness  of  the  bed  and  the  degree  of  inclina- 
tion ;  it  cannot  be  less  than  the  thickness  of  the  bed,  and  is  wider-, the  smaller  the  angle  of  inclination. 
In  order  to  define  a  bed,  two  things  must  be  known — first,  the 
direction  in  which  the  inclined  bed  reaches  the  surface,  and  the 
inclination  of  the  bed.  The  angle  which  beds  make  with  the 
horizon  is  called  the  dip,  and  the  line  in  a  horizontal  plane,  the 
strike,  the  latter  necessarily  being  at  right  angles  to  the  dip. 
When  the  surface  of  the  ground  is  horizontal,  the  lines  of  outcrop 
and  strike  coincide,  but,  if  the  strata  are  inclined,  the  outcrop 
is  inclined  also ;  the  strike  is  always  horizontal.  Angles  of  dip 
are  usually  measured  by  an  instrument  called  a  clinometer,  but,  in 
doing  this,  care  must  be  taken  to  distinguish  between  the  true 
and  apparent  inclination ;  the  latter 
can  never  be  greater  than  the  former,  Fio.  i. 
but  it  may  be  less  to  any  amount. 
When  the  strata  are  bent  in  arches, 
they  are  said  to  have  a  synclinal  fold, 
when  the  arch  is  downwards ;  an  anti- 
clinal, when  the  arch  is  upwards  (Fig.  i); 
when  the  folds  are  small,  they  are  called 
troughs  and  saddles  respectively. 
Faults. — When  the  pressure  is  too  great,  or  is  applied  suddenly, 

--- Page Break ---
</«_'i- xr^i/S? 
4  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
or  if  the  rock  refuses  to  yield,  and  then  breaks,  instead  of  bending, 
a  dislocation  is  obtained ;  the  divided  segments  are  thrown  out  of 
level,  and  do  not  fit,  one  side  being  higher  than  the  other.  This  is 
called  a  fault.  In  mining  districts,  such  term  is  applied  loosely  to 
anything  which  interferes  with  the  seams  that  are  being  worked. 
Generally  speaking,  when  contortions  of  the  strata  are  numerous, 
faults  are  few ;  and  vice  versd.  The  position  of  every  fault  is 
defined  by  two  directions,  as  in  the  case  of  beds :  the  strike  of  a 
fault  is  spoken  of,  but,  in  the  place  of  the  word  "  dip,"  the  term hade  is  employed,  this  being,  however,  the  inclination  measured 
from  the  vertical.  To  determine  a  fault  accurately,  it  is  necessary 
to  know  two  other  things — (i)  which  side  is  throw-up,  and  which 
is  throw-down  ;  (2)  the  amount  of  displacement.  The  former  is  in 
the  majority  of  instances  easily  determined,  as  faults  usually  hade 
or  incline  towards  the  down-throw,  so  that  in  driving  roads  under 
ground,  if  the  fault  is  first  met  with  in  the  roof  it  is  a  down- 
throw, while  if  struck  on  the  floor  first,  it  is  an  up- throw.  Again, 
rocks  before  breaking  usually  yield  to  bending  a  little,  and  such 
signs  are  very  useful  to  the  miner,  especially 
FIG.  2.  where  the  hade  of  fault  is  nearly  vertical  (Fig.  2). No  rule  can  give  the  amount  of  displacement,  as 
sometimes,  when  the  hade  is  small,  the  throw  is 
large,  and  at  other  times,  with  a  similar  hade, 
the  displacement  is  small.  The  throw  of  faults 
is  always  measured  vertically,  and  may  be  variable 
at  different  points,  often  changing  from  a  few 
feet  at  one  end  to  hundreds  of  yards  at  the  other.  In  addition, 
there  is  often  a  variation  in  the  throw  of  the  same  fault  at 
different  levels.  When  the  amount  is  small,  they  are  called 
hitches,  troubles,  or  slips. 
Reversed  Faults. — It  has  been  observed  above,  that  ordinary 
faults  incline  to  the  down-throw,  but  in  rare  instances  they  incline 
towards  the  up-throw,  and  are  then  said  to  be 
IG'  3-         overlap  or  reversed  faults  (Fig.  3).   The  most  iiote- 
7"*""  worthy  of  this  class  in  our  own  country,  is  the 9-     ^  overlap  fault   of   the   Somerset   coal-field,   which 
-      7      _         occurs  in  the  Countess  Waldegrave's  colliery  at r     _Z         Radstock  ;  by  it,  the  seams  of  coal  are  doubled  for 
/  a  breadth  of  about   150  yards,  the  alteration  in 
level  amounting  to  44  yards. The  dislocated  walls  of  a  fault  are  often  in  contact  with  each 
other,  but  frequently,  especially  when  the  beds  are  of  varying 
hardness,  spaces  are  left  between  filled  with  broken  fragments 
which  have  been  removed  from  the  adjoining  rocks.  The  dis- 
tance across  a  fault  may  therefore  vary  from  a  few  feet  to  many 
yards. When  the  rocks  are  very  hard  and  the  fault  is  a  clean-cut  one, 
we  get  a  remarkable  polishing  of  the  sides,  known  as  "  slickensides," 

--- Page Break ---
GEOLOGY. 
FIG.  4. 
caused  by  the  enormous  pressure  of  the  rocks  on  each  other  during 
the  displacement  of  the  beds. 
Trough.  Faults. — These  are  caused  by  two  faults,  each  having 
a  down-throw  towards  the  other.  A  very  good  example  of  this  is the  Dudley  Port  Trough  Fault,  of  the  South 
Staffordshire  coal-field  (Fig.  4).  Here  two 
faults  are  separated  from  each  other  by  half 
a  mile — one  a  down-throw  to  the  south, and  the  other  a  down-throw  to  the  north. 
Each  hades  towards  the  other,  so  that  they 
meet  at  no  great  depth,  and,  as  the  throw 
is  equal  and  opposite  at  the  point  of  meeting, 
no  dislocation  takes  place. 
Conformable  and  TTnconformable  Strata. — Subsidence  has 
taken  place  in  all  times,  but  when  this  action  was  uniform,  bed 
succeeded  bed  in  regular  order,  and  produced  what  are  called  con- 
formable strata  (Fig.  5).  When,  however,  the  beds  were  tilted  up 
before  the  succeeding  layer  was  deposited  on  them,  or,  as  in  many 
FIG.  5. FIG.  6. 
instances,  the  older  beds  were  in  addition  denuded  or  worn 
away,  the  strata  are  said  to  be  unconformable  to  each  other 
(Fig.  6). 
Joints  in  Rocks. — The  bedding  of  a  rock  is  produced  during deposition,  but  there  are  other  parallel  structures  produced  by 
forces  acting  on  it  subsequent  to  formation.  One  system  of 
divisional  planes  running  through  most  stratified  rocks,  and  which 
is  entirely  independent  of  the  bedding,  is  that  called  joints.  There 
are  generally  two  systems  of  joints  at  right  angles  to  each  other, 
one  better  developed  than  the  other,  the  first  being  called  the 
master  joints,  and  the  other  the  secondary  joints.  These  joints 
tend  to  break  up  what  would  otherwise  be  a  continuous  mass 
into  rectangular  blocks.  Sandstones,  granites,  and  rocks  which 
do  not  easily  undergo  solution  in  water  have  closed  joints,  while 
limestones,  &c.,  which  are  easily  soluble,  have  open  joints.  The 
force  which  produced  these  divisional  planes  must  have  been  very 
great,  for  pebbles  of  quartz  lying  in  the  direction  of  the  joint 
planes  are  always  found  split  right  through.  Not  only  do  sedi- 
mentary rocks  exhibit  jointing,  but  some  igneous  rocks  frequently 
possess  this  structure  in  a  marked  degree.  Generally  the  joints 

--- Page Break ---
6  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
are  very  irregular,  but  many  igneous  rocks,  especially  basalts, 
have  developed  columnar  jointing.  The  reason  for  a  rock  splitting 
into  columnar  structure  is  not  hard  to  discover  ;  a  mass  of  fused 
matter,  on  cooling  down,  tends  to  split,  and,  if  of  large  extent,  has 
no  special  form  to  follow,  and  therefore  divides  into  the  easiest 
forms,  either  the  triangle,  square,  or  hexagon.  Three  cracks  only 
are  required  for  the  latter,  so  hexagonal  columns  are  generally found. 
The  divisional  planes,  called  cleat  by  the  miner,  which  rim 
through  coal  nearly  at  right  angles  to  each  other,  and  subdivide  it 
into  rectangular  fragments  of  varying  size,  are  referable  to  jointing, 
but  it  differs  from  ordinary  jointing,  inasmuch  as  it  is  carried  to small  subdivisions. 
Cleavage.  —  Under  the  influence  of  great  pressure,  the  particles of  which  a  rock  is  composed,  which  usually  have  a  long  and  short 
axis,  tend  to  re-arrange  themselves  along  the  line  of  least  resi>t- ance,  thereby  imparting  to  the  rock  a  fissile  structure,  known  to 
the  geologist  as  cleavage,  extending  over  large  areas.  Coarsely 
grained  rocks  never  exhibit  cleavage  ;  it  is  best  developed  in 
argillaceous  rocks,  altered  clays,  and  shales.  As  a  rule,  when  a 
rock  is  cleaved,  it  loses  its  power  of  splitting  along  the  bedding, 
the  latter  being  completely  obliterated  by  the  force  which  pro- duced the  cleavage.  Nodules  and  fossils  which  are  included  in 
cleaved  rocks,  are  altered  and  distorted  in  a  curious  manner. 
The  order  of  succession  has  been  divided  into  four  great 
divisions  —  (i)  archsean  ;  (2)  palaeozoic,  or  primary;  (3)  mesozoic,  or secondary  ;  and  (4)  cainozoic,  or  tertiary  ;  to  which  is  sometimes 
added  the  quaternary,  or  recent.  These  divisions  are  split  up 
into  systems,  each  system  into  formations,  which  usually  receive 
the  name  of  places  where  they  are  well  developed,  and,  finally,  the 
formations  are  subdivided  into  beds,  characterised  in  many  in- 
stances by  certain  fossils  being  always  associated  with  them. 
The  following  summary  shows  the  classification  at  present 
adopted  :  — 
(Post-pliocene. 
Pliocene. 
Miocene. 
Oligocene. Eocene. 
MESOZOIC,    [Cretaceous. OR          \  Jurassic. 
SECONDARY.  (Triassic. 
/Permian,  or  dyas.  [Upper,  middle,  and  lower  coal  measures. 
PAT  ^OZOTP      Carboniferous.       \  Millstone  grit. 
™          J  Devonian.  (  Carboniferous  limestone. 
PRIMARY    1  Upper  Silurian. PRIMARY.      Lower  gilurian> 
\Cambrian. 
ARCHAEAN.-  Crystalline  rocks,  schists,  &c. 

--- Page Break ---
GEOLOGY.  7 
It  must  be  observed,  that  these  formations  rarely  succeed  each 
other  in  the  regular  order  given  ;  breaks  occur,  caused  by  rneta- 
morphism  and  denudation,  or  by  original  non-deposition  owing  to 
local  circumstances,  and  only  by  observations  at  numerous  places has  the  order  of  succession  been  established. 
The  coal-miner  is  more  interested  in  the  carboniferous  forma- 
tion, that  being  the  one  in  which  beds  of  coal  occur  to  the  greatest 
extent  all  over  the  globe.  In  this  country,  with  one  or  two  small 
and  rare  exceptions,  the  whole  of  the  coal  mined  is  extracted 
from  beds  of  the  carboniferous  strata.  The  greater  part  of  the 
coal  measures  of  Europe  and  the  United  States  also  belongs  to  the 
carboniferous  system,  but  in  the  latter  country  large  deposits  of 
coal  occur  in  the  cretaceous  formation,  while  a  large  portion  of 
the  New  South  Wales  coal  belongs  to  the  triassic. 
Carboniferous  System  in  Britain. — This  is  divided  into  the 
following  members  : — (i)  The  Coal  Measures,  consisting  of  beds  of shale  and  sandstone  varying  in  thickness  from  200  to  1200  feet, 
and  containing  numerous  beds  of  coal.  The  coal  measures  proper, 
may  be  further  subdivided  into  upper,  middle,  and  lower  divisions, 
each  of  which  possesses  characters  more  or  less  peculiar  to  it ;  no 
sharp  line  of  demarcation  has,  however,  been  yet  satisfactorily 
established  between  them,  each  passing  insensibly  into  the  other. 
One  peculiarity  of  the  upper  coal  measures  is  worth  noticing — 
namely,  the  occurrence  in  them  of  thin  beds  of  a  fresh- water  lime- 
stone, containing  immense  numbers  of  a  small  shell  called  iheSpiror- 
bis  carbonarius,  from  which  the  beds  are  called  spirorbis  limestone. 
(2)  The  Millstone  Grit,  consisting  of  coarse  sandstones.  This 
received,  in  the  South  of  England,  the  name  of  the  "  farewell 
rock,"  as  it  contains  no  coal  seams  in  that  part  of  the  country. This  rule,  however,  does  not  apply  to  every  district,  as,  in  the 
North  of  England  and  in  Scotland,  beds  of  coal  and  shale  are 
found.  (3)  The  Carboniferous  Limestone  contains  in  Scotland  thin 
beds  of  coal.  This  portion  of  the  carboniferous  system  is  built  up 
of  thick  beds  of  limestone  of  marine  origin,  full  of  the  remains  of animal  life. 
Fossils. — The  coal  measures  contain  in  varied  abundance  the 
remains  of  luxuriant  vegetation.  As  an  example,  may  be  cited  the 
occurrence  of  the  plant  known  to  the  geologist  as  Lepidodendron, 
which  attained  dimensions  of  from  40  to  60  feet  high,  and  several 
feet  diameter.  This  plant  is  allied  to  the  lowly  club-moss  of  the 
present  time,  whose  height  does  not  exceed  a  few  inches.  Another 
example  that  may  be  referred  to,  is  the  jointed  and  fluted  stems 
called  Calamites,  represented  in  our  fields  and  marshes  by  the  equi- 
setum,  or  horse-tails.  Portions  of  ferns  are  very  abundant,  some of  which  attained  enormous  dimensions.  Remains  of  the  stalks 
(rachis)  of  ferns  have  been  met  with,  measuring  in  their  compressed 
state  5  feet  across,  and  Grand  'Eury  describes  the  frond  of  a  fern measuring  16  feet  long.  The  classification  of  these  ferns  has 

--- Page Break ---
8  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
aiways  presented  difficulties  to  the  botanist,  owing  to  the  fragmen- 
tary manner  in  which  they  are  found,  but  recent  researches  of 
Williamson  and  Kidston  in  our  own  country,  Grand  'Eury, Schimper,  Zeiller,  and  Stur  on  the  Continent,  and  Dawson  and 
Lesquereux  in  America,  have  greatly  extended  our  knowledge  of 
a  most  fascinating  branch  of  geology,  and  one  in  which  the 
mining  student  is  most  directly  interested.  A  knowledge  of  the 
flora  of  the  coal  measures  is  essential  to  any  one  searching  un- 
known districts  for  indications  as  to  coal-bearing  rocks,  and  it  is 
not  too  much  to  say,  that  vast  sums  of  money  have  been  thrown 
away  in  fruitless  attempts  to  prove  coal  to  exist,  where  a  little 
knowledge  of  the  fossils  of  the  carboniferous  formation  would 
have  at  once  shown  the  uselessness  of  any  search.  The  classifica- 
tion cf  these  ferns  has  until  lately  been  quite  arbitrary,  form  of 
leaf  and  arrangement  of  nerves,  being  the  points  usually  relied 
on.  Living  ferns  are  referred  to  their  several  classes,  by  the 
arrangement  of  their  fructifications,  which  are  usual^  borne  in 
small  rounded  dots,  called  sori,  on  the  back  of  the  leaflets.  Much 
knowledge  has  recently  been  gained  of  the  fructifications  of  fossil 
plants,  and  hence  a  more  reliable  classification  is  the  result. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : — 
The  Coalfields  of  Great  Britain,  E.  Hull,  4th  Edition,  London,  1881. 
N.  B.  I. :  The  Northern  end  of  the  Bristol  Coalfield,  H.  Cossham,  x.  97  ;  Coal 
Mining,  &c.,  N.  Wood,  J.  Taylor,  and  J.  Marley,  xii.  149  ;  The  South 
Wales  Coalfield,  T.  Forster  Brown,  xxiii.  197  ;  The  Larger  Divisions 
of  the  Carboniferous  System  in  Northumberland,  G.  A.  Lebour,  xxv.  225 ; 
The  Carboniferous  Hocks  of  Cumberland  and  North  Lancashire,  J.  D. 
Kendall,  xxxiv.  125;  A  Further  Attempt  for  the  Correlation  of  the  Coal 
Seams  of  the  Carboniferous  Formation  of  the  North  of  England,  M. 
Walton  Brown,  xxxvii.  3. 
SO.  WALES.  INST.  :  The  Southern  portion  of  the  Somersetshire  Coalfield 
G.  C.  Greenwell,  i.  147  ;  Some  of  the  Geological  Problems  in  the  Bristol 
Coalfield,  H.  Cossham,  xii.  84 ;  The  Somersetshire  Coalfield,  J. 
McMurtrie,  xii.  424. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Economic  Geology  of  Derbyshire,  A.  H.  Stokes,  vi.  60  ;  Geology 
of  the  South  Derbyshire  and  East  Leicestershire  Coalfields,  G.  S. 
Bragge,  xv.  198. 
FED.  INST. :  The  Geology  of  the  Southern  portion  of  the  Yorkshire  Coalfield, 
E.  Kussell,  i.  123  ;  On  the  Coalfield  adjoining  Barnsley,  K.  Miller,  ii.  7  ; 
A  Geological  Sketch  of  the  Town  and  District  of  Nottingham,  G.  Lewis, 
ii.  22  ;  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  the  Birmingham  District,  C.  Lapworth, 
iii.  10 ;  A  General  Description  of  the  South  Staffordshire  Coalfield 
South  of  the  Bentky  Fault,  W.  F.  Clark  and  H.  W.  Hughes,  iii.  25  ; 
The  Northern  Part  of  tlie  South  Staffordshire  Coalfield,  A.  Sopwith, iii.  50; 
BEIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Forest  of  Dean  Coalfield,  H.  E.  Insole  and  C.  Z. 
Bunning,  vi.  61 ;  A  Month's  Visit  to  the  North  Staffordshire  Coalfieldt A.  W.  Grazebrook,  xiii.  127. 

--- Page Break ---
(     9     ) 
CHAPTER    II. 
COAL. 
Definition  of  Coal. — The  question,  "  What  is  coal  ? "  appears  a very  simple  one  to  answer,  but  that  such  is  not  the  case,  was  proved 
by  the  now  historical  lawsuit  over  the  Torbane  Hill  mineral  in  1 853. The  owners  of  the  Torbane  Hill  estate  had  leased  all  coal  contained 
in  it,  and  in  the  course  of  working,  the  lessees  extracted  a  com- bustible material  containing  a  large  amount  of  gas.  The  lessor 
claimed  that  this  mineral  was  not  coal,  and  disputed  the  right  of 
the  lessees  to  work  it.  A  trial  resulted,  and  geologists,  chemists, 
and  gas  engineers  gave  evidence  on  both  sides.  In  summing  up, 
the  judge  remarked,  that  "  to  find  a  scientific  definition,  after  what 
has  been  brought  to  light  within  the  last  few  days,  is  impossible." For  our  purpose,  coal  may  be  defined  as  a  solid  stratified  sub- stance, capable  of  undergoing  combustion  in  contact  with  oxygen, 
not  containing  sufficient  earthy  impurities  to  prevent  its  being 
applied  as  a  source  of  heat  in  furnaces  and  fireplaces,  and  varying in  colour  from  brown  to  black. 
Formation  of  Coal. — However  much  geologists  may  differ  as 
to  the  question  whether  coal  was  formed  on  the  spot  on  which 
the  forests  that  produced  it  grew,  or  whether  it  resulted  from  the 
accumulation  of  drift,  every  one  agrees  that  it  results  from  the 
decomposition  of  vegetable  matter.  The  hypothesis  most  generally 
accepted  is  the  former,  although  it  is  perfectly  clear  that  in  a  few 
isolated  instances  small  areas  of  coal  have  been  formed  by  organic 
matter  drifted  into  lakes.  The  common-sense  view,  that  the  land 
became  submerged  at  intervals,  and  that  the  underclays  of  coal 
seams  form  the  beds  on  which  the  plants  originally  grew,  is  the 
great  argument  in  favour  of  the  in  situ  theory,  as  it  is  an  every- day occurrence  to  find  the  roots  of  trees  firmly  embedded  in  the 
underclay.  Exposed  to  the  action  of  the  atmosphere,  vegetation 
decays  and  goes  to  enrich  the  soil,  but  supposing  that  the  organic 
material  fell  into  water,  decay  is  incomplete,  layer  would  be  de- 
posited on  layer,  and  under  pressure  deposits  of  coal  are  formed. 
In  peat  bogs,  for  instance,  living  plants  are  found  at  the  surface, 
lower  down  the  forms  of  plants  are  still  recognisable,  while  the 
bottom  portion  is  very  compact,  and  vegetable  structure  can 

--- Page Break ---
10 TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
scarcely  be  distinguished ;  as  we  go  deeper  in  the  mass  the 
quantity  of  carbon  increases.  The  conversion  of  woody  tissue 
into  coal  takes  place  by  the  elimination  of  oxygen,  which  combines 
with  carbon  to  form  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  by  the  separation  of 
carburetted  hydrogen  ("  fire  damp "  of  the  miner)  and  water. To  illustrate  the  gradual  change  in  composition  in  passing  from 
wood  to  anthracite  coal,  Dr.  Percy  *  gives  the  following  table,  the proportion  of  carbon  being  estimated  at  the  constant  amount  of 
100  : — 
Substance. Carbon. Hydrogen. 
OYYO-PTI      I>i»pOSalM 
Ox)gen.|   Hydrogen 
Wood  (the  mean  of  several  analyses 100 12.  18 
83.07 1.  80 
•  Peat           „ IOO 
9.85     j  55-67 
2.89 
Lignite      ,          „     15  varieties   .     . 100 
8-37 
42.42 
3-07 
Ten-yard  coal  of  South  Staffordshire IOO 6.12 
21.23 
3-47 
Steam  coal  from  the  Tyne      .     .     . IOO 
5-91 
18.32 
3.62 
Anthracite  coal  from  Penn.,  U.S.A. IOO 
2.84 
1.74 2.63 
Note. — Certain  bodies  existing  in  Nature  are  composed  of  substances  that 
cannot  be  resolved  into  any  simpler  form,  these  being  called  elements  by 
chemists,  and  designated  by  symbolic  abbreviations.  The  smallest  indivi- 
sible parts  of  these  elements  are  called  atoms,  and  these,  by  combination 
with  each  other,  form  the  substances  occurring  in  Nature.  The  number  of 
atoms  of  each  element  comprised  in  any  substance,  is  shown  in  chemical 
formulas,  by  a  number  following  the  symbol  of  each  element.  Thus,  water 
contains  one  atom  of  oxygen  and  two  of  hydrogen,  its  chemical  symbol 
being  H2O. 
Classification  of  Coals. — The  classification  of  the  various 
coals  occurring  in  the  sedimentary  rocks  is  best  done  by  dividing 
them  into  heads  according  to  the  relation  between  the  proportions 
of  carbon  and  oxygen.  In  this  manner,  is  obtained  (i)  Lignite, 
(2)  Bituminous  Coal,  (3)  Steam  Coal,  (4)  Cannel,  (5)  Anthracite. 
1.  Lignite. — Found  in  our  own  country  at  Bovey  Tracey,  in Devonshire.     Some  varieties  show  distinct  woody  texture,  while 
others   are   structureless.     They  contain  a  large  proportion   of 
water,  burn  with  a  disagreeable  odour,  and  are  brown  in  colour. 
Lignite  coal  contains  about  67  per  cent  of  carbon  and  26  per  cent, 
of  oxygen.     A  subdivision  of  the  class  is  sometimes  made,  called 
brown  coal,  which  contains  a  larger  proportion  of  carbon  and  less 
oxygen  than  the  true  Lignites.     They  occur  in  large  quantities 
on  the  Continent  and  in  some  of  our  colonies,  an  analysis  of 
brown  coal  from  New  Zealand  showing,  carbon  72.2,  oxygen  22.4, 
hydrogen  5.4. 
2.  Bituminous  Coed. — The  proportion   of  carbon  in  this  class 
varies  from  75  to  90,  and  the  oxygen  from  6  to  19.     They  burn 
*  Metallurgy  (Fuel),  c£c.,  1875,  p.  208.  f  For  definition,  see  p.  14. 

--- Page Break ---
COAL.  ii 
with  a  more  or  less  smoky  flame,  and  are  largely  used  for  house- 
hold purposes.  As  the  proportion  of  oxygen  decreases,  the  coal 
gets  blacker  and  less  sonorous,  and  the  friability  increases.  The 
bituminous  class  of  coals,  may  be  further  subdivided  into  non- 
caking  and  caking  varieties  ;  the  former,  when  burnt,  split  up  into 
fragments,  while  the  latter  soften  on  the  fire  and  swell  up,  the 
particles  bind  together,  and  form  a  pasty  mass.  This  property  is 
an  extremely  valuable  one,  and  from  this  class  of  coal  are  made 
great  quantities  of  coke.  The  small  pieces  are  heated  together  in 
a  suitable  oven  to  a  certain  temperature,  and  when  the  mass  is 
withdrawn  and  cooled,  a  hard  glistening  mass  is  obtained,  in 
which  all  form  of  the  original  particles  is  lost.  It  has  never  been 
established,  to  what  this  property  of  caking  is  due,  but  it  is  certain 
that  ultimate  analysis  forms  no  guide.  M.  Gruner  gives  the 
following  analyses  of  two  coals  : 
(«)  (&) Carbon   75.2  ..76 
Hydrogen       ....  4  ..  4.3 
Oxygen .         .         .         .         .         16  ..         16 
Ash   3  ..  3.3 
Water   6.3  5.4 
These  coals  are  nearly  identical  in  composition,  but  while  (a)  cakes, 
(b)  does  not.  Chemists  can  determine  the  amounts  of  the 
various  elements  present  in  coal,  but  are  quite  unable  to  say  how 
these  elements  are  combined  amongst  themselves,  these  internal 
combinations  being  the  probable  explanation  of  the  different  be- 
haviours of  coals  of  the  same  ultimate  analysis.  For  commercial 
purposes,  proximate  analysis  is  all  that  is  required,  this  giving  us 
the  amount  of  fixed  carbon  (coke),  volatile  matters,  and  the  amount 
of  impurities.  There  appears  to  be  no  rule  for  determining  the 
caking  qualities  of  a  coal,  except  actual  experiment,  as  this  pro- 
perty is  possessed  by  coals  differing  widely  in  composition.  It 
appears  to  be  influenced  by  the  method  of  conducting  the  experi- 
ment ;  thus,  in  some  cases  rapid  heating  will  cake  a  non-caking  coal. 
The  amount  of  ash  present  does  not  seem  to  influence  the  result,  as 
examples  are  known  of  a  caking  coal  containing  20  per  cent,  of 
ash.  On  the  other  hand,  many  coals  lose  their  power  of  caking 
by  long  exposure  to  the  air. 
(3)  Steam  Coals. — These  are  principally  worked  in  the  South 
Wales  and  North  of  England  coal-fields.     As  their  name  denotes, 
they  are  mainly  used  for  the  production  of  steam  ;  their  evapora- 
tive power  is  high  and  they  give  off  scarcely  any  smoke  in  burn- 
ing, while  on  account  of  their  structure,  they  burn  more  readily 
than  anthracite. 
(4)  Cannel  Coal. — The  chief  deposits  of  this  class  occur  in  the 
Lancashire    and    Scotch    coal-fields.     Cannel    is    very   rich    in 
hydrogen,  and  is  mainly  used  for  the  production  of  gas,  as  it  yields 
by  destructive  distillation  about  40  per  cent,  of  volatile  matters. 

--- Page Break ---
12 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
It  is  very  hard,  dense,  and  structureless,  and  is  sometimes  used 
for  the  manufacture  of  ornaments.  In  this  division  of  coals  may 
be  included  certain  shales,  containing  large  quantities  of  bitu- 
minous matters,  which  on  distillation  yield  liquid  and  solid 
paraffin.  The  Boghead  caiinel,  over  which  the  celebrated  trial 
took  place,  may  be  considered  the  representative  of  this  type. 
(5)  Anthracite. — The  darker  and  denser  varieties  of  ordinary 
coal  gradually  pass  into  the  anthracitic  varieties,  which  are 
characterised  by  the  large  amount  of  carbon  they  contain. 
They  do  not  soil  the  fingers,  are  very  hard,  and  break  with  a 
conchoidal  fracture.  The  formation  of  anthracite  has  probably 
been  effected  by  the  alteration  of  bituminous  coals  under  heat  and 
pressure.  In  the  South  Wales  coal-field,  the  same  seam  of  coal, 
which  is  of  the  ordinary  bituminous  variety  in  the  eastern  district, 
passes  by  gradations  into  steam  coal  in  the  middle  of  the  coal- 
field, while  in  the  western  district  it  is  changed  into  anthracite. 
Enormous  deposits  of  this  class  of  coal  are  met  with  in  Pennsyl- 
vania, our  own  store  being  confined  to  South  Wales.  Anthracite 
contains  from  93  to  95  per  cent,  carbon,  4  to  2  per  cent,  hydrogen, 
and  3  per  cent,  oxygen.  It  is  practically  smokeless  when  burning, 
and  is  much  used  where  such  a  property  is  valuable,  as,  for  instance, 
in  malt-drying  and  in  some  metallurgical  operations.  The  coke  is 
brittle  and  useless  for  commercial  purposes. 
The  following  table*  (p.  13)  shows  the  percentage  composition of  different  classes  of  coal. 
Commercial  Value  of  Coals. — The  value  of  coal  as  fuel  de- 
pends chiefly  on  the  Calorific  Power,  which  is  the  total  heat  de- 
veloped by  combustion,  expressed  either  in  units 
of  heat  or  of  evaporation,  and  by  the  amount  of 
ash  and  impurities  present. 
In  determining  the  calorific  power  of  fuels,  the 
same  difficulty  is  met  with,  as  in  judging  of  the 
caking  properties.  The  composition,  and  the  units 
of  heat  developed  by  the  combustion  of  each  com- 
ponent of  the  coal,  being  known,  the  theoretical 
calorific  power  can  be  easily  determined,  but,  as 
before,  we  neither  know  how  the  various  elements 
are  combined  together,  nor  what  quantities  of  heat 
appear  or  disappear  during  the  breaking  up  of  the 
complicated  compounds  of  which  coals  are  com- posed. Direct  experiment  is  resorted  to  for  the 
actual  calorific  power,  the  operation  being  per- formed in  an  instrument  called  a  calorimeter.  The 
most  convenient  of  these  for  practical  purposes,  is 
the  one  designed  by  Mr.  Lewis  Thompson,  which  consists  of  a 
glass  vessel  (a,  Fig.  7)  containing  a  known  quantity  of  water. 
*  Compiled  from  Dr.  Percy's  Metallurgy  (Fuel,  <£c.),  London,  1875. 
FIG.  7. 

--- Page Break ---
COAL. 
•83100 
O\O          "-"NOONOOioO          OOO 
r^vo    I    N   rot^«-i   rj-vo  ro^-   i    fOt>.  i     i     | 
vd  ^i-  IOOQ  o\  '    ro  o\  '    '    ' 
ro ^i-  IOOQ  o 
cX)  ex)  oo  oo 
«O    TJ-  N    O\OO 
VO  00    —    N  OO 
DOO    O          ~ 3    vovO     I     O 
4  o  rj-  M  «  M  d  d  o  o   '  d i?i •qsy 
5-3 
I5 
t^O  O 
N   ro  O -^-O  VO   W  1-^  O 
^»  «  .  ,      , 
>>  N  fo  ro  w  i>.oo  oo  •*  ^  |    m  «  ON  O   | 
-^-  O  O   fi   O   O   O   O  O         "-<*  M   O   O 
M     M  CJ 
Q  t^ 
-ON^o 
CO  Q^  LO  vo  CO  5-  t^OO  VOO  ^-  O  ^J-  •-"  CO  up  rf 
vO  vo  to  t^oo  OO  OO  OO  ON  ON  ONOO  t-'.vO  ON  ON  ON 
CC  g 
'  c"2 
l|i!!1|4llg|jll] pq  pq  <J  H  <J  &  <J  J«  n3  PH  -^  !>  -   -  ccocPn 
"«l 
C~~C  c« 
bfl  -5  * 
a     M       OQ 
IH   N   CO  ^- t^OO    ON  O    "-1    N   fO  rj-  tovo 
ng  
oxygen 
13,  
14,  
15, 
mber 
,  4,  6, 
is  
included 
amPles  in 
tatively  
dete calculated 
he y, 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
A  weighed  invariable  quantity  of  the  coal  to  be  experimented 
with,  is  intimately  mixed  in  a  mortar  with  about  ten  times 
its  weight  of  a  mixture  of  three  parts  potassic  chlorate  and 
one  of  potassic  nitrate.  This  mixture  is  placed  in  a  small  copper 
cylinder  &,  which  in  its  turn  is  covered  with  another  copper 
vessel  c,  furnished  with  a  tube  and  stopcock  d  on  the  upper 
side,  and  pierced  with  holes  e  on  the  lower  end.  A  fuse  is  placed 
in  the  smaller  cylinder  containing  the  mixture,  this  is  lighted, 
the  stopcock  closed,  and  the  apparatus  let  down  to  the  bottom 
of  the  graduated  flask  containing  the  water.  When  combustion 
has  ceased,  the  stop-cock  is  opened  and  the  apparatus  is  moved 
gently  up  and  down,  care  being  taken  not  to  raise  it  out  of  the 
water.  The  temperature  is  noted  at  the  beginning  and  end  of 
the  experiment,  and  from  a  table  supplied  with  each  instrument, 
the  calorific  power  is  found.  The  rise  of  the  temperature,  plus  10 
per  cent,  of  this  rise,  will  give  the  number  of  Ibs.  of  water  which 
i  Ib.  of  coal  will  convert  into  steam  from  and  at  212°  F.  The importance  of  calorific  power  is  not  at  all  understood  by  consumers. 
One  coal  may  be  obtained  for  a  less  price  than  another,  but  if  the 
lower-priced  coal  has  less  calorific  power  than  the  other  one,  the 
consumer  may  not  be  obtaining  the  best  value  for  his  money. 
Coals  rich  in  oxygen  never  have  such  high  calorific  powers  as  those 
containing  a  smaller  amount,  as  the  quantity  of  hydrogen  available 
for  heating  purposes  in  any  fuel,  is  not  the  total  amount  of  that 
element  present,  but  only  that  portion  of  it  (called  disposable 
hydrogen)  which  is  in  excess  of  the  quantity  required  to  form 
water  with  the  oxygen  contained  in  the  coal.  The  amount  of 
disposable  hydrogen  in  any  coal  can  be  ascertained,  when  its  com- 
position is  known,  by  dividing  the  quantity  of  oxygen  present  by 
8  and  subtracting  the  result  obtained  from  the  total  quantity  of 
hydrogen  present,  the  remainder  being  the  disposable  hydrogen. 
Calorific  powers  of  a  few  coals  are  given  in  the  following  table :  * 
Locality. Nature  of  Coal. 
Calorific  Power  (in  heat 
units),  of  dry  Coal free  from  Ash. 
Lignite 
17,8^7 
Manosque,  Basses  Alpes  . 
France  and  Germany Brown  coal 
Caking  coal 
12,584 
11,340-14,220 j  s  8o<i 
16  108 „             
Basin  of  Donetz,  Russia    .         . 
Le  Creusot,  France  .... 
»              it          •.•*'• Basin  of  Donetz,  Russia   . 
»»         » 
j)          » 
Anthracite 
j> 
15,651 17,319 
17,021 
14,866 
The  ash  of  coals  is  the  substance  remaining  when  total  combus- 
*  Coal,  its  History  and  Uses,  1878,  p.  250. 

--- Page Break ---
COAL.  15 
tion  has  been  effected.  It  is  composed  of  the  earthy  impurities 
originally  present  in  the  coal,  and  may  be  easily  determined  by 
burning  a  weighed  quantity  of  coal  in  a  porcelain  crucible,  either 
over  a  Bun  sen  gas-burner,  or  in  a  muffle.  It  is  important  that 
not  only  the  quantity  of  ash  should  be  determined,  but  also  its 
nature.  Some  ashes  tend  to  fuse  together  and  form  "clinker," which  is  very  objectionable  ;  more  attention  is  required  from  the 
stoker,  as  he  has  to  be  continually  stirring  up  the  fire,  and  even 
when  this  is  done  thoroughly,  the  draught  is  materially  interfered 
with,  and  imperfect  combustion  is  likely  to  take  place.  Coal  may 
contain  such  a  large  proportion  of  ash  as  to  be  practically  worthless 
as  a  fuel.  The  amount  of  iron  pyrites  present  has  also  a  great 
effect  on  the  nature  of  ash,  as  fusion  is  assisted  and  a  tendency  to 
form  clinker  results.  Sulphur,  too,  which  is  contained  in  pyrites, 
is  very  objectionable  in  some  metallurgical  operations. 
Gases  occluded  in  Coal. — The  majority  of  coals  contain  various 
gases,  which  are  given  off  when  exposed  to  the  atmosphere.  Gene- rally this  takes  place  slowly,  and  may  be  observed  by  the  singing 
noted  at  the  working  places  in  fiery  seams  of  coal,  or  by  the  sudden 
outbursts  of  gas  which  are  known  to  the  miner  by  the  name  of 
"  blowers."  Certain  coals  of  a  porous  structure  readily  yield  up the  gases  contained  in  them,  while  others  of  a  denser  character, 
although  containing  even  more  gas  stored  in  them,  do  not  discharge 
it  in  such  quantities.  In  vacuo,  and  under  the  influence  of  a 
gentle  heat,  coals  readily  discharge  the  gases  they  contain.  Mr. 
J.  W.  Thomas  *  has  made  a  series  of  experiments  on  this  subject which  throw  a  great  deal  of  light  on  the  question.  He  finds  that 
the  gases  occluded  from  bituminous  coals  consist  mainly  of 
carbonic  acid,  and  that  the  quantity  yielded  is  very  much  smaller 
than  that  given  off  by  the  steam  and  anthracitic  varieties. 
Steam  coals  evolve  a  large  quantity  of  gas,  the  chief  component  of 
which  is  marsh  gas,  which  in  some  instances  reaches  as  high  as 
87  per  cent.  Anthracites  yield  by  far  the  largest  volume  of 
gas,  with  a  composition  closely  resembling  that  from  steam  coal. 
The  following  table*  (p.  16)  shows  the  quantities  of  gas  evolved 
from  coal  at  100°  C.  (212°  F.)  in  vacuo,  and  its  percentage  com- position. 
Mr.  Thomas  points  out,  that  these  results  were  obtained  in  a 
laboratory,  and  that  it  must  not  be  supposed  that  coals  which  contain 
the  greatest  quantity  of  gas  in  their  pores  are  the  most  dangerous 
to  work,  the  rate  of  discharge  being  controlled,  as  has  been  before 
pointed  out,  by  the  structure  of  the  coal.  Anthracites,  for  in- 
stance, although  holding  large  quantities  of  marsh  gas,  are  by  no 
means  dangerous  to  work,  as  only  small  quantities  of  gas  are  dis- 
charged at  the  working  face  owing  to  the  jet-like  nature  of  these coals,  such  structure  being  eminently  favourable  to  the  retention 
*  Coal,  Mine  Gases  and  Ventilation,  1878.  t  Op,  cit.,  p.  345. 

--- Page Break ---
i6 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
of  gas.  On  the  other  hand,  steam  coals,  although  containing  a 
smaller  quantity  of  gas,  readily  give  it  up,  owing  to  their  porous 
nature,  and  the  quantity  of  gas  evolved  at  the  face  of  the  workings in  some  of  these  coals  is  enormous.  From  these  results  we  are 
No.  of 
Sample. Nature  of  Coal. Gas  evolved  by  TOO 
grammes  of  coal  at 100°  0.  in  vacuo. 
Composition  of  Gases. 
Carbonic 
Acid. Oxygen. 
Marsh 
Gas. Nitrogen. 
c.c. I Bituminous 
55-9 36.42 
0.8o — 
62.78 
3 »                  • 
55-i 
5-44 
1.05 
63.76 
29-75 
3« 
Semi-bituminous 
73-6 
12.34 
0.64 
72.51 
I4-5I 
4 Steam 
»            •         • 194.8 
250.1 
5-04 
13.21 
0-33 
0.49 
87.30 
81.64 
4^66 
8 »             •         • 
375-4 
9-25 
0-34 
86.92 3-49 
9 »             •         • 
149-3 
n-35 
0.56 
73-47 
14.62 
13 
Anthracite 
555-5 2.62 — 
93-13 
4-25 14 
>»                 • 600.6 14.72 — 
84.18 
1.  10 
able  to  see  where  the  explosive  gases  in  mines  are  obtained,  and 
can  readily  understand  that  mine-gases  and  the  gases  occluded in  the  coal  stand  in  definite  and  fixed  relationship.  Mr.  Thomas 
experimented  in  this  direction,  and  the  results  he  obtained  are 
summarised  in  the  following  table : — • 
No.  of 
Sample. 
Whether  a  Blower  or  obtained 
by  boring  into  Coal. 
Composition  of  the  Gas. 
Marsh Gas. Carbonic Acid. Oxygen. 
Nitrogen. 
2 
3 
4 
10 
14 
07.61; 
0.50 
0.38 
0.47 
0.44 
0.15 
0.10 0.90 
0.35 
4.69 10.15 
O.I  I 
1.85 
2.31 
2-79 
3.02 
20.30 
5-06 
41.58 
3.98 
97.31 Blower          
Boring           
96.74 
£8 94.84 47.37 
»              ..... 
95-56 
The  enormous  pressure  under  which  these  gases  are  contained 
in  the  coal  will  be  realised  when  it  is  stated  that  in  the  4-ft. 
seam  of  the  Harris  Navigation  Colliery,  at  a  depth  of  700  yards 
from  the  surface,  and  with  a  bore-hole  put  30  feet  into  the  face  of 
the  coal,  the  pressure  was  143  Ibs.  per  square  inch ;  while  a  bore- 
hole 50  feet  deep,  in  the  4-ft.  seam  at  Merthyr  Yale  Colliery,  at  a 
depth  of  450  yards  from  the  surface,  registered  280  Ibs.  per  square 
inch  pressure  of  gas;  it  maybe  further  added  that  these  pressures 

--- Page Break ---
COAL.  17 
are  by  no  means  the  maximum  ones  that  have  been  obtained  in 
different  collieries.* 
"  Blowers  "  of  small  dimensions  usually  follow  the  face,  and  as this  proceeds,  the  older  ones  die  out  and  newer  ones  take  their 
place.  A  thin  seam  of  coal  overlying  the  bed  worked,  is  very 
favourable  for  supporting  this  action.  By  the  sinking  of  the  strata, 
cavities  are  formed  in  the  measures  above  the  roof,  and  these  are 
filled  with  accumulations  of  gas  ;  a  crack  is  by  some  means  formed, 
and  an  outburst  of  gas  results.  This  action  is  guarded  against  in 
some  collieries,  by  a  regular  system  of  putting  bore-holes  up  in  the roof,  and  thereby  gradually  draining  all  the  gas  from  the  measures. 
In  driving  exploring  works,  large  blowers  are  frequently  met  with 
which  yield  enormous  volumes  of  gas,  sometimes  for  long  periods 
of  time,  and  sometimes  for  smaller  ones.  In  the  former  case,  the 
gases  are  conveyed  to  the  surface  through  pipes  and  burnt ;  while 
in  the  latter  the  district  has  to  be  temporarily  abandoned  until the  outburst  has  exhausted  itself. 
*  On  Experiments  showing  the  Pressure  of  Gas  in  the  /Solid  Coal,  Lindsay Wood,  N.E.I,  xxx.  163. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER  III. 
SEARCH   FOR   COAL. 
Prospecting. — The  preliminary  operations  in  searching  for 
coal  in  new  districts,  consist  in  carefully  examining  surface  indi- 
cations to  determine  the  nature  and  position  of  the  beds  exposed 
in  the  area  under  examination.  A  knowledge  of  geology  is  indis- 
pensable for  such  work.  The  banks  of  streams  and  cuttings 
should  be  closely  examined,  and  all  outcrops  noted  and  laid  down 
on  a  rough  sketch-map.  Rocks  and  fossils  of  Carboniferous  age afford  the  best  indication  of  the  probable  existence  of  coal,  but  it 
is  not  absolutely  necessary  that  such  should  be  found  at  the  surface, 
nor  is  it  certain  that,  when  they  are  found,  coal  surely  exists  beneath. 
For  instance,  in  this  country,  the  greater  part  of  the  Somerset 
coal-field  is  covered  with  rocks  of  newer  formations  (Lias  and  New 
Red  Sandstone);  while  in  the  north  of  Prance  and  Belgium,  thick 
deposits  of  the  Cretaceous  formation  are  passed  through  before 
reaching  the  Coal  Measures.  Perhaps  the  most  remarkable  instance 
of  the  reversal  of  strata,  is  afforded  at  Drocourt,  in  the  Pas  de 
Calais,  where,  after  sinking  through  the  Cretaceous,  they  passed, 
at  a  depth  of  413  feet,  into  the  Devonian;  and  after  sinking  in 
this  formation  to  a  depth  of  958  feet  from  the  surface,  met  with 
very  disturbed  Coal  Measures,  and  beds  of  coal,  which  were  worked 
for  a  considerable  period.  The  shaft  was  sunk  deeper  and  deeper, 
until,  at  1886  feet,  a  fault  was  reached.  On  passing  through  this, 
the  ordinary  Coal  Measures  of  the  district  were  met  with,  and  are 
now  being  worked.  The  Devonian,  and  first  portion  of  the  Coal 
Measures  met  with,  had  evidently  been  bent  completely  over 
before  the  Cretaceous  was  deposited. 
Boring. — Even  after  the  examination  above  referred  to,  from 
which  the  probable  existence  of  minerals  may  be  reasonably 
inferred,  further  proofs  have  to  be  obtained.  If  outcrops  of  actual 
seams  have  been  found,  a  great  deal  can  be  done  by  sinking 
shallow  pits  or  by  driving  levels.  Indications  at  small  depths 
are,  however,  seldom  conclusive,  especially  as  regards  the  quality 
of  the  coal  seams,  and  the  operation  of  boring  is  generally  re- sorted to. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH  FOR  COAL. 
Choice  of  Site. — For  proving  considerable  areas,  several  holes 
may  be  required,  the  sites  of  which  are  determined  by  the  extent, 
location,  and  general  features  of  the  land  to  be  developed.  The 
preliminary  survey  decides  these  general  features,  but  considera- 
tion has  also  to  be  given  to  the  suitability  of  the  spot  for  the  erec- 
tion of  the  drilling  apparatus  and  for  carrying  on  the  work. 
Various  Appliances  used  in  Boring. — (a)  Bits. — For  shallow holes  in  soft  ground,  the  borer  consists  of  some  heavy  instrument 
of  the  "  scoop "  kind,  the  general  form  being  a  cylinder,  the cutting  edge  having  a  slit  up  its  side  like  a  gimlet.  In  soft,  loose 
ground,  pipes  furnished  with  a  cutting  edge  can  be  driven  down 
by  blows  of  a  heavy  wood  block,  dropped  through  a  considerable 
height.  A  second  pipe,  of  smaller  diameter,  is  lowered  inside  the 
drive-pipe,  and  through  it,  a  strong  stream  of  water  is  forced. 
This  second  pipe  follows  the  cutting-shoe,  and  stirs  up  the  loose material  and  washes  it  to  the  surface. 
This  method  is  largely  used  in  America,  up  to  300  ft.  of  gravel 
being  easily  got  through.  The  pressure  of  water  is  sufficient  to 
force  up  gravel  of  about  J  in.  diameter,  but  if  larger  pieces  than 
this  are  encountered,  they  must  be  chopped  to  pieces. 
For  harder  ground,  bits  of  chisel-shape  have  to  be  employed. 
These  are  suspended  from  rods,  which  are  raised  up  and  dropped 
down,  thereby  chipping  off  small  quantities  of  rock.  The  rods  are 
rotated  after  every  blow,  so  that  the  tool  drops  in  a  different  place each  time. 
The  general  form  of  chisel  employed,  is  that  having  FIG.  8. 
a  straight  edge  (Fig.  8).  The  angle  enclosed  by  the 
cutting  edges  is  variable,  depending  on  the  nature 
of  the  rock.  For  hard  rocks,  a  chisel  with  an  acute 
edge  is  too  likely  to  break;  the  angle  should  not 
exceed  70°.  The  size  of  the  chisel  should  be  carefully measured  before  it  is  lowered  into  the  hole,  as,  if  it  is 
too  wide,  it  will  jam,  while  if  too  small,  the  hole 
will  get  too  narrow.  As  with  all  tools,  the  chisel 
was  formerly  made  of  wrought  iron  tipped  with 
.steel,  but  is  now  universally  constructed  of  steel 
throughout.  For  very  hard  rocks,  a  V-shaped 
•chisel  is  sometimes  employed.  Various  other  shapes 
have  been  tried  from  time  to  time,  but  abandoned, 
•owing  to  the  difficulty  of  sharpening. 
(6)  Rods. — These  may  be  either  of  wood  or  iron,  the  latter 
being  most  common.  Their  usual  size  is  about  i  in.  square,  and 
from  28  ft.  to  36  ft.  long.  Shorter  pieces  for  making  up  lengths 
.are  also  used.  As  the  hole  gets  deeper,  the  thickness  of  rods  has 
to  be  increased.  The  rods  are  provided  with  screwed  and  socket 
ends.  When  first  used,  the  rods  are  not  screwed  completely 
together,  but  only  the  first  three  or  four  threads ;  when  these  get 
worn,  more  turns  are  given,  but  the  ends  of  successive  rods  must 
UNIVERSITY 

--- Page Break ---
20 TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
not  be  brought  close  together,  or  the  concussion  will  cause  the 
threads  to  jam,  and  render  unscrewing  impossible.  The  screws 
for  the  rods  are  cut  left-handed,  and  when  they  begin  to  wear  are 
broken  off  and  fresh  end  pieces  welded  on. 
After  each  blow,  the  rods  and  chisel  are  turned  through  a  small 
angle  by  the  "tiller"  (Fig.  9),  which  is  attached  at  the  surface. To  enable  this  operation  to  be  easily  carried  out,  a  swivel  joint  is 
introduced.  As  the  depth  of  the  hole  slowly  increases  the  rods 
necessarily  descend,  being  allowed  to  do  so  by  the  use  of  an  instru- 
ment called  the  "stirrup"  (Fig.  10),  which  consists  of  a  collar gradually  working  down  a  long  screw.  When  the  limit  of  travel 
of  this  instrument  is  reached,  it  is  detached,  the  screw  run  back 
into  the  position  shown  in  the  illustration,  and  a  short  length  of 
rod  inserted  between  it  and  the  main  length  attached  to  the  tool. 
This  operation  is  repeated  until  sufficient  distance  has  been  bored, 
FIG.  9. FIG.  10 FIG.  ii. 
to  allow  of  the  insertion  of  an  ordinary  length  of  rod,  the  smaller 
making-up  pieces  being  then  removed.  For  unscrewing,  an 
ordinary  spanner  key  is  employed. 
(c)  Guides. — To  keep  the  hole  vertical,  a  guide-block  is  fixed at  the  surface.  This  generally  consists  of  a  block  of  wood 
(a,  Fig.  n)  about  9  feet  long,  through  the  centre  of  which  passes 
a  hole  of  the  same  diameter  as  the  bore-hole.  It  is  fixed  truly 
vertical,  and  secured  by  four  pieces  of  wood  arranged  in  the  form 
of  a  square.  Its  upper  end  is  furnished  with  two  stops  (6,  b) 
turning  around  pins.  A  piece  is  cut  out  of  each  shutter,  leaving 
an  opening  central  with  the  hole,  and  of  a  size  slightly  larger 
than  the  rods,  so  that  when  the  latter  are  in  position  the  space  is 
filled  in.  This  shutter  really  fills  two  purposes,  as  it  prevents 
anything  falling  down  the  bore-hole,  and  also  suspends  the  rods 
during  the  operation  of  unscrewing,  the  hole  through  it  being 
large  enough  to  allow  the  rods  to  pass,  but  not  a  joint. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH  FOR  COAL. 21 
In  deep  holes,  other  guides  are  inserted  in  the  rods  at  regular intervals.     A   common   form   is  that  shown  by  Fig.   12,  which readily  passes  through  water.     Discs  and  other 
shapes   have   been   abandoned,  as   even   where  FIG.  12.    FIG.  13. water-ways  are  left  through  them,  they  set  up 
eddies  in  the  water  filling  the  bore-hole,,  wearing away  the  sides,  and  causing  them  to  fall  in,  if the  rock  is  at  all  soft. 
(d)  Clearing  Instruments. — When  a  sufficient amount  of  cutting  has  been  done,  the  debris  which has  accumulated  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole  is 
removed  by  the  "  sludger"  (Fig.  13),  which  con- sists of  a  tube  from  4  to  6  feet  long,  having  a 
valve  at  the  bottom,  either  of  the  ball  or  flap- 
door  type.     The  removal  is  usually  done  with  a 
rope,  sometimes  a  few  lengths  of  rods  being  added 
to  give  weight.     When  the  sludger  reaches  the 
bottom, it  should  be  picked  up  and  dropped  several 
times,  before  raising  to  the  surface.   For  deep  and 
large  bore-holes,  a  superior  class  of  sludger  is 
employed,   having,  in  addition  to  the   valve  at 
the  bottom,  a  piston  working  in  the  barrel  portion.     When  this 
piston  is  drawn  up,  it  sucks-in  the  slime. 
(e)  Levers. — The  most  general  way  of  working  the  rods  in  per- cussive boring,  is  to  attach  them  to  the  shorter  arm  of  a  lever 
(Fig.  14),  the  longer  end  of 
which  receives  an  up-and- 
down  motion ;  as  previously 
mentioned,  the  rods  are  sus- 
pended by  a  swivel,  and  are 
turned  by  the  bore-master after  each  blow.  Where 
manual  labour  is  employed, 
two  or  more  smooth  cross- 
bars are  attached  to  the 
longer  arm  of  the  lever,  so  that  more  men  are  able  to  work  at 
it.  With  cross-pieces  8  feet  long,  six  men  can  work  on  each side.  For  deep  holes,  manual  labour  is  quite  out  of  place,  and 
the  long  end  of  the  lever  is  depressed  at  intervals,  either  by  large 
teeth  on  a  revolving  wheel  driven  by  steam,  or,  preferably,  by 
directly  connecting  it  with  the  piston-rod  of  a  cylinder. 
GO  Spring  Pole. — In  our  coal  districts,  the  vibratory  movement is  often  given  to  the  rods  by  the  use  of  the  spring  bar,  which 
consists  of  a  wooden  pole  having  one  end  fixed  to  the  ground,  a 
fulcrum  placed  further  on,  and  the  rods  attached  to  the  other  end. 
The  blow  is  struck  by  depressing  the  beam,  the  rods  being  raised 
by  the  elasticity  of  it.  The  lengths  of  the  parts  on  each  side  of 
fulcrum  are  usually  i  :  3  or  5 .  For  shallow  holes,  the  axis  may 

--- Page Break ---
22  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
be  fixed,  but  for  deeper  ones  it  must  be  movable.  An  elabora- 
tion of  this  method  consists  in  the  employment  of  two  spring 
poles.  The  first  is  from  60  to  70  feet  long,  fastened  at  one  end 
(Fig.  15),  and  at  |  of  its  length FIG.  J5-  from  the  fixed  point  it  rests  on an  upright.  To  the  other  end, 
are  fixed  two  cross-bars  which  tho 
workmen  press  down  on  to  a 
second  springpole,  thus  producing 
a  dancing  movement.  Between  the  upright  and  the  cross  beams  is 
attached  a  hook,  from  which  the  boring  tools  are  hung  in  the usual  manner. 
(g)  Frames. — In  order  to  enable  the  rods  to  be  raised  perpen- dicularly, a  frame  of  three  shear  legs  is  erected  at  the  surface,  to 
which  a  pulley  is  attached  at  the  top,  one  of  the  shear  legs  having 
steps  on  it  so  that  this  may  be  easily  reached.  For  shallow  holes, 
a  windlass  supplies  motive  power,  but  in  larger  holes  a  steam 
engine  and  drum  is  employed.  To  save  labour  in  unscrewing  the 
rods,  it  is  advisable  that  the  frame  should  be  made  as  high  as 
possible,  so  that  a  long  length  of  rods  may  be  raised  at  a  time. 
This  is  done  in  the  following  manner  : — The  stops  (b,  Fig.  n)  are 
opened,  and  a  hook  (Figs.  16  and  17),  at  the 
FIGS.  1 6  AND  17.  end  of  the  rope,  is  placed  beneath  a  joint  in 
the  rods,  these  being  then  detached  from  the 
end  of  the  lever.  The  rope  is  then  hoisted  up 
until  the  limit  in  height  is  reached,  when  the 
stops  are  closed  beneath  the  nearest  joint,  and 
the  rods  above  that  joint  unscrewed  and  re- 
moved. This  operation  is  repeated  until  all 
are  withdrawn.  The  sludger  is  then  lowered, 
either  by  the  same  rope,  or,  if  the  boring  is  a 
large  one,  by  a  second  one  passing  over  another  pulley  lower  down 
the  frame.  After  clearing  out  the  debris,  the  rods  are  replaced  by  a 
reversal  of  these  operations.  One  point  must  be  specially  noted  : 
the  rods  when  not  in  use  should  never  be  stood  on  end,  but  always 
suspended. 
Devices  employed  to  meet  Difficulties  of  Deep  Boring. — 
As  the  depth  of  holes  increases,  a  large  number  of  difiiculties 
arise,  the  greatest  one  being  the  weight  of  the  rods  themselves. 
Hods  i  in.  square  weigh  about  i  ton  for  every  200  yards.  In  deep 
holes,  not  only  does  this  great  weight  injure  the  screw  joints, 
alter  the  structure  of  the  iron,  and  break  the  tool  which  receives 
the  blow,  but  it  sets  up  excessive  vibration  in  the  rods,  injures  the 
sides  of  the  hole,  and  accumulates  a  mass  of  broken  material  above 
the  tool,  which  often  leads  to  rupture  when  an  attempt  is  made 
to  withdraw  it.  To  overcome  these  disadvantages  several  methods 
are  employed. 
(a)  Lighter  Hods.—  Hollow  iron  rods  were  first  suggested,  the 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH   FOR  COAL. 
FIGS.  1 8,  19,  20. 
weight  of  these  for  the  same  strength  as  solid  ones  being  in  the  ratio 
of  i  to  1.35.  They  were,  however,  found  to  be  too  expensive. 
Wooden  rods  were  then  introduced.  They  possess  certain  advan- 
tages over  iron,  as  not  only  are  they  specifically  lighter,  but,  when 
the  bore-hole  contains  water,  as  their  size  is  also  greater,  a  larger 
volume  of  water  is  displaced.  They  also  fit  the  hole  tightly,  and do  not  rattle  about  from  side  to  side  like  iron  ones.  When  a 
rupture  occurs  with  iron  rods,  the  large  weight  dropping  down, 
causes  other  breakages  and  the  bending  of  rods  in  the  hole,  often 
rendering  it  a  most  difficult  matter  to  get  them  out.  On  the 
other  hand,  when  a  break- down  occurs  with  wooden  rods,  there 
is  generally  only  one  fracture.  The  great  objection,  however,  to 
their  employment,  is  the  large  diameter  of  hole  required,  owing  to 
the  necessity  of  using  rods  2  to  3  in.  square  for  shallow  depths. 
For  larger  and  deeper  holes,  this  objec- tion is  removed,  and  such  rods  have 
been  largely  employed  in  Canada  and on  the  Continent. 
(b)  Free-falling  Cutters. — The  great- est advance  made  in  percussive  boring, 
was  undoubtedly  the  introduction  of 
what  are  known  as  "  free-falling  cut- 
ters." By  their  use,  vibration  and shocks  in  main  rods  are  practically 
avoided,  the  only  portion  of  the  appa- ratus that  is  really  let  fall  being  the 
boring  tool  itself,  and  as  much  of  the 
apparatus  as  is  necessary  to  give  weight to  the  blow. 
The  tool  designed  by  Kind  has  been 
largely  employed.  It  consists  of  two 
fangs  or  pincers  (a,  a',  Fig.  18),  work- 
ing about  centres  6,  b'.  These  fangs are  enclosed  at  their  upper  extremity 
by  a  collar  c,  connected  to  a  circular 
disc  of  leather  c7,  through  a  rod  e; 
at  their  lower  end  they  grip,  dur- 
ing certain  stages  of  the  operation, 
that  part,  f,  of  the  rods  to  which  the tool  is  attached.  As  shown  in  the 
illustration,  the  rods  are  making  their  upward  stroke,  and  the 
pressure  of  water  in  the  bore-hole  depresses  the  leather  disc,  pushes 
the  collar  c  down  on  the  fangs,  and  causes  them  to  retain  their 
hold  of  the  lower  part  of  the  rods  carrying  the  tool.  When  the 
limit  of  the  up  stroke  is  reached,  a  sudden  change  of  motion  takes 
place  in  the  opposite  direction,  causing  the  pressure  of  water  on 
the  underside  of  disc  d  to  lift  the  collar,  thus  opening  the  fangs. 
The  tool  and  lower  rods  fall  quickly  and  deliver  their  blow,  while  the 

--- Page Break ---
24  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
long  length  of  upper  rods  follow  at  a  slower  spe  3d.  When  this  has 
descended  to  the  proper  point,  a  slight  upward  motion,  producing 
pressure  on  the  upper  side  of  the  leather  disc,  causes  it  to  descend 
with  the  rod  e  and  collar  c,  and  so  close  the  fangs. 
The  above  apparatus  reduced  in  a  marked  manner  the  break- 
ages of  tools  and  rods,  and  consequently  the  cost  of  boring.  It  is, 
however,  inapplicable  in  dry  and  narrow  holes,  is  somewhat  com- 
plicated, and  causes  the  water  to  form  streams,  whilst  the  slime  from 
the  hole  collects  on  the  disc,  and  prevents  it  from  acting. 
Numerous  other  complicated  appliances  have  been  used  from 
time  to  time,  but  practically  have  all  given  way  to  the  sliding  joint 
invented  by  (Eynhausen.  As  before,  the  rods  are  divided  into 
two  lengths,  but  a  sliding  joint  forms  the  connection  between 
them.  The  two  lengths  a  and  b  (Figs.  19  and  20)  are  raised  to- 
gether and  also  fall  together,  until  the  lower  part  6,  to  which  the 
tool  is  attached,  strikes  on  the  bottom  of  the  hole,  when  its  motion 
is  arrested.  The  upper  part,  however,  continues  its  downward 
movement  (the  collar  sliding  over  the  stationary  lower  rods), 
and  is  gradually  brought  to  rest  within  the  limit  of  length  of  the 
slide  by  an  elastic  stop  placed  beneath  the  rocking  lever  at  the 
surface.  By  this  means,  the  shocks  received  by  the  tool  and  lower 
rods  do  not  reach  the  upper  part. 
Obtaining  Cores. — It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  satis- 
factory samples  of  the  strata  cut  through  should  be  obtained. 
FIG.  21.  With  the  tools  already  described,  everything  is  chopped 
to  small  pieces,  and  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  contents 
of  the  sludger  very  closely,  to  determine  what  material  the 
hole  is  passing  through.  In  order  to  obtain  more  definite 
results  with  percussive  boring,  a  tool  is  put  down,  consist- 
ing of  four  or  five  chisels,  arranged  round  a  cylinder  (Fig. 
21),  which  cuts  away  an  annular  space,  leaving  a  central core.  A  second  tool  is  then  lowered  down  to  the  bottom 
of  the  hole,  and  a  cutting  tooth  at  the  base  is  pressed 
inwards  by  means  of  a  spring.  This  tool  is  revolved  several 
times,  until  the  greater  part  of  the  foundation  of  the  core 
is  cut  away,  and  then  by  a  sharp  jerk  the  whole  is 
detached,  and  brought  carefully  to  the  surface. 
Special  Methods  of  Boring. — The  greatest  change 
which  has  taken  place  in  percussive  boring  is  that  due  to 
suspending  the  tools  by  a  rope,  in  place  of  the  rigid  bar. 
To  the  Chinese,  belongs  the  credit  of  first  employing  this 
means.     The  shank  of  the  tool  consists  of  a  heavy  cylinder 
of  iron  attached  to  a  rope  of  bamboo  fibres,  the  torsion  of  which 
is  sufficient  to  rotate  the  tool  after  each  blow.     Motion  is  com- 
municated at  the  surface  by  means  of  a  spring  pole. 
(a)  Mather  and  Plait's  system. — In  this  method,*  the   tool    is 
*  We    Soring.     F.  Mather,  Proc.  Inst.  Mec.  Eng.  ,1869,  p.  278. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH   FOR   COAL. 
FIG.  22. 
suspended  from  a  flat  hempen  rope,  but  the  system  differs  from 
all  others  in  the  measures  employed  for  rotating  the  tool,  and 
giving  it  the  necessary  percussive  action.  The  rope  to  which  the 
tool  is  attached  (a,  Fig.  2 2)  passes  over 
a  pulley  b,  over  the  hole,  and  thence  is 
directed  by  a  guide  pulley  c  to  the  drum 
of  a  winding  engine  worked  by  steam 
power.  This  rope  can  be  clamped  at 
an  intermediate  point  by  means  of  the 
clutch  d.  The  up  and  down  motion  is 
obtained  by  connecting  the  pulley  b  to 
the  piston  rod  of  a  small  vertical  cylin- der e.  As  the  rope  is  clamped  on  one 
side  at  the  point  d,  when  the  piston 
moves  upwards  it  carries  the  tool  and 
rope  hanging  in  the  hole,  with  it,  and allows  it  to  fall  on  the  return  stroke. 
As  the  hole  deepens,  the  rope  on  the 
drum  is  gradually  let  out.  A  self-act- 
ing valve  motion,  worked  by  tappets 
moved  by  the  piston  rod,  is  employed, 
and  the  length  of  stroke  can  be  varied 
by  altering  the  position  of  the  tappets. 
Before  the  valves  can  be  opened,  it  is  necessary  that  the  piston 
rod  should  move;  a  small  quantity  of  steam  is  therefore  kept 
continually  blowing  on  to  the  underside  of  the  piston,  through  the 
small  port  f.  As  the  exhaust  port  is  situated  a  little 
higher  up  the  cylinder,  this  really  serves  an  additional 
purpose,  as  it  interposes  a  cushion  of  steam  between 
the  piston  and  bottom  of  cylinder,  preventing  any 
chance  of  the  latter  receiving  a  blow  on  the  return stroke. 
The  boring  head  (Fig.  23)  consists  of  an  iron  bar 
about  8  feet  long,  having  a  cast-iron  boss  a  at  the bottom,  into  which  the  cutting  tools  are  secured  with 
taper  shanks  b,  so  as  to  be  firm  in  working,  but  easily 
taken  out  for  sharpening.  Two  guides  are  employed 
to  keep  the  tool  perpendicular ;  one,  c,  being  a  plain 
cylinder,  the  other,  d,  having  ribs  of  saw-tooth  form arranged  round  its  circumference.  These  ribs  have  a 
long  pitch,  and  as  they  bear  against  the  sides  of  the  bore- hole, assist  in  turning  the  tool.  Each  alternate  plate  has 
the  ribs  inclined  in  opposite  directions,  so  that  one  half  are 
acting  to  turn  the  bar  in  rising,  and  the  other  half  to  turn 
it  in  the  same  direction  in  falling.  The  definite  rota-  " tion  of  the  tool  is  effected  by  keying  two  cast-iron  collars, 
e  andy,  on  to  the  bar,  about  12  inches  apart.  The  top  side  of  the 
lower  collar,  and  the  bottom  side  of  the  upper  collar,  have  deep 
FIG.  23. 

--- Page Break ---
26 TEXT.BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
ratchet  teeth  cut  on  them.  Intermediate  between  these  two,  and 
sliding  freely  on  the  bar,  is  a  third  collar  g,  having  ratchet  teeth  cut 
on  both  its  faces,  but  those  on  the  upper  side  are  set  half  a  tooth 
in  advance  of  those  on  the  lower  side.  A  wrought-iron  hoop  is 
attached  to  this  third  collar,  through  which  the  bore-head  is 
attached  to  the  hook  and  shackle  shown  in  Fig.  22.  When  the 
tool  is  dropped  and  the  blow  delivered,  the  teeth  of  the  collar  g 
fall  on  to  those  of  the  bottom  collar  e,  and,  through  the  teeth  not 
being  opposite  each  other,  receive  half  a  twist  backwards ;  on 
commencing  to  lift  again,  immediately  g  engages  withy,  a  further 
twist  backwards  of  half  a  tooth  takes  place,  so  that  the  flat  rope 
is  actually  twisted  through  the  space  of  one  tooth.  As  soon  as 
the  lift  takes  place,  it  untwists  itself,  and  so  rotates  the  tool. 
The  sludger  is  furnished  with  a  clack  at  the  bottom,  and  inside 
is  fitted  a  bucket  having  an  indiarubber  valve  on  the  top  side. 
The  boring  head  can  be  lowered  at  a  speed  of  500  feet  per  minute, 
and  raised  at  the  rate  of  300  feet  per  minute.  The  percussive 
action  gives  24  blows  per  minute,  and  if  this  rate  be  continued  in 
New  Red  Sandstone  or  similar  strata,  about  6  inches  will  be 
drilled  in  10  minutes,  when  it  becomes  necessary  to  send  down 
the  sludger,  which  is  effected  at  the  same  speed  as  the  tool,  but  it 
only  remains  down  about  2  minutes. 
(b)  American  System. — The  development  of  the  oil  industry  in 
the  United  States  required  rapid  boring,  and  considerable  im- 
provements under  this  head  have  been  effected.  The 
whole  operation  has  been  elaborately  described  by 
Mr.  J.  F.  Carll.*  The  success  of  the  operation seems  to  be  due  more  to  the  perfection  of  small 
details  than  to  any  startling  novelty.  The  first  thing 
done  is  to  erect  shear  legs  and  fix  the  wooden  con- 
ductor box  previously  described,  this  being  set  truly 
perpendicular,  and  carried  down  a  few  inches  into 
the  bed  rock  to  fasten  it  securely.  Should  the  bed 
rock  lie  at  a  considerable  depth  beneath  the  surface, 
the  wooden  conductor  is  replaced  by  a  wrought-iron 
stand  pipe,  which  is  carried  down  by  the  method 
already  alluded  to.  The  engine  furnishing  power 
is  regulated  and  controlled  from  the  boring  stage. 
The  tools  are  attached  to  a  rope,  and  an  instrument 
called  a  u  temper  screw  "  (a,  Fig.  24)  connects  the 
rope  to  the  lever  through  the  "  stirrup  "  b.  The lever  receives  an  oscillating  movement  from  a  con- 
necting rod  and  crank,  turned  by  the  band  wheel. 
The  length  of  stroke  can  be  varied  by  adjusting  a 
collar-pin  in  any  one  of  several  holes  placed  in  the crank  at  different  distances  from  the  centre  of  its  shaft.  Separate 
*  Second  Geo.  Survey  of  Pennsylvania,  Eeport  I3. 
FIG.  24. 

--- Page Break ---
SEAECH   FOE,   COAL.  27 
drums  are  provided  both  for  winding  out  the  drilling  rope  and  the 
sludger,  these  being  driven  by  gearing  thrown  in  and  out  by 
clutches.  The  effective  cutting  blow  of  the  tools  is  given  by  the 
weight  of  the  chisel,  the  auger  stem,  and  the  lower  link  of  the  "jars." 
The  jars  is  a  modification  of  QEynhausen's  slide,  arranged  in  such a  manner  that  the  auger  stem  and  bit  are  given  a  decided  jar  on 
the  up  stroke,  so  that  the  bit  is  loosened,  in  case  it  has  a  tendency 
to  wedge  fast  in  the  hole.  As  the  tools  rise  and  fall  with  the 
rocking  lever,  they  are  constantly  rotated  by  hand,  by  a  short 
lever  inserted  in  the  rings  of  the  temper  screw,  and  as  the  hole 
deepens  and  the  screw  of  the  stirrup  reaches  its  limit,  the  clamps 
(c)  of  the  temper  screw  are  slacked,  and  a  short  length  of  rope 
payed  out. 
The  withdrawing  of  tools  is  carried  out  by  first  taking  up  all 
the  slack  rope,  then  loosing  the  clamps,  throwing  the  connecting  rod 
out  of  gear  with  the  band  wheel,  and  lifting  up  the  lever  out  of  the 
way.  The  tools  are  then  run  up,  but  are  stopped  when  the  bit 
reaches  the  level  of  boring-floor,  where  it  is  loosened  by  large wrenches.  The  tools  are  then  lifted  up  clear  of  the  hole,  and  the 
rope  disconnected  from  the  steam  engine,  the  bit  being  removed 
and  replaced  by  a  sharp  one.  While  this  has  being  going  on,  the 
sand  pump,  or  sludger,  has  been  run  up  and  down  once  or  twice 
by  the  friction  gear,  &c.,  already  described. 
The  first  60  feet  cannot  be  drilled  in  the  ordinary  way  just  de- 
scribed, this  being  done  by  the  method  called  "  spudding."  The anger  stem  and  bit  are  attached  by  the  rope  socket  to  a  short 
piece  of  cable  (i5otoi6o  feet  long),  the  other  end  being  passed  over 
the  pulley  at  the  top  of  the  frame,  round  another  wheel,  and  then  a 
few  turns  taken  round  one  of  the  drum  shafts.  The  engine  is 
started,  and  one  of  the  drillers  takes  his  stand  near  the  drum, 
with  the  loose  end  of  the  cable  in  his  hands.  A  slight  pull  on 
this,  tightens  the  loose  coils  on  the  drum  shaft,  which  is  rapidly 
revolving ;  the  tools  are  raised,  the  rope  is  immediately  slackened, 
and  the  tools  drop  in  the  hole  ;  another  slight  pull  is  given,  and 
so  on,  until  sufficient  depth  is  attained  to  enable  the  drillers  to 
replace  this  motion  by  that  of  the  rocking  lever. 
This  method  has  been  introduced  into  England,  and  was  used 
in  September  1886  for  boring  for  salt  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Middlesbrough.  Mr.  J.  Daglish*  stated  that  it  proved  exceedingly satisfactory,  the  progress  having  been  remarkably  rapid.  An 
averse  rate  of  progress  of  63  feet  per  day  was  attained,  with  a 
maximum  of  5  feet  per  hour. 
(c)  Diamond  Boring. — This  method  differs  from  the  others in  the  fact,  that  the  tool  receives  a  rapid  rotary  motion  instead  of 
a  percussive  one.  It  consists  in  placing  a  series  of  small  diamonds 
*  Presidential  Address,  N.E.I,  xxxv.  225 

--- Page Break ---
28 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
around  the  lower  edge  of  an  annular  tube  (Figs.  25  and  26)  called 
the  "  crown."  This  part  is  composed  of  soft  wrought  iron,  in which  the  diamonds  are  bedded,  the  edges  of  the  holes  being knocked  down  to  keep  the  stones  in  position.  The  common 
FIGS.  25  AND  26. 
CO 
s\>lit wedge 
CROWN 
variety  of  black  diamond  (bort)  is  employed,  as  the  cost  of  the 
rare  gems  would  be  too  great.  The  crown  is  provided  with  a 
series  of  vertical  grooves  (a  a,  Fig.  26)  round  its  circumference,  to 
allow  water  to  pass  from  the  centre  outwards,  and  it  is  made 
slightly  larger  in  diameter  than  the  main  boring-piece,  so 
FIG.  27.  that  the  latter  can  revolve  freely  in  the  hole.  The  main 
boring-piece  consists  of  a  wrought-iron  cylinder  (Fig.  27) 
in  two  pieces,  the  upper  one  being  open  at  the  top.  In 
the  centre  of  this  cylinder  is  placed  a  horizontal  disc  of 
metal,  a,  which  divides  it  into  two  portions,  and  also 
serves  as  a  connection  to  which  wrought-iron  pipes,  b, 
are  screwed.  These  pipes  are  carried  to  the  surface,  and 
are  connected  by  mitre  gearing  to  a  steam  engine,  this 
giving  the  rotary  motion  to  the  tool.  A  stream  of  water 
under  pressure  is  brought  down  the  centre  of  these  pipes, 
passes  into  the  lower  chamber  c,  on  to  the  bottom  of 
the  hole,  and  escapes  by  the  side  of  the  crown  through 
the  waterways  already  referred  to.  So  long  as  the  water 
is  circulating,  the  debris  is  carried  away  upwards,  but 
as  soon  as  the  pressure  is  taken  off,  the  slime  would  fall 
between  the  sides  of  the  bore-hole  and  cylinder  and  jam 
it.  This  is  the  object  of  making  the  top  piece  open. 
All  the  falling  debris  settles  in  the  space  ddf  (Fig  27), 
around  the  water  delivery  pipes. 
A  cylindrical  core  is  produced,  which  is  removed  in 
the  following  manner  :     A  circular  split  band  of  iron, 
with  vertical  ribs,  is  placed  inside  the  lower  portion  of 
the  boring  tool  immediately  above  the  crown  (Fig.  25), 
the  surface  on  which  it  slides  being  an  inverted  cone. 
In  boring,  the  core  readily  passes  upwards,  as  it  can  slip  through 
the  split  ring,  but  when  the  boring  tool  is  raised,  the  core  drags 
with  it  the  split  ring,  and  gradually  forces  it  on  to  the  smaller 
J 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH   FOR   COAL. 
29 
FIG.  28. 
diameter  of  the  cone,  until  the  pressure  is  sufficient  to  cause  the 
core  to  break  off,  and  be  lifted. 
Considerable  improvements  have  taken  place  in  this  method  of 
boring  during  the  past  few  years.  The  usual  practice  is  now  to  pro- 
vide separate  machinery  for  pumping,  and  rotating  and  raising  the 
rods,  thus  dividing  and  minimising  the  risk  of  breakages.  The  usual 
method  of  feeding  the  drill  forward,  is  to  allow  the  weight  of  the  rods 
in  the  hole  to  do  it,  but  as  the  pressure  exerted  would  be  too  much  if 
full  weight  was  put  on,  part  of  it  is  taken  oft' by  counterbalancing.  A  decided  improve- 
ment on  this,  is  the  hydraulic  feed  of  the 
Sullivan  Prospecting  Co.,  which  operates 
as  follows  :  a  (Fig.  28)  is  the  hydraulic 
cylinder  with  its  piston  b,  and  hollow  piston 
rod  c.  Connection  to  the  force  pump  is 
made  at  the  tee  d,  and  to  the  exhaust  at  e. 
The  inlet  valves  are  numbered  i  and  2,  and 
the  outlet  ones,  3  and  4.  When  i  and  3  are 
open  and  2  and  4  closed,  the  piston  moves 
downwards,  but  when  2  and  4  are  open  and 
i  and  3  closed,  the  motion  takes  place  in  an 
upward  direction.  To  the  upper  end  of  the 
piston  rod,  is  screwed  the  thrust  plate  f9 
through  which  pass  three  stud  pins  (not 
shown  in  illustration)  screwed  into  another 
thrust  plate  g.  Between  these,  are  two  sets 
of  ball  bearings,  one  set  on  each  side  of  the  collar  h,  which  is 
fixed  to  the  drive  rod  i.  To  the  opposite  end  of  this  drive  rod 
is  secured,  by  means  of  an  ordinary  chuck,  the  wrought-iron 
pipes  to  which  the  drilling  cylinder  (Fig.  27)  is  attached,  so  that 
the  collar  h  transmits  the  vertical  motion  of  the  hydraulic  piston 
to  the  drilling  crown. 
The  advantages  of  the  hydraulic  feed  are  :  economy  of  time, 
saving  of  diamonds,  and  accuracy  and  safety  in  operation.  The 
amount  of  water  admitted  to,  or  released  from,  the  hydraulic 
cylinder  can  be  varied  to  any  degree,  by  simply  adjusting  the 
inlet  and  outlet  valves,  and  as  the  feed  depends  entirely  on  that 
amount,  it  follows  that  it  can  be  adjusted  to  the  greatest  nicety. 
The  hydraulic  feed  allows  the  drill  to  run  with  slightly  slower 
speed  on  suddenly  entering  hard  rock,  when  the  attendant  can  at 
once  give  the  amount  of  feed  the  machine  will  take  without  injury 
to  the  diamonds.  As  the  water  escaping  from  below  the  feed 
piston,  is  throttled  by  the  outlet  valves  while  feeding  down,  and 
led  up  above  the  level  of  the  bottom  of  the  piston,  it  follows  that 
the  water  cannot  escape  from  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder  faster 
than  it  enters  at  the  top.  Hence  the  lower  part  of  the  cylinder  is 
always  full  of  water,  and  in  case  a  cavity  is  struck,  the  weight  of 
the  drill  rods  hanging  on  the  piston  is  supported  by  this  body  of 

--- Page Break ---
30  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
water,  which  is  incompressible,  and  entirely  prevents  the  dropping 
of  the  rods.  When  a  cavity  is  struck,  the  hydraulic  feed  continues 
downwards  as  regularly  as  in  drilling  through  hard  rock. 
An  important  detail  of  this  hydraulic  drill  is  the  friction 
bearing  (kk,  Fig.  28);  one  set  of  balls  sustains  the  weight  of  the 
rods  as  they  hang  in  the  drill  chuck,  the  other  set  sustain  the 
upward  thrust  of  the  rods  in  drilling.  This  device  reduces  to  a 
minimum  the  amount  of  work  lost  in  friction,  leaving  the  whole 
power  of  the  engines  to  be  devoted  to  drilling. 
The  great  advantage  and  superiority  of  the  diamond  boring 
system,  is  the  perfect  cores  obtained  from  rocks  of  moderate 
hardness,  which  enable  an  accurate  section  of  the  rocks  passed 
through  to  be  easily  constructed.  In  ordinary  soft  measures 
(such  as  coal),  owing  to  the  rotary  and  vibratory  action  of  the 
bore  tube  breaking  off  the  core,  which  falls  to  the  bottom  of  the 
hole  and  becomes  ground  into  mud,  the  indications  afforded  by 
this  method  in  such  ground  are  scarcely  better  than  the  slime  and 
debris  removed  by  sludgers  in  ordinary  boring.  The  breakage 
of  the  core  has  lately  been  obviated  to  a  considerable  extent  by 
the  boring  of  larger  holes,  the  larger  amount  of  core  inside  the 
crown  being  better  able  to  stand  shocks  than  the  smaller  ones  of 
the  earlier  borings. 
A  further  improvement,  by  means  of  which  the  amount  of  core 
extracted  has  been  considerably  increased  when  boring  through 
coal  and  soft  rocks,  is  described  by  Mr.  James  Barrow,*  the 
boring  tool  being  so  constructed  that  a  core  of  the  strata  can  be 
drawn  up  intact.  This  is  accomplished  by  the  use  of  an  internal 
stationary  core  tube,  rivetted  to  the  socket  of  the  ordinary  boring 
tube,  an  annular  space  being  provided  between  these  two  parts  for 
the  passage  of  water.  The  crown  on  the  boring  tube  is  stepped, 
to  facilitate  the  cutting  of  the  core,  and  as  the  boring  tube 
revolves,  the  crown  penetrates  through  the  strata,  and  the  core 
enters  the  inner  or  stationary  tube,  which  when  the  bore  rods  are 
raised  is  lifted  with  them  and  extracted.  When  in  operation,  a 
constant  stream  of  water  is  passed  down  the  annular  space 
between  the  exterior  of  the  core  tube  and  the  interior  of  the 
boring  tube. 
This  modified  tube  was  employed  at  Yillefranche  (Allier)  in 
1876,  and  M.  Bauref  states  that  the  success  has  been  com- 
plete, as  the  greater  portion  of  the  cores  were  extracted  in  an  un- 
broken condition.  Not  only  did  they  obtain  a  complete  section 
of  the  rocks  passed  through,  but  they  reduced  the  breakage  and 
grinding  of  cores  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole,  which  so  materially 
increases  the  power  required  for  turning  the  tool  and  augments 
the  amount  of  debris  to  be  removed. 
The  modified  crown  was  put  to  work  on  i2th  Oct.  1876,  when 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xii.  42. 
t  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  2e  S£rie,  xiv.  25. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH   FOE  COAL. 
the  boring  had  reached  1684.7  f66^  from  the  surface,  and  by  the 
5th  of  January  1877,  745.6  feet  had  been  bored,  making  the  total 
depth  from  the  surface,  2430.3  feet.  The  length  of  core  extracted 
was  724.18  feet,  or  97.1  per  cent.,  while  with  the  original  form  of 
crown,  only  39.9  per  cent,  had  been  obtained.  During  the  months 
of  Oct.  and  Nov.  1876,  462.3  feet  was  bored  (from  1609.7  to 
2072.0  feet)  at  an  average  rate  of  11.887  feet  per  working  day, 
operations  being  suspended  part  of  this  time,  while  negotiations 
were  being  entered  into  for  proceeding  deeper  with  the  bore- hole. 
For  very  soft  ground  the  diamond  drill  is  quite  useless,  and 
if  a  hole  is  proceeding  on  that  system,  and  such  ground  is 
encountered,  the  crown  is  removed,  and  percussive  boring  tools 
employed. 
Accidents  in  Boring. — If  it  were  not  for  accidents,  boring 
would  be  a  comparatively  easy  and  rapid  operation.  It  is  in  this 
division  that  the  skill  and  knowledge  of  the  bore-master  is  put  to 
the  test.  The  accidents  themselves,  and  the  tools  employed 
during  such  accidents,  are  so  numerous  and  complicated,  that  a 
full  description  would  be  quite  out  of  place  here,  and  indeed 
impossible  to  give  within  the  limits  of  the  book. 
(a)  Accidents   arising  from   the  Boring  Tools  themselves. — The 
constant  vibration  and  shocks  to  which  the  rods  are  subjected 
tends  to  rapid  deterioration  of  the  iron,  and  frequent  breakages 
follow.     Often   the   workmen   do   not  screw  the  rods  properly 
together,  or  negligently  allow  them  to  drop  down  into  the  bottom 
of  the  hole  during  the  progress  of  unscrewing.     To  lift  up  the 
broken  part  of  the  rods,  a  tool  called  the  "crow's 
foot"  (Fig.  29)  is  employed;  it  is  slipped  down  the       FIGS.  29 hole,  and  twisted  round  until  the  hooked  part  catches        AND  30. 
the  rods. 
If,  however,  the  fracture  had  taken  place  some 
distance  above  a  joint,  when  the  rods  were  raised  the 
top  part  would  catch  the  side  of  the  bore-hole,  as  the 
crow's  foot  itself  only  grips  at  a  joint.  In  such  cases, an  instrument  called  a  "  bell "  is  let  down.  In  one 
form,  this  is  a  bell-shaped  tool  (Fig.  30),  with  a  screw 
cut  on  its  inside.  It  is  dropped  down  on  to  the 
broken  rod,  and  cuts  a  screw  thread  on  it.  All 
screwing  tools  for  removing  broken  rods  are  cut 
with  their  threads  right-handed,  so  as  not  to  dis- 
connect the  joints  of  either  the  rods  to  which 
they  are  attached,  or  those  that  are  broken  in  the  j  II hole. 
If  a  piece  breaks  off  the  chisel,  or  any  small  tool 
or  other  hard  obstruction  drops  in  the  bore-hole, 
an  attempt  is  made  to  extract  it  with  an  im- 
plement resembling  a  double  corkscrew,  called  a  "wadhook 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING 
(Fig  31).  This  is  generally  successful,  but  if  all  attempts  to 
dislodge  the  obstruction  fail,  then  the  only  alternative  is  to  chop 
it  to  pieces.  Mr.  Mather,  in  the  paper  already  referred  to,  states 
that  it  had  been  found  necessary  to  remove  both  the  heavy 
boring  head  and  sludger  employed  in  his  system  of  boring  by  such 
means.  Powerful  magnets  have  also  been  used  with  success. 
In  case  of  a  fracture  in  the  rods  (tubes)  of  the  diamond  system, 
an  ordinary  screw  tap  is  let  down  and  a  thread  cut  inside  the 
broken  pipe ;  in  large  bore-holes,  where  the  diameter  of  the  hole 
is  large  compared  with  that  of  the  tube,  a  crooked  piece  of  iron 
(a,  Fig.  32)  is  placed  at  the  lower  extremity  of  the  tap,  this 
guiding  that  piece  into  the  tube  in  case  it  should  be  leaning 
against  the  side  of  the  hole. 
FIG.  31. FIG.  32. FIG.  33. 
(b)  Accidents  arising  out  of  the  Nature  of  the  Ground. — Unless 
the  strata  passed  through  is  of  considerable  hardness,  the  constant 
jarring  of  the  rods,  and  washing  action  of  fche  water,  soon  causes 
the  sides  to  crumble  and  fall  in  over  the  tool.  A  very  soft  bed 
at  any  point  is  a  source  of  considerable  danger.  In  order  to 
prevent  serious  accidents,  it  becomes  necessary  to  line  or  case  the 
sides  of  the  bore-hole. 
Lining.— This  is  done  by  forcing  down  wrought-iron  tubes  in 
lengths  of  from  10  to  12  feet,  the  connections  between  each 
length  being  made  "  flush  " ;  that  is  to  say,  there  are  not  any projecting  points.  The  lower  tube  is  provided  with  a  steel  cutting 
edge  (a,  Fig.  33). 
For  small  holes,  the  tubes  are  driven  down  by  dropping  a  heavy 
block  on  them,  about  20  to  30  blows  a  minute  being  given.  A 
superior  method  to  this  is  to  use  two  small  jacks,  which  exert 
pressure  equally  and  gradually,  and  avoid  shocks  and  risks  of 
bending. 
For  larger  and  deeper  holes,  hydraulic  presses  are  employed 

--- Page Break ---
SEAECH  FOR  COAL.  33 
having  a  stroke1  sufficient  to  force  down  one  length  of  tube  at  a time.  A  strong  framing  is  built  over  the  hole,  and  beneath  this 
the  presses  are  secured.  Both  the  hydraulic  rams  and  tubes  are 
carefully  guided  in  a  truly  vertical  direction. 
Means  of  Widening  Holes. — When  a  hole  is  cased,  and  boring 
has  to  proceed  further,  it  is  obvious  that  the  diameter  of  the  hole 
must  be  reduced,  as  the  tool  has  now  to  pass  through  the  tubes. 
In  order  to  prevent  this,  before  inserting  the  first  length,  the  hole 
is  slightly  enlarged  by  a  tool  called  a  "  reamer,"  which  is  very 
similar  to  the  "  bell,"  except  that  it  is  provided  with  a  cutting edge  round  its  circumference.  In  diamond  boring,  the  reamer 
consists  of  a  guide  the  size  of  the  drilled  hole,  and  a  face  above  it, 
in  which  diamonds  are  set,  and  which  cuts  away  the  sides  of  the 
hole  above  the  guide. 
After  the  sides  have  been  cased,  and  boring  resumed,  it  fre- 
quently happens  that  additional  casing  is  required  at  some  point 
lower  down  ;  then  either  narrow  tubes  must  be  sunk  through  the 
first  set,  to  reach  the  dangerous  part,  or  the  old  casing  is  removed 
by  one  of  the  methods  described  below,  and  the  hole  rebored  large 
enough  to  take  in  the  original  size  of  tubes.  As  a  rule,  the  latter 
method  is  not  adopted,  except  when  the  bore-hole  has  become  so 
narrow  by  repeated  linings  that  the  first  method  cannot  be  em- 
ployed. 
A  special  tool,  introduced  by  the  Diamond  Boring  Co.,  is  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  James  Barrow.*     It  consists  of  an  undercutting  or expanding  crown,  a  simple  arrangement  set  with  diamonds, 
which  is  lowered  down  through  the  lining  tubes,  and  expanded   FIG. 
directly  it  gets  beneath  them.     In  revolving,  it  cuts  away     34. 
and  enlarges  the  sides  of  the  bore-hole,  after  each  10,  20, 
or  30  feet  had  been  bored  in  advance  with  the  ordinary 
crown.      After  this,  the  lining  fribes  are  lowered  to  the 
bottom,  and  boring  resumed  in  the  ordinary  way.     With 
such  a  tool,  and  the  use  of  hydraulic  presses,  800   lineal 
feet  of  wrought-iron  lining  tubes,  weighing  about  50  tons, have    been    forced   down  a   bore-hole  in   one   continuous 
length. 
Withdrawal  of  Casing. — Eitherwhen  the  hole  is  finished 
and  abandoned,  or  when  inserting  tubes  of  greater  diameter, 
the  lining  has  to  be  removed.  Where  the  friction  is  not 
great,  Kind's  plug  (Fig.  34)  can  be  used.  This  consists  of an  oval  ball  of  wood  slightly  less  in  diameter  than  the  inside 
of  the  tube.  It  is  lowered  down  on  the  rods,  and  a  few 
handfuls  of  sand  or  gravel  thrown  on  the  top.  This  causes 
it  to  bite,  when  the  tubes  can  be  lifted  out. 
Should  the  friction  be  too  great  to  allow  the  casing  to  be 
removed  in  one  length,  it  is  cut  through  by  the  tool  shown  in 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xi.  318. 

--- Page Break ---
34 TEXT-BOOK   OF   GOAL-MINING. 
FIG.  35  AND  36. 
Fig.  35.  This  is  provided  with  a  sharp  cutting  point  a,  pressed 
against  the  side  of  the  tubes  by  a  strong  spring  b.  On  reaching 
the  point  where  the  severance  is  to  be  made,  the  tool  is  revolved 
round  and  round  until  the  lining  is  cut  through, 
when  the  upper  portion  can  either  be  removed 
by  Kind's  plug,  or  by  a  similar  class  of  tool  (Fig. 36)  having  two  spring  clips  a  al,  which  are  pressed 
inside  the  shank  b  so  long  as  lowering  is  taking 
place,  but  which  spring  out  and  catch  beneath 
the  lining,  immediately  the  place  cut  through  is 
reached.  These  clips  cannot  be  forced  aside  in 
the  upward  passage,  and  so  the  casing  is  with- drawn. 
Record  of  Boring. — Exact  records  should  be 
kept  of  the  work  done  each  day,  the  strata  bored 
through,  and  its  thickness.    Each  sludger  full  of 
material  should  be  carefully  examined,  and  sam- 
ples taken  and  kept  for  reference.     These  are 
best  kept  in  small  wooden  boxes  and  labelled. 
The  label  should  note :  place,  date,  depth,  sort 
of  material,  and  any  remarks  necessary.    Memory 
should  never  be  relied  upon.     Neglect  of  these  precautions  has 
resulted  in  the  loss  of  considerable  sums  of  money,  owing  to  mis- information, at  a  subsequent  date. 
Cost  of  Boring. — This  depends  in  a  great  measure  on  the depth  to  which  the  hole  is  carried.  A  common  form  of  tender  is, 
that  the  price  per  foot  increases  at  a  certain  figure  for  every  stated 
increase  in  the  depth.  As  a  result,  one  foot  at  the  bottom  of  a 
hole  may  be  more  expensive  than  several  feet  at  the  top.  In  view 
of  this  fact,  when  commencing  a  boring,  a  shaft  is  generally  sunk 
down  some  distance,  and  the  bore-hole  started  from  the  bottom. 
The  low  rate  is  then  counted  from  the  shaft  bottom,  not  from  the 
surface,  so  that,  by  sinking  the  pit,  a  length  equal  to  its  depth  is 
cut  off  from  the  bottom  of  the  bore-hole,  which  would  be  at  the 
highest  rate.  It  is  stated  *  that  the  bore-hole  at  Sperenberg, 4170  feet  deep,  made  with  rigid  rods  and  percussive  action,  cost 
415.  per  foot ;  while  an  average  of  a  series  of  37  rope-borings,  with 
depths  varying  from  80-1300  feet,  cost  415.  $d.  per  foot.  Mr.  T. J.  Bewick  f  states  that  the  first  hole  at  Middlesbrough,  bored  by 
Mather  and  Platt's  system,  was  1200  feet  deep,  and  cost  about ;£8  65.  &d.  per  foot.  It  is  nearly  impossible  to  compare  the 
several  systems,  as  the  conditions  may  be  quite  different  in  each 
instance.  In  ordinary  strata,  the  Diamond  Drilling  Company  will 
contract  to  put  down  a  hole,  commencing  at  the  surface  with  a 
diameter  of  9  in.  at  a  price  of  155.  per  foot  for  the  first  500  feet, 
and  from  500-1000  feet,  255.  per  foot,  =  205.  per  foot  for  1000 
*  .N.E.I,  xxx, t  Ibid.  xxx.  98. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH  FOR   COAL.  35 
feet ;  the  company  providing  all  labour  and  tackle  (except  lining 
tubes,  should  such  be  required),  fuel,  carriage,  and  fares ;  but  the 
employer  has  to  provide,  gratis,  on  the  site  of  the  boring,  about  i  o 
to  12  gallons  of  water  per  minute  for  engine  and  other  purposes. 
This  price  would  not  vary  much  even  if  the  hole  was  of  smaller diameter. 
Mr.  H.  M.  Chance  *  states  that  the  average  cost  of  drilling  a well,  by  the  American  rope  system,  in  the  oil  country  in  1878 
(including  the  cost  of  the  plant)  for  a  i5oo-feet  hole,  was  ^403, or  a  little  over  6s.  per  foot.  As  prices  were  at  their  lowest  ebb 
then,  this  estimate  should  be  increased  about  20  %  to  make  it 
available  for  comparison  with  other  methods  in  1882  ;  but  as  the 
plant  would  have  some  value  when  the  operations  were  concluded, 
he  states  that  the  net  cost  of  a  i5oo-feet  prospecting  hole  (in 
1882)  would  be  .£380,  or  about  55.  per  foot.  At  the  same  time, 
he  points  out  that  the  cost  of  drilling  holes  by  this  method  in  the 
anthracite  regions  will  be  very  much  greater  than  that  shown  by 
the  above  figures,  because  the  rocks  are  much  harder,  and  are  in- 
clined at  considerable  angles  from  the  horizontal.  Mr.  R.  A.  S. 
Redmayne  f  states  that  the  bore-hole  put  down  by  this  system  at Middlesbrough  for  salt  cost  85.  per  foot,  the  depth  reached  being 
1 2 10  feet,  and  the  diameter  8  in. 
Surveying  Bore-holes. — The  great  difficulty  in  boring  is  to keep  the  holes  truly  vertical,  and,  in  spite  of  all  efforts  to  the 
contrary,  crooked  bores  are  common,  especially  where  the  beds 
are  inclined.  No  rules  can  be  given ;  the  only  thing  to  be  done 
is  to  exercise  the  greatest  care.  Unfortunately,  bore-holes,  by  all the  methods,  are  liable  to  deviate  from  the  perpendicular,  the 
diamond  drill,  which  was  assumed  to  always  bore  a  perfectly 
straight  hole,  being  no  better  than  any  of  the  other  systems. 
However,  if  an  accurate  survey  be  made,  a  crooked  hole  gives  jusfc 
as  valuable  information  as  a  straight  one. 
In  the  method  devised  by  Mr.  E.  F.  Macgeorge,|  clear  glass 
phials,  filled  with  a  hot  solution  of  gelatine,  and  each  containing 
in  suspension  a  magnetic  needle  and  a  very  delicate  plumb-bob, 
are  lowered  into  the  bore-hole,  and  allowed  to  remain  there  until 
the  gelatine  sets,  when  they  are  withdrawn,  and  by  means  of  a 
special  instrument  the  angles  of  the  compass  and  the  plumb-bob 
are  noted.  Another  suggestion  §  is  to  lower  into  the  bore-hole 
glass  cylinders  containing  hydrofluoric  acid,  which  etches  a  line  on 
the  glass.  Both  these  methods  are  reviewed  by  Mr.  B.  H.  Brough,|| 
who  gives  a  full  description  of  the  instruments  employed  and  the 
way  of  using  them. 
*  Second  Geo.  Sur.  Pennsylvania,  Report  A.O.,  p.  39. f  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  x.  102 
J  Engineering,  xxxix.  260  (1885). 
§  Translation  by  C.  Z.  Banning  and  J.  K.  Guthrie,  N.E.I,  xzix.  6l. 
||  Treatise  on  Mine  Surveying,  3rd  ed.  (1891),  p.  276. 

--- Page Break ---
36  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
The  uses  of  Bore-holes  in  Mines  are  many  and  valuable. 
Every  colliery  ought  to  be  provided  with  a  set  of  tools,  and  men instructed  in  their  use. 
(a)  Tapping  Water. — A  provision  of  the  Coal  Mines  Regula- tion Act,   1887,  is  to   the  effect  that  all  roads  approaching  old 
workings,  where  there  are  likely  to  be  dangerous  accumulations  of 
water,  should  be  preceded  with  bore-holes.     One  bore-hole  is 
usually  kept   straight   ahead  for  a  distance   of    about    5    or    6 
yards,  and  flank-holes,  at  an  angle  of  45°  with  the  centre  line  of road,  are  put  out  for  a  similar  distance  on  each  side.    The  general 
practice  with  the  leading  hole  is  to  bore  in  a  certain  distance,  and 
then   remove   part   of  the   face,   a   further   length   being   then 
bored  before  any  more  ground  is  removed.     In  this  way,  the  dis- 
tance from  the  face  to  the  back  of  bore-hole  is  never  less  than  5 
yards.     Where  water  is  expected,  plugs  should  be  kept  in  readi- 
ness to  drive  in  immediately  it  is  released ;  or,  if  the  pressure  is 
likely  to  be  great,  it  is  best  to  bore  through  a  length  of  pipes  fitted 
with  a  tap. 
(b)  Releasing  Gas. — In  collieries  liable  to  sudden  outbursts  of 
fire-damp,  bore-holes  are  systematically  put  out  of  the  working 
places  into  the  layers  of  strata  in  which  the  gas  accumulates,  in 
order  to  drain  it  out  gradually.     At  "Wharncliffe  Silkstone,  and other  collieries  where  this  procedure  is  adopted,  it  has  met  with success. 
(c)  Proving  Faults. — Bore-holes  are  of  the  greatest  assistance in  determining  the  amount  of  throw  of  faults,  and  have  saved 
considerable  sums  of  money,  which  would  otherwise  have  been 
spent  in  unprofitable  exploratory  work.     With  their  aid  one  can 
determine  the  gradient  required  to  drive  the  roads  that  will  in- 
tersect the  dislocated  seam.     Especially  is  this  the  case  where  the 
hade  of  the  fault  is  vertical  or  ill-defined,  as  they  actually  prove in  such  instances,  whether  it  is  an  upthrow  or  downthrow. 
Owing  to  the  confined  space  in  roadways,  the  cost  of  boring  is 
rather  high,  as  much  time  is  wasted  in  screwing  and  unscrewing 
rods.  From  a  number  of  cases  carried  out  under  the  author's 
direction,  the  cost  per  foot  averaged  4$.  for  distances  bored  of  about 
30  feet,  with  diameter  of  hole  3  inches,  the  rate  of  wages  paid  to 
men  being  55.  6d.  per  day  of  eight  hours.  The  cost  of  boring  uphill 
seems  less  expensive  than  downhill,  if  the  weight  of  boring  tackle 
is  counterbalanced,  as  the  disadvantage  of  clearing  out  the  hole 
and  unscrewing  of  rods  for  such  purpose  is  removed. 
(d)  /Steam  and  Rope-ways. — The   anthracite   region   of   Penn- 
sylvania supplies  numerous  instances  of  the  employment  of  bore- 
holes for  steam  and  rope-ways  passing  from  the  surface  to  the 
interior  of  the  mine.*    At  Shenandoah  City  slope,  an  8-in.  hole  was bored  by  the  method  employed  in  the  oil  regions,  and  lined  with 
School  of  Mines  Quarterly,  New  York,  ix.  189. 

--- Page Break ---
SEARCH   FOR  COAL.  37 
5 1 -in.  casing,  through  which  a  rope  travels,  the  space  between the  casing  and  the  rock  being  filled  in  with  cement.  The  engines 
and  boilers  are  on  the  surface.  Another  hole,  6  in.  diameter,  was 
then  bored,  and  two  lines  of  2 -in.  gas-pipe  laid  in  it,  the  interstices between  being  filled  in  with  cement.  One  pipe  is  used  for  a 
speaking-tube  and  the  other  for  a  bell- wire  to  the  engineer  at  the machinery  on  the  surface.  At  East  Franklin  Colliery  there  are 
two  bore-holes,  each  8  in.  diameter,  cased  and  cemented,  763  feet 
deep.  These  holes  are  7  feet  apart,  and  are  used  to  hoist  from 
a  double-track  underground  slope.  At  Lincoln  Colliery,  an  8-in. hole  is  used  to  convey  steam  to  an  underground  pump  through 
4j-in.  steam-pipe.  As  this  hole  was  remarkably  dry,  it  was  not 
cased.  At  the  Clear  Spring  Colliery,  West  Pittston,  a  6-in.  hole  was 
drilled  270  feet,  and  a  line  of  4j-in.  steam-pipes  inserted.  This 
hole  was  not  cased,  and,  owing  to  the  flow  of  about  J-in.  stream 
of  water  down  it,  condensation  was  so  great  that  the  pressure  was 
lowered  from  i2olbs.  at  surface  to  4olbs.  at  bottom  of  hole. 
Afterwards,  the  space  between  the  rock  and  the  steam-pipe  was 
cemented,  and  a  4-in.  steam-pipe  placed  inside  the  4g-in.  pipe,  with the  result,  that  the  steam  pressure  at  the  bottom  of  the  hole  was the  same  as  on  the  surface. 
These  holes  have  also  been  successfully  used  in  dealing  with 
mine  fires,  for  providing  water  supplies,  and  for  other  purpose? 
connected  with  mining. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject  matter  of  this  chapter : 
CHES.  INST.  :    Boring  and  Boring  Machines,  A.  H.  Stokes,  iii.  192. 
AMEB.  INST.  M.E.  :  Recent  Improvements  in  Diamond  Drills,  W.  P.  Blake, 
i.  395  ;  The  Diamond  Drill  for  Deep  Boring,  compared  with  other 
systems  of  Boring,  0.  J.  Heinrich,  ii.  241,  and  Supplementary  Paper, iii.  183. 
N.  B.  I. :  Description  of  an  Instrument  for  ascertaining  the  Inclination  from 
the  Perpendicular  of  Bore-holes,  C.  Z.  Bunning  and  J.  K.  Guthrie, 
xxix.  61  ;  On  Diamond  Rock  Boring,  T.  J.  Bewick,  xxx.  93. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Notice  sur  les  appareils  de  Bondage  employes  par  la  Societi 
Anonyme  de  Commentry  Jfourchambault,  M.  Lecacheux,  (2®  Se"rie) ix.  337  ;  Note  sur  VoutiUage  emploi/6  dans  quelques  Bondages  du  Gard, 
M.  Sarran,  (2°  Serie)  ix.  453  ;  Bondages  des  Boubes  ei  de  Neuville executes  a  Vaide  de  la  couronne  a  diamants,  M.  Baure,  (2*  Slrie)  xiv.  5 
SO.  WALES  INST.  :  On  the  Machinery  used  in  Boring  Artesian  Wells,  and 
its  application  to  Mining  purposes,  W.  Mather,  iv.  51  ;  Some  particulars 
of  Boring  with  the  Diamond  Drill,  A.  Bassett,  ix.  130;  and  Hort. 
Huxham,  ix.  201  ;  Large  and  Deep  Bore-holes  with  the  Diamond  Drill. 
James  Barrow,  xi.  315,  and  xii.  41. 
MID.  INST.  :  On  the  Diamond  Rock-drill,  J.  H.  Gulland,  iii.  254 ;  A 
History  of  Deep  Boring  or  Earth  Boring  as  practised  on  the  Continent, 
J.  C.  Jefferson,  v.  105,  and  vi.  29  and  73. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER    IV. 
BREAKING    GROUND. 
Contracts. — The  greatest  proportion  of  the  miner's  work,  consists in  removing  and  breaking  up  different  varieties  of  rock,  and  to  do 
this  various  special  tools  are  employed.  Usually  the  different  quali- 
ties of  ground  are  let  by  contract  to  men,  and  it  is  here  that  ex- 
perience is  of  the  greatest  use,  as  only  from  that  is  it  possible  to 
judge  of  the  value.  Hardness,  in  a  mining  sense,  is  different  from 
the  same  term  looked  at  from  a  mineralogical  standpoint.  Ground 
that  is  hard  and  brittle,  will  often  bore  better  than  a  softer  variety 
which  is  tough,  because  in  the  former  instance,  the  blows  break 
off  small  pieces,  while  in  the  latter,  the  chisel  has  to  cut  its  way. 
Another  point,  is  the  question  whether  the  ground  will  "  shoot " well,  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  contains  a  number  of  faces,  or 
joints,  which  easily  break  away  from  the  surrounding  mass  under 
the  action  of  explosives,  or,  at  any  rate,  allow  the  material  to  be 
so  shaken  that  it  is  easily  removed  by  wedging.  At  one  of  the 
collieries  under  the  author's  charge,  numerous  intrusions  of  ba- saltic rock  are  met  with,  and  he  has  adopted  a  system  for  judging 
the  value  of  reading,  which  is  worthy  of  mention.  A  sample  of 
every  intrusion  is  kept  and  labelled,  with  the  price  per  yard  paid 
for  driving  through  it,  and  in  addition,  a  microscopical  section  is 
cut  from  the  specimen.  When  other  intrusions  are  met  with,  a 
piece  is  broken  from  each  of  them,  and  a  section  cut  and  carefully 
compared  with  other  pieces  and  sections  of  which  the  price  is 
known.  From  this  comparison,  the  price  to  be  paid  to  the  work- men is  found. 
Methods  of  Hastening  Work. — The  commonest  plan  of 
hastening  work,  and  one  that  gives  good  results,  is  to  pay  the 
men  a  bonus  for  every  extra  yard  they  drive  over  a  certain 
stipulated  amount.  So  far  as  working  is  concerned,  perhaps,  the 
cheapest  way  is  to  only  work  one  shift,  for,  as  a  rule,  the  night 
shift  leave  work  behind  for  the  day  men  to  do.  If  different  shifts 
of  men  are  employed,  the  best  way  is  to  measure  up  the  amount 
each  shift  does,  and  pay  them  on  it,  as  by  this  means  each  set  of 
men  know  that  they  will  receive  the  money  for  all  the  work  they 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND.  39 
do,  and  consequently  work  harder.  Where  rapidity  is  the  main 
object,  six-hour  shifts  are  adopted,  with  one  workman  always remaining  to,  and  starting  from,  the  middle  of  a  shift.  This  one 
does  all  odd  work,  fetching  tools,  &c. ;  the  regular  workmen  are 
then  able  to  keep  constantly  at  the  face. 
TOOLS  USED. — Shovels  are  principally  used  for  removing broken  debris,  and  always  have  pointed  noses,  to  enable  them  to 
get  past  the  larger  pieces  of  loose  stuff.  The  length  of  handle 
varies;  commonly  it  is  about  30  in.,  this  being  set  at  an  angle 
of  from  140°  to  1 60°  with  the  surface  of  plate,  which  varies  from 8  to  1 6  in.  across.  In  some  districts,  baskets  are  used  for  load- 
ing in  preference  to  shovels,  the  coal  being  raked  into  them. 
They  are  largely  employed  in  the  South  Staffordshire  coal-field, 
and  are  made  of  wicker-work  for  the  working  places,  and  of  iron 
for  gate-roads,  the  reason  of  this  being,  that  the  former  are  practi- cally noiseless.  With  them,  a  man  certainly  loads  more  stuff  than 
with  a  shovel,  especially  where  the  ground  is  uneven,  as  in  such 
cases  the  shovel  catches  on  projections.  Their  application  is limited  to  thick  seams. 
Picks. — These  vary  much  in  shape  for  different  uses  and  dif- 
ferent qualities  of  ground.  For  holing  purposes,  where  the  blow 
is  struck  in  a  horizontal  direction,  the  weight  is  small,  generally 
about  3  Ibs.,  with  a  head  15  in.  long,  and  a  helve  from  24  to 
33  in.  The  head  will  be  slightly  curved  for  holing  along  a 
straight  long-wall  face,  as  the  miner  naturally  swings  his  pick  in a  curve,  and  the  blow  is  then  delivered  in  the  direction  the  instru- 
ment is  moved.  If,  however,  the  miner  is  under-cutting  in  a 
narrow  road,  and  working  in  the  corners  against  the  "  fast,"  the curved  head  cannot  be  employed,  as  the  curved  portion  would 
catch  against  the  side  before  the  point  entered.  For  cutting  coal 
or  breaking  rock,  the  shape  of  the  shank,  or  stem,  is  usually 
square  in  section,  tapered  to  a  point ;  while  for  dressing  rocks  when 
sinking,  a  chisel-shaped  edge  is  employed.  For  coal  work,  the 
shank  tapers  uniformly  from  the  eye  to  the  point ;  but  for  stone 
work,  the  point  tapers  suddenly,  like  the  sharpening  of  a  pencil. 
The  head  part  is  fitted  into  a  wooden  stem,  called  the  helve,  upon 
which  the  greater  strain  of  the  work  is  thrown ;  so,  to  prevent 
rupture  of  the  wood  the  eye  should  be  made  as  broad  and  long  as 
possible,  and  the  two  side  cheeks  carried  down  the  helve  a  good  dis- 
tance. On  the  other  hand,  for  under-cutting,  where  the  tool  works 
in  a  narrow  slit,  the  eye  must  be  made  as  slim  as  possible ;  if  not, 
the  pick-head  cannot  be  turned  sufficiently  to  enable  the  point  to 
catch  the  sides  of  the  cut.  Helves  are  generally  made  of  good 
straight-grained  ash,  nicely  rounded  to  fit  the  hands  of  the  miner. 
American  hickory  helves  are  becoming  largely  employed,  the 
only  objection  raised  against  them  being  that  they  are  rather  too 
springy,  and  jar  the  hands  in  delivering  a  blow.  This  objection, 
probably,  arises  more  from  prejudice  than  anything  else. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
A  pick  worthy  of  mention  is  that  known  as  the  Rivelaine,  em- 
ployed by  the  French  and  Belgian  miners  for  holing  in  thin  in- 
clined seams.  It  is  made  of  flat  steel,  about  1  in.  thick,  &nd  the 
helve  is  from  3  ft.  6  in.  to  4  ft.  long  (Fig.  37),  so  that  the  miner 
does  not  have  to  get  his  arms  under  the  face.  A  very  narrow slit  is  made,  and  waste  is  reduced  to  a  minimum. 
In  the  day,  a  workman  spoils  the  points  of  several  picks,  which 
he  has  to  bring  to  the  surface  to  get  sharpened.  The  labour  of 
doing  this  is  considerable,  and  numerous  devices  have  been  brought 
out  with  a  view  of  lightening  it.  The  oldest  consists  in  employ- 
ing loose  points,  held  in  position  by  a  screw,  but  the  idea  is  a 
failure,  owing  to  the  difficulty  of  keeping  them  tight  and  firm, FIG.  39. 
A 
which  is  only  possible  when  they  are  new.  A  better  plan  is  that 
of  the  Hardy  Pick  Co.,  which  consists  in  making  the  head  loose, 
and  either  employing  a  tapering  helve,  getting  slightly  broader 
towards  the  top,  and  threading  the  head  over  the  end  of  the 
handle,  and  allowing  it  to  slide  down  into  its  proper  position  (Fig. 
38),  or  by  recessing  the  head  of  the  pick,  and  fitting  it  into  a  rect- angular iron  collar  at  the  top  of  the  helve,  and  securing  it  in 
position  by  means  of  a  sliding  wedge  (Fig.  39).  Originally  a 
double  wedge  was  employed,  with  a  view  of  making  a  more 
secure  joint,  and  allowing  for  wear  ;  but  experience  has  shown 
that  no  necessity  exists  for  this,  and  the  single  wedge  pattern is  most  in  favour. 
The  tendency  at  the  present  day  is  to  construct  picks  entirely 
of  steel,  instead  of  wrought  iron  with  steel  points.  Without 
repeating  this  remark  again,  it  may  be  taken  as  true  with  regai  d 
to  every  other  class  of  mining  tools.  The  texture  of  steel  is  such, 
that  it  transmits  a  blow  better  than  softer  iron,  and  as  it  is 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND. 
stronger,  the  weight  of  the  tool  is  less ;  consequently  the  point 
receives  the  impact  better.  Then  again,  the  wearing  capacity 
of  steel  tools  is  very  much  greater,  and  repairs  are  consequently less. 
Dressers. — For  breaking  up  all  large  pieces  of  coal  and  rock, 
a  tool  shown  in  Fig.  40  is  used.  The  direction  of  the  blow  being 
downwards,  it  is  made  very  much  heavier  than  an  ordinary  pick. 
One  side  of  the  head  forms  a  curved  pick,  and  the  other  a 
hammer.  The  helve  is  not  straight,  like  that  of  a  pick,  but 
curved,  and  as  it  is  largely  used  for  wrenching  purposes,  two 
strengthening  side  strips,  a  a,  pass  from  the  eye  up  the  helve. 
FIG.  40. 
FIG.  41. 
FIG.  42. 
Wedges. — These  are  most  useful  tools  for  breaking  up  hard 
rocks,  and  getting  down  pieces  shaken  by  shots.  Their  shapes 
are  few,  but  harder  rocks  require  smaller  wedges  than  softer 
ground,  as  in  the  latter  case  a  small  tool  would  only  push  its  way 
into  the  rock,  and  be  buried  in  it.  The  general  shape  is  shown  in 
Fig.  41.  The  striking  end  is  made  small,  so  that  the  blow  is  deli- 
vered in  the  centre.  For  soft,  cloddy  varieties  of  ground,  the  pene- 
trating end  is  made  somewhat  of  a  chisel  shape,  as  this  tends  to 
split  it  very  well ;  but  with  harder  varieties  of  rock,  small  dumpy 
wedges  are  adopted,  gradually  tapering  towards  the  extremity, 
and  suddenly  sharpened  to  a  point. 
Hammers. — The  common  form  (Fig.  42)  consists  of  an  eye  and 
two  stems,  tapered  down  to  form  the  striking  faces,  which  are 
slightly  convex,  and  have  their  edges  rounded  or  chamfered  off, 
so  that  the  hammer  glances  off  the  object  struck  when  the  blow 
is  misdirected,  and  prevents  injury  to  the  hand  of  the  man  hold- 
ing the  drill.  The  only  difference  between  hammers  and  sledges 

--- Page Break ---
42  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
is,  that  the  latter  are  heavier,  and  the  blow  is  delivered  with  both 
hands.  For  wedge-driving,  long,  tapering  heads  are  adopted,  so that  they  may  follow  the  wedge  right  into  the  mineral ;  while  for 
drilling,  shorter  heads  are  used,  as  in  them  the  material  is  well 
concentrated,  and  the  blow  takes  greater  effect. 
Drills. — For  the  present,  it  is  proposed  to  treat  only  of  those drills  worked  by  hand.  These  may  be  divided  into  percussive 
and  rotary  borers.  The  former  are  either  worked  by  the  miner 
grasping  the  tool,  and  giving  it  a  reciprocating  action,  or  one  end 
of  the  tool  is  struck  with  a  hammer.  The  latter  may  be  sub- 
divided into  two  classes,  one  of  which  wears  the  mineral  away 
(diamond),  while  the  other  crushes  the  rocks,  and  reduces  them  to 
small  fragments,  this  being  done  either  by  a  screw  working 
through  a  nut,  or  by  hydraulic  pressure  (Brandt's). Comparing  percussive  borers  with  rotary  ones,  the  useful  effect 
of  the  force  expended  is  decidedly  in  favour  of  the  latter.  In 
hand  tools  of  the  former  class,  about  half  the  time  is  expended  in 
bringing  back  the  hammer  into  place  to  deliver  a  fresh  blow,  and, 
in  addition,  a  considerable  amount  of  power  is  wasted  in  the 
inertia  and  rigidity  of  the  tools.  Ill-directed  blows  are  also  a 
source  of  loss.  Even  with  machine  drills,  the  same  objections 
hold  good,  but  here  the  undoubted  advantage  is  the  obtaining  of 
deep  holes.  In  harder  rocks,  percussive  action  is  necessary,  but 
in  softer  materials,  easily  disintegrated,  the  debris  tends  to  choke 
the  hole,  jam  the  drill,  and  cushion  the  blow.  As  the  gene- 
rality of  coal-measure  rocks  can  be  penetrated  by  rotary  drills, it  seems  preferable  to  use  that  class. 
Percussive  Hand-tools. — For  soft  rock,  the  tool  employed  is 
called  a  "  jumper,"  the  hole  made  being  a  large  one.  It  consists of  a  bar  of  iron,  from  5  to  6  ft.  long,  having  a  broad  curved  bit 
at  one  end.  This  bar  is  grasped  by  the  miner  in  both  hands,  and 
a  reciprocating  motion  given  to  it,  and  at  the  same  time  it  is 
slightly  turned  between  each  blow,  so  that  the  cutting  edge  strikes 
in  a  fresh  place  each  time. 
This  method  is  only  applicable  in  soft  varieties  of  rock,  and  is 
soon  replaced  by  the  system  in  which  the  tool  is  struck  a  blow  with 
a  hammer.  Here  two  divisions  of  labour,  called  single  and  double 
hand  sets,  may  be  noticed.  In  the  former,  a  man  holds  the  drill 
in  one  hand  and  delivers  blows  with  the  other;  in  the  latter, 
one  man  holds  and  turns  the  drill,  while  the  striking  is  done  by 
another  man,  and  sometimes,  in  very  hard  ground,  by  two  men.  In 
single-hand  tools,  small  drills  are  employed,  and  the  power  expended 
is  more  effectively  applied  than  in  double-hand  sets  using  larger 
tools,  as  in  the  latter  case  one  man  is  solely  employed  turning  the 
drill.  The  bits  too,  in  small  drills,  stand  better  than  large  ones, 
which  is  probably  accounted  for  by  the  more  uniform  temper.  The 
blows  delivered  with  the  small  drills  are  more  rapid  and  light,  this 
being  advantageous  in  a  hard  siliceous  rock,  as  there  is  more  ten- 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  43 
dency  to  break  it  off  in  small  pieces,  requiring  the  expenditure  of 
less  power,  and  there  is  also  less  liability  to  injure  the  tools.  The 
drills  of  both  classes  are  composed  of  a  stem  (generally  of 
octagonal  section),  a  striking  face,  and  a  bit.  The  end  which  re- ceives the  blow,  is  made  smaller  in  diameter  than  the  stem,  so  that 
the  blow  strikes  dead  in  the  centre.  The  remarks  previously 
made  about  constructing  picks  of  steel  apply  more  especially  here. 
Steel  being  so  much  stronger  than  iron,  the  stem  can  be  materially 
decreased,  and  the  mass  through  which  the  blow  has  to  be  de- 
livered is  correspondingly  reduced,  with  the  result,  that  the 
power  expended  is  more  effectively  employed. 
The  edge  of  the  chisel  is  generally  curved  to  a  certain  extent, 
more  so  for  softer  rocks  than  for  harder  ones.  The  edges  also  are 
less  acute  for  the  latter  class.  In  boring  a  hole  of  any  depth,  the 
first  tool  used  is  shorter  than  the  following  ones,  and  the  breadth 
of  the  bit  of  each  succeeding  drill  is  less  than  the  one  before,  so 
that  the  tool  can  clear  itself  and  follow  freely  in  the  hole.  The 
great  thing  in  hand-drilling  is  to  properly  turn  the  drill,  so  that 
the  hole  is  round ;  otherwise  it  is  impossible  to  bore  deep  holes, 
and  the  cartridges  employed  for  blasting  do  not  fit  properly, 
leaving  spaces  in  which  the  gas  expands  when  the  shots  are  fired, 
and  the  useful  effect  is  lessened.  In  the  Cleveland  iron  mines, 
triangular  holes  are  bored  and  loose  powder  employed,  it  being 
claimed  that  such  form  is  specially  advantageous  in  the  deposits 
of  that  district;  but  machine  drills,  boring  round  holes,  are 
making  great  headway  there. 
There  is  a  special  art  in  sharpening  and  tempering  tools.  The 
blacksmith  must  be  experienced  in  the  different  qualities  of 
ground.  The  only  objection  raised  against  steel  tools  is,  that  the 
points  sometimes  break  off  with  the  first  blow  or  two  after  being 
put  to  work.  The  fault  in  such  cases  does  not  so  much  lie  with 
the  steel  as  with  the  smith,  as  the  explanation  of  the  sudden 
fracture  is  that,  in  hardening  and  tempering  the  point,  the  tool  is 
plunged  into  cold  water  whilst  a  portion  of  it  is  yet  at  a  red  heat, 
the  consequence  being  that  the  steel  is  made  as  brittle  as  glass. 
In  sharpening,  in  no  case  should  the  tool  be  heated  to  more  than 
a  blood  colour,  and  no  further  up  the  stem  than  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary, and  it  should  then  be  hammered  lightly  and  quickly  until 
quite  black.  After  being  sharpened,  it  is  perhaps  best  to  allow 
the  tool  to  cool  down  before  it  is  tempered ;  but  such  is  not  abso- 
lutely necessary,  so  long  as  it  is  not  made  red-hot  too  far  from  the 
point. In  hardening,  the  tool  should  not  be  heated  further  ap  than 
I  in.  from  the  point,  and  it  is  then  dipped  into  cold  water  for 
about  f  in.,  leaving  J  in.  still  at  red  heat.  The  edges  of  the 
tool  will  then  be  filed,  so  that  the  polished  surface  of  the  metal  is 
exposed  to  the  atmosphere,  when  the  heat  remaining  in  the  top 
part  gradually  passes  towards  the  thin  edge,  and  various  colours 

--- Page Break ---
44  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
successively  appear  on  its  surface,  these  indicating  the  temperature 
the  metal  has  attained  and  the  degree  of  hardness  still  remaining 
in  the  steel;  when  the  desired  colour  appears,  the  article  is 
plunged  into  water,  completely  cooled,  and  retains  the  temper,  as 
it  is  called.  The  colours  appearing  on  the  steel  during  the  tempering 
process  vary  from  a  faint  yellow,  through  brown  and  purple,  to  a 
full  blue  colour,  the  former  giving  the  very  hardest  temper,  while 
in  the  latter  the  metal  is  so  far  softened  as  to  permit  of  a  little 
bending  in  small  articles  before  any  fracture  takes  place.  The 
experience  of  the  smith  is  the  only  guide  as  to  which  hardness  the 
tool  should  be  tempered.  It  must  be  harder  than  the  mineral  to 
be  attacked,  but  should  also  be  soft  and  tough  enough  not  to  be 
brittle.  There  is  no  advantage  in  having  a  very  hard,  brittle  tool to  cut  soft  rock. 
Scrapers. — In  percussive  boring,  the  debris  produced  at  the 
bottom  of  the  hole  is  cleaned  out  from  time  to  time  by  the  use  of 
a  tool  called  a  scraper,  which  generally  consists  of  a  rod  of  copper, 
with  a  circular  disc  at  right  angles  to  it  at  one  end,  and  a  semi- 
circular groove,  like  a  cheese-scoop,  at  the  other  (Fig  43).  Unless 
FIGS.  43,  44  AND  45. 
ou- 
the  disc  end  is  considerably  less  in  diameter  than  the  hole,  the 
powdered  mineral  is  pushed  right  to  the  back,  and  prevents  the 
bit  getting  at  the  rock  when  it  is  re-inserted.  To  dilute  the 
sludge,  and  prevent  the  tool  from  sticking  and  getting  hot,  water 
is  introduced  in  downhill  holes ;  a  little  ring  of  straw,  or  a  piece  of 
leather  with  a  hole  in  it,  through  which  the  tool  passes,  is  put 
over  the  hole  to  prevent  the  sludge  spurting  out. 
Tamping  or  Ramming. — When  a  hole  has  reached  its 
required  depth,  the  blasting  charge  is  inserted  and  rammed  ;  that 
is  to  say,  some  material  is  placed  over  it  to  prevent  the  escape  of 
the  gases  through  the  front  of  the  hole,  and  so  confine  them  at 
the  back  of  it,  their  only  escape  being  to  blow  out  the  rock.  In 
preparing  the  hole,  it  is  carefully  scraped  out  for  the  last  time, 
and  if  water  has  been  used  during  boring,  it  is  dried  by  connect- 
ing to  the  scraper  a  small  wisp  of  hay,  or  rag,  which  forms  a  sort 
of  plug,  and  sucks  up  moisture ;  or,  if  the  hole  is  very  wet,  the 
claying  or  "  bulling  "  iron  is  employed.  This  consists  of  a  stem of  wood  (a,  Fig.  44)  and  an  iron  head  (6)  through  which  a  hole  (c) 
passes.  A  lump  of  clay  is  inserted  into  the  bottom  of  the  bore- 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND. 
45 
hole,  and  the  stump  of  the  claying  iron  driven  in,  forcing  the  clay 
into  the  interstices  of  the  rock,  and  actually  forming  a  lining 
round  the  hole.  The  bulling  iron  is  lifted  out  by  passing  a  cross- 
bar through  the  hole  c.  The  charge  and  tamping  are  then  put 
in,  the  latter  in  small  quantities  at  a  time,  each  quantity  being 
successively  rammed  with  the  tamping-rod,  which  consists  of  a 
bar  having  at  one  end  a  flat  face,  while  the  other  terminates  in 
a  cone  having  a  groove  cut  in  it  (Fig.  45),  to  allow  the  means  for 
lighting  the  shot  to  lie  against  the  side  of  the  bore-hole.  This 
may  be  either  a  needle,  or  pricker  where  straws  are  used,  or  fuse, 
or  wires  if  electricity  is  the  agent.  The  farther  the  tamping  is 
from  the  charge,  the  harder  it  is  stemmed.  In  strong  rocks 
blows  are  given  to  the  end  of  the  rammer  by  a  hammer. 
Hand  Machine  Drills. — The  general  type  of  these  consists of  a  screwed  spindle  working  through  a  nut,  with  a  socket  for  the 
boring  tool  at  one  end,  having  a  square  on  it 
for  the  ratchet-handle  which  communicates  FIG.  46. 
power. The  tool  commonly  employed  (Fig.  46)  con- 
sists of  a  screw- spindle  a,  working  through 
the  nut  collar  b.  The  boring-bit  is  of  the 
ordinary  auger  form,  with  a  V  point.  The 
screw  is  revolved  and  pressed  gradually  against 
the  rock  by  turning  the  ratchet -handle  c, 
small  pieces  are  broken  off,  and  the  hole  is bored.  When  the  advance  has  reached  the 
length  of  the  drill,  it  is  worked  back  into 
its  sheath  again,  and  a  longer  one  inserted. 
With  an  ordinary  nut  arrangement,  as  many revolutions  have  to  be  made  with  the  screw 
to  replace  it  in  its  sheath,  as  took  place 
during  boring.  To  prevent  this  waste  of 
time,  a  split-nut,  having  lugs  on  each  half 
tapped  with  right-  and  left-hand  threads,  is adopted  by  the  Hardy  Pick  Co.  These  lugs 
are  connected  by  a  screw,  cut  with  a  right- hand  thread  at  one  end  and  a  left-hand 
thread  at  the  other,  and  can  therefore  either  be  brought  in  con- 
tact with,  or  disengaged  from,  the  main  propelling  screw.  Conse- 
quently the  drill  and  screw  can  be  withdrawn  without  being wound  back. 
With  this  type  of  drill,  a  tree  or  prop  has  to  be  set  near  the 
face,  to  support  one  end  of  the  machine.  To  prevent  loss  of  time, 
many  machines  are  supplied  with  a  stand,  whose  length  is  adjust- able, as  it  is  formed  of  two  pieces  which  can  slide  upon  each  other, 
and  be  clamped  together,  the  final  adjustment  being  made  by  an 
ordinary  lengthening  screw  at  the  bottom. 
In  the  Elliott  machine  (Fig.  47)  the  nut  is  replaced  by  a  worm- 

--- Page Break ---
46 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
wheel  a,  in  the  teeth  of  which,  a  square-threaded  feed-screw  c,  of 
J-in.  pitch,  takes  its  bearing.  This  wheel  is  carried  in  a  ring, 
having  a  hinged  joint  at  one  side,  and  a  screw  clamp  b  on  the 
other,  so  that  more  or  less  friction  can  be  set  up  between  the 
screw  and  the  worm-wheel.  The  feed  is  thus  automatic,  and  the 
extent  is  regulated  by  the  tightness,  or  otherwise,  with  which  the 
ring  is  screwed  up.  If  the  resistance  is  excessive,  the  wheel 
slips  round  to  a  certain  extent,  and  reduces  the  full  advance  of 
the  drill,  which  may  vary  from  J  in.  per  revolution  to  nothing. 
If  the  clamping  screw  b  is  slacked,  the  drill  can  at  once  be  with- drawn without  being  wound  back. 
When  boring  near  the  sides  or  roof,  the  crank-handle  cannot  be 
completely  rotated,  but  has  to  be  worked  backwards  and  forwards, 
FIG.  47. FIG.  48. 
and  a  ratchet  employed,  thus  all  the  time  devoted  to  one  half  the 
motion  is  lost.  To  remove  this  disadvantage,  the  crank-handle 
is  not  connected  directly  to  the  screw,  but  through  the  interven- 
tion of  bevel  gearing.  Bornet's*  machine  is  so  fitted,  and  in  ad- dition, the  nut  in  which  the  feed  screw  works  is  seated  in  a  spring 
box,  so  that  with  an  increase  in  pressure,  when  working  in  hard 
strata,  the  feed  is  equal  to  the  pitch  of  the  screw,  less  the  amount 
of  compression  of  the  springs.  When  these  are  fully  compressed, 
the  nut  slips  out  of  its  bearings,  and  revolves  with  the  screw,  the 
feed  being  then  governed  solely  by  the  spring  pressure,  until  the 
resistance  decreases,  and  the  nut  again  occupies  its  seat. 
In  thick  seams,  ordinary  stands  cannot  be  employed.  In  the 
anthracite  mines  of  America  they  are  replaced  by  a  clamping 
device,  shown  in  Fig.  48,  attached  to  the  Howell  f  drill,  one  of 
*  N.E.I,  xxxvii.  117. t  Report  A.C.  Second  Geo.  Survey  Penn.,  p.  172 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND.  47 
the  best  known  in  that  coal-field.  To  fix  the  machine,  a  hole,  3  or 4  in.  diam.,  is  first  cut  into  the  face,  and  the  clamping-bar  &, 
which  is  supplied  with  a  number  of  spikes,  is  firmly  wedged 
in  it.  The  illustration  to  a  great  extent  explains  this.  The 
auger  bit  is  rotated  bv  bevel  wheels,  geared  down  from  i  :  3  to  6. 
A  point  worthy  of  attention,  is  that  two  or  three  holes  can  be 
bored  from  one  position,  owing  to  the  sector  arm  b  allowing movement  either  to  the  right  or  left. 
The  merits  of  a  drill  depend  upon  its  weight,  the  facility  with 
which  it  may  be  set  and  used  in  different  positions,  and  the  wear- 
ing capacity  of  the  machine  itself.  The  rate  of  boring  depends 
entirely  on  the  form  of  the  cutting  tool  and  the  quality  of  the 
steel,  because,  unless  the  latter  is  suitable  metal,  it  is  110  use 
making  it  of  a  suitable  form,  as  that  form  is  soon  lost  by  rapid 
wear.  A  great  deal  also  depends  upon  the  men.  Unless  a  certain 
amount  of  skill  is  shown  in  setting  the  machine,  and  properly 
clamping  it  in  position,  as  much  time  is  occupied  in  drilling  holes 
in  ordinary  varieties  of  rock  as  if  they  were  put  in  by  hand. 
The    most  suitable   shape   of   the 
points  of  the  twisted  augers  for  drill-  FIGS.  49  AND  50. ing  ordinary  rock-binds  and  coal,  is 
shown  in  Figs.  49  and  50.  This  form 
penetrates  with  greater  speed  and 
less  labour  than  any  other  pattern, 
and  is  easy  to  repair.  The  piece  cut 
out  of  the  centre,  should  be  a  little 
more  than  one-third  of  the  width  of 
the  point,  and  of  a  broad  V  shape,  in 
order  to  keep  the  two  outside  portions 
as  strong  as  possible.  These  should 
be  kept  as  thick  and  stiff  as  the  section  of  the  steel  will  admit. 
The  cutting  point  should  be  carefully  kept  sharp,  with  a  good 
clearance  left  at  the  back.  As  a  rule,  the  greater  the  opening 
in  the  middle,  the  more  rapid  is  the  penetration,  especially  in 
coal,  shale,  and  soft  sandstone ;  but  the  size  of  the  V  opening  is 
governed  by  the  hardness  and  strength  of  the  rock  to  be  bored. 
When  great  pressure  is  necessary,  the  opening  at  the  top  of  the V  should  be  narrow. 
The  best  results  are  obtained  in  tempering,  by  heating  one  inch 
of  the  points  to  a  blood-red,  and  then  plunging  them  into  coal- 
tar,  as  the  cutting  edge  is  made  extremely  hard,  the  points  gradu- 
ally becoming  softer  as  the  thickness  of  steel  increases.  Drills 
so  treated,  can  be  re-sharpened  once  or  twice  on  a  grindstone,  until 
it  becomes  necessary  to  put  them  in  the  fire  again  to  enlarge  the 
points. 
To  show  the  advantage  of  using  these  drills,  the  following 
example  is  given  : — At  a  colliery  under  the  author's  charge,  a  road was  driven  for  61  yards,  crossing  the  measures  over  a  fault. 

--- Page Break ---
48  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  section  of  the  road  was  6  ft.  wide  at  the  bottom,  5  ft.  at 
the  top,  5  ft.  high,  and  it  was  driven  at  a  down  gradient  of  2 J  in. 
to  the  yard.  Time  occupied,  5  weeks;  rate  of  progress,  12  yards 
per  week.  The  cost  was:  labour,  ^£47  los. ;  powder  and  fuse, 
;£n  iSs.  gd.;  total,  ^59  8$.  yd.  The  total  cost  per  yard  run 
was  19.48^.,  equal  to  6.3865.  per  cubic  yard;  and  the  cost  of 
explosives  per  yard  run  was  3.9145.  The  hardness  of  the 
measures  varied  considerably.  A  small  portion  could  be  worked 
with  the  pick,  but  other  parts  consisted  of  a  hard,  gritty  sandstone, 
nearly  too  hard  for  the  drill.  Very  little  timbering  was  required, 
so  this  did  not  interfere  much.  Ventilating  pipes  and  rails  had 
to  be  laid.  The  road  might  be  considered  a  very  fair  sample  of 
a  cross-cut  in  the  Coal  Measures.  Similar  work  in  another  part 
of  the  pit,  without  the  aid  of  a  drill,  cost  £2  a  lineal  yard. 
TRANSMISSION  OF  POWER.— In  considering  the  ques- tion of  transmitting  power  to  the  machines  used  in  breaking 
ground,  choice  is  limited  to  compressed  air  and  electricity;  the 
other  means  of  steam  and  wire  ropes  are  inapplicable.  Steam  is,  to 
a  certain  extent,  out  of  place  in  a  mine,  although,  under  certain 
exceptional  conditions,  it  is  employed,  and  gives  good  results ;  but 
its  use  in  confined  spaces,  where  either  coal-cutting  is  in  progress 
or  rock-drills  are  being  worked,  is  quite  out  of  the  question. 
Compressed  Air. — Air  may  be  considered  a  perfect  gas,  and 
obeys  the  laws  relating  to  such  a  body.  These  are : 
(1)  That  if  the  temperature  be  kept  constant,  the  volume 
varies  inversely  as  the  pressure;  if  for  example,  the 
pressure  is  doubled,  the  volume  will  be  reduced  to  one- half. 
(2)  If  the  volume  be  kept  constant,  pressure  varies  directly 
as  the  temperature  reckoned  from  the  absolute  zero 
(-273°C.  =  -  459°  F.).  Thus  double  temperature gives  double  pressure. 
(3)  If  the  pressure  remains  constant,  the  volume  varies  directly 
as  the  temperature  reckoned  from   the   absolute  zero. 
Thus  if    the  temperature   is   doubled    the    volume    is doubled. 
If  the  above  laws  are  clearly  understood,  it  will  be  at  once  seen 
that  great  losses  must  occur  in  compressing  air.  When  the  volume 
in  the  cylinder  is  reduced  by  the  piston,  a  considerable  rise  in 
temperature  takes  place,  which  can  only  be  produced  by  an  expen- 
diture of  power,  heat  being  simply  work  in  another  form.  If  the 
compressed  air  were  used  immediately  at  the  point  where  it  was 
generated,  no  loss  would  take  place.  This,  however,  is  never  done : 
the  heat  produced  by  compression  is  lost  in  the  transmission-pipes, and  all  the  power  which  produced  it  is  lost  also. 
The  increase  of  temperature  during  compression,  expands  the 
air  in  the  cylinder  and  increases  its  pressure,  so  that  the  piston  is 
met  both  by  the  natural  resistance  of  the  air  to  compression,  and 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND. 
49 
by  the  increased  resistance  due  to  expansion  by  heat.  Another  loss 
through  this  heating  is  that,  at  the  moment  of  discharge  the  air 
bears  the  pressure  it  should  do,  but  as  it  cools  the  pressure  falls. 
It  has  been  noted  that,  in  an  ordinary  compressor,  the  air  was  com- 
pressed to  four  atmospheres  after  the  piston  had  travelled  fths 
instead  of  fths  of  its  stroke  (see  first  law  above),  the  compressed 
air  occupying  §ths  instead  of  ^th  of  the  space  in  the  cylinder. 
A  third  loss  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  sides  of  the  cylinder 
become  heated,  and  the  air  on  entry  is  expanded,  so  that  when  the 
piston  commences  its  stroke,  a  smaller  mass  or  weight  of  air  is  in 
the  cylinder,  but  the  increase  of  pressure  due  to  the  temperature 
makes  the  pressure  normal. 
From  these  considerations  it  follows  that,  to  secure  good  results, 
there  should  be  (i)  thorough  cooling  during  compression,  and 
(2)  the  air  on  introduction  should  have  as  low  an  initial  tempera- ture as  possible. 
Air  Compressors. — Two  systems  are  in  use  by  which  the  heat 
produced  during  compression  is  absorbed.  In  one,  water  is  not 
admitted  into  the  cylinder,  while  it  is  in  the  other.  The  former 
are  called  "  dry  "  and  the  latter  "  wet "  compressors. In  dry  compressors,  air  is  cooled  during  compression  by  the  use 
of  a  water-jacket  on  the  compression  cylinder,  but  at  the  best  the 
action  of  this  is  very  imperfect,  as  the  area  of  surface  exposed  to 
the  cooling  action  is  small,  compared  with  the  volume  of  air  com- 
pressed, so  that  only  a  small  portion  of  the  confined  air  can  come 
into  contact  with  the  inner  surface  of  the  cylinder.  In  addition, 
air  parts  with  its  heat  to  a  metal  cylinder  very  slowly,  and,  with 
a  compressor  working  at  moderate  speed,  there  is  not  time 
between  the  inlet  and  dis- 
FIG.  51. charge  to  effect  sufficient  re- 
duction in  the  temperature. 
Wet  compressors  may  be 
subdivided  into  two  classes — • 
(a)  those  where  the  air  is  com- ressed by  a  piston  of  water, 
where  a  fine  spray  of 
water  is  injected  into  the 
cylinder  during  compression. 
The  former  type,  the  design 
of  which  is  due  to  Som- 
meiller,  is  illustrated  in  Fig. 
51,  and  consists  of  a  piston 
a,  moving  horizontally  in  a 
«ast-iron  cylinder  kept  full of  water.  From  the  extremi- 
ties of  this  cylinder  spring  two  vertical  cylinders  b  6,  closed  at 
their  upper  ends  by  covers  bolted  on.  The  in-take  air  is  admitted 
through  rectangular  openings  c  c,  in  the  sides  of  the  vertical 

--- Page Break ---
50  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
cylinders,  the  suction-valve  being  of  leather,  while  discharge  takes 
place  through  a  conical  brass  valve  d,  situated  in  the  top.  The 
reciprocating  movement  of  the  piston  causes  the  water  to  rise  on 
one  side  and  fall  on  the  other.  A  partial  vacuum  is  formed  above 
the  falling  water,  which  causes  the  admission-valve  to  open  and 
the  unoccupied  spaces  to  be  tilled  with  air ;  while  on  the  return 
stroke  the  water  is  driven  back,  and  the  air  with  it,  until  com- 
pression in  the  cylinder  is  equal  to  the  pressure  in  the  receiver, 
and  then  the  delivery-valve  opens. 
These  compressors  have  been  largely  employed  on  the  Continent, 
the  idea  being  that,  if  the  air  during  compression  was  in  contact 
with  water,  all  heat  would  be  absorbed.  Such,  however,  is  not  the 
case.  The  air  is  only  exposed  to  water  on  one  side ;  a  thin  film  of  this 
soon  gets  hot,  and,  water  being  a  bad  conductor  of  heat,  little 
cooling  during  compression  takes  place.  As,  however,  a  certain 
quantity  of  water  is  carried  over  into  the  delivery-pipes  at  each stroke,  the  air  is  cooled  before  it  gets  to  the  receiver ;  but  to  be  of 
any  economical  good,  cooling  should  take  place  during  compres- 
sion. Indeed,  it  has  been  found  that,  to  get  good  results,  spray 
injection  has  to  be  introduced  near  to  the  outlet-valve. Compressors  of  this  class  resemble  pumps,  and  must  work  at 
slow  velocities.  As  a  large  body  of  water  has  to  be  set  in 
motion  and  stopped  at  each  stroke,  considerable  friction  is  caused, 
and  the  machine  subjected  to  severe  shocks.  It  must,  therefore, 
be  made  very  strong,  and  to  produce  the  same  quantity  of  air  as  a 
high-speed  compressor,  must  be  considerably  larger,  and  take 
more  power  to  drive. 
The  actual  position  of  affairs  seems,  therefore,  to  be  that,  by 
the  assistance  of  a  water  piston  and  spray  injection,  a  certain 
economy  in  compression  is  gained,  while  this  advantage  is  neutral- 
ised by  the  extra  power  required  to  drive  the  machine.  In  addition, there  is  the  difference  between  first  cost  and  cost  of  maintenance 
in  the  two  systems.  It  is  impossible  either  to  purchase  large 
engines,  or  to  keep  them  working,  at  the  same  cost  as  smaller  ones. 
The  second  division  of  wet  compressors  is  that  in  which  water 
is  injected  directly  into  the  cylinder.  This  answers  well  in  keeping 
down  the  temperature,  provided  that  the  water  is  in  the  form  of 
fine  spray,  that  it  meets  the  piston  during  compression,  and  that  it 
is  in  thorough  contact  with  the  air.  A  further  economy  results 
from  the  fact,  that  the  power  required  to  compress  moist  air  is 
less  than  that  required  for  dry  air.  The  injected  water  also  fills 
clearance  spaces,  and  prevents  loss  from  this  cause.  The  absence 
of  these  in  a  compressor  cylinder  is  a  point  of  high  importance. 
No  spaces  should  exist  between  the  piston  and  the  cylinder  cover 
at  the  termination  of  the  stroke,  because  such  spaces  are  filled 
with  air  at  high  pressure,  and,  on  the  retreat  of  the  piston,  this 
air  expands  and  fills  the  cylinder,  no  free  air  entering  until  the 
pressure  is  reduced  to  that  of  the  atmosphere. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  51 
It  is,  however,  believed  that  the  cooling  results  obtained  by 
the  use  of  a  spray  of  water  are  deceptive,  as  they  take  place 
principally  after  the  air  is  completely  compressed. 
The  objection  to  the  injection  system  is  the  wear  of  the  cylinder 
and  piston,  caused  by  the  fact  that  water  is  not  only  a  bad  lubri- 
cant itself,  but  its  presence  in  the  cylinder  prevents  oil,  or  grease, 
getting  to  the  working  parts,  as  it  floats  on  the  top  of  the  water. 
The  situation  is  bad  when  clean  fresh  water  is  used,  but  much 
worse  when,  as  is  often  the  case,  it  is  necessary  to  employ  acid 
water  or  water  containing  grit  or  sediment.  Another  objection 
is,  that  the  compressed  air  produced  contains  a  considerable 
amount  of  moisture,  and  that  when  used  the  exhaust  ports  of  the 
motors  become  clogged  up  by  the  formation  of  ice.  By  a  proper 
arrangement  of  reservoirs,  or  draining  tanks,  most  of  the  moisture in  the  air  can  be  removed  before  it  is  used  in  the  motors. 
The  difficulty  in  getting  rid  of  the  heat  produced  by  com- 
pression has  hitherto  prevented  the  use  of  even  moderately  high 
pressures,  but  the  means  adopted  at  the  Paris  installation  *  have 
overcome  this.  The  air  is  compressed  in  two  or  more  stages,  and 
thoroughly  cooled  between  them.  This  intermediate  cooling  is 
easily  and  thoroughly  effected,  the  air  being  taken  through  tubular 
vessels  which  present  any  amount  of  cooling  surface  that  may  be 
required. 
The  general  type  of  modern  air  compressors,  consists  of  a  pair  of 
engines  having  the  air  cylinder  arranged,  tandem  fashion,  behind 
the  steam  cylinder.  With  a  single  engine  and  air  cylinder 
arranged  in  a  straight  line,  it  is  impossible  to  construct  an 
economical  machine,  because  the  greatest  work  in  the  air  cylinder 
has  to  be  done  at  the  end  of  the  stroke.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
stroke,  when  the  steam  has  full  pressure,  the  air  cylinder  contains 
air  at  atmospheric  pressure,  and  offers  no  resistance,  but  at  the 
end  of  the  stroke,  when  the  pressure  in  the  steam  cylinder  would 
be  low  (if  expansion  were  used),  the  resistance  in  the  air  cylinder 
is  at  its  maximum.  All  sorts  of  arrangements  have  been  designed 
to  equalise  the  power  and  resistance,  but  have  given  way  to  the 
straight  line  pair  type,  with  cranks  set  at  right  angles.  Expansive 
working  can  then  be  used,  as  one  steam  cylinder  is  always  exert- 
ing its  maximum  power  at  the  moment  when  the  air  cylinder  of 
the  other  engipe  is  finishing  its  stroke. 
This  explains  the  seeming  paradox,  how  steam,  say  at  50  Ibs., 
can  compress  air  to  70  Ibs.,  where  both  cylinders  have  the  same 
diameter  and  stroke.  When  it  is  remembered,  that  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  stroke  the  pressure  in  the  air  cylinder  is  nothing, 
that  for  three-fourths  of  the  stroke  it  is  considerably  below 
50  Ibs.,  and  that  only  at  the  moment  of  discharge  does  it  reach 
70  Ibs.,  the  explanation  is  self-evident. 
*  Inst.  C.E.  cv.  180. 

--- Page Break ---
52  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Various  Valves  on  Air  Compressors : 
Walker's  Valves. — The  inlet  valve  is  connected  by  a  link  (a,  Fig.  52), and  piston  6,  with  a  controlling  spindle  c,  these  reciprocating 
with  the  movement  of  the  valve.  When  the  piston  retreats, 
suction  opens  the  valve,  which  is  prevented  from  going  too  far  by 
the  spring  d,  which  becomes  compressed.  Immediately  the  piston 
starts  to  return,  the  valve  is  closed  by  the  spring,  and  prevented 
from  being  violently  dashed  on  to  its  seat  by  the  collar  f,  which 
moves  with  the  spindle,  coming  into  contact  with  the  india-rubber buffer  k,  carried  on  a  fixed  abutment  I,  suspended  by  two  bars 
m,  m',  attached  to  the  cylinder  cover  n.  Messrs.  Walker's  experi- ence has  shown  that  it  is  also  desirable  to  buffer  the  valve  on  its 
FIGS.  52  AND  53. 
in-stroke,  this  being  done  by  a  second  india-rubber  washer  A, 
striking  against  another  fixed  abutment  i.  It  will  be  noticed 
from  the  drawing,  that  the  tension  of  the  spring,  and  the  position 
of  the  stops,  can  be  varied,  if  desired,  by  a  nut  and  lock-nut 
arrangement,  e  and/. 
The  outlet  valve  (Fig.  53)  is  balanced  by  making  a  portion  of 
the  spindle  passing  through  the  stuffing-box  hollow,  the  outer  end 
passing  into  a  small  cylinder  a,  into  which  air  is  admitted  at  the 
same  pressure  as  in  the  receiver.  The  valve  is  prevented  from 
opening  too  rapidly  by  the  spring  5,  and  is  buffered  on  its  in- 
stroke  and  out-stroke  by  stops,  c,  c',  arranged  to  engage  the  india- 
rubber  blocks,  e,  e'  (carried  by  a  fixed  cross-bar  /),  just  prior  to  the termination  of  the  valve's  travel. 
The  india-rubber  blocks  are  annular  in  form,  but  somewhat  of 
a  T-shape  in  cross  section,  the  faces  of  the  annulus  being  widened 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND. 
53 
FIG. 
out  to  leave  a  projecting  flange  at  the  inner  and  outer  periphery. 
With  this  shape,  it  has  been  found  that  the  life  of  the  blocks  is 
considerably  increased. 
Sturgeon's  Valve. — The  feature  of  Sturgeon's  Air  Compressor consists  of  a  stuffing-box  inlet  valve,  which  is  opened  by  the 
piston-rod  at  the  commencement 
of  its  stroke,  this  doing  away  with 
the  necessity  of  forming  a  vacuum, 
in  order  to  cause  the  valve  to  open. 
A  complete  cylinder,  full  of  air  at 
atmospheric  pressure,  is  taken  in  at 
each  stroke,  and  immediately  the 
piston  starts  to  return,  the  valve 
shuts.  In  Fig.  54,  i  is  the  inlet 
valve  attached  to  the  stuffing-box 
of  the  piston-rod.  By  means  of 
the  nuts,  a,  a,  sufficient  grip  can be  obtained  to  ensure  the  valve 
opening  on  the  forward  and  back- 
ward strokes  of  the  piston.  The 
stops,  b,  b,  screwed  to  the  valve, 
limit  its  travel  in  one  direction, 
while  its  flange  portion  performs the  same  office  in  the  other.  The 
piston  is  recessed  to  fit  over  the 
each  str(  k  >,  and  reduce  clearance 
valves,  o,  o,  are  usually  eight  in  number  and  can  be  taken  out 
valve  at  the  termination  of 
to   a   minimum.     The   outlet 
separately  for  repairs,  or  removed  by  unscrewing.  A  spiral  spring 
c  in  each  one,  serves  to  bring  it  back  sharply  on  to  its  seat.  The 
arrows  show  the  direction  of  the  air  both  from  the  inlet  and  de- 
livery-valves. 

--- Page Break ---
54 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  56. 
Ing er soil- Sergeant  Valve* — This  consists  of  two  annular  valves 
(a,  Fig.  55),  placed  in  a  hollow  piston  of  a  double-acting  air-cylinder, 
free  air  being  admitted  through  a  hollow  tail-rod  attached  to  the 
piston.  The  valves  do  riot  require  the  aid  of  springs  or  other 
connections,  but  are  opened  and  closed  at  the  proper  moment  by their  own  inertia.  The  arrows  show  the  direction  of  the  intake 
and  delivery ;  the  outlet  valves  are  shown  at  b.  To  reduce  clear- 
ance, small  recesses,  c,  are  turned  in  the  cylinder  covers,  into  which the  inlet  valve  fits  at  the  termination  of  the  stroke.  As  there  are 
no  inlet  valves  in  the  cylinder  covers,  water-jackets,  d,  d,  are  pro- vided at  each  end,  as  well  as  around  the  sides, 
e,  e.  The  air  passes  into  the  receiver  through  f. 
A  perspective  view  of  the  valve  is  shown  in 
Fig.  56. 
Means  to  prevent  "Dancing"  of  Valves. — In  the  ordinary  form  of  valves  to  which  a  spring 
is  connected,  vibratory  motion  is  set  up,  because 
the  air  tries  to  pull  the  valve  open  and  the  spring 
to  shut  it,  and  first  one  and  then  the  other  pre- vails. 
The  dancing  of  the  valve  in  Walker's  Air  Com- pressor is  reduced  by  causing  a  certain  amount  of  friction  to  be 
set  up  between  the  spindle  (c,  Fig.  52)  and  one  or  more  of  its 
bearings.  To  accomplish  this,  where  the  spindle  passes  through 
the  cross-bar  (p,  Fig.  52),  the  bearing  is  split 
longitudinally,  so  that  the  bore  of  the  bush 
can  be  slightly  contracted  by  means  of  a 
screwed  spindle  (a,  Fig.  57),  having  a  hand- 
wheel  6,  and  lock-nut  c,  connected  to  the  top 
half  of  the  step.  To  provide  a  greater  fric- tional  surface,  the  spindle  is  made  of  larger 
diameter  where  it  passes  through  the  bearing, 
and  is  surrounded  by  a  carbonite  washer, 
which  acts  as  a  lubricant  and  prevents  heat- 
ing. Only  a  small  amount  of  friction  is  applied,  so  as  not  to 
interfere  with  the  free  working  of  the  valve  to  any  appre- 
ciable extent.  This  device  gets  over  the  difficulty  of  "  dancing  " at  ordinary  speeds,  but  increases  the  power  required  to  open  the valve. 
A  very  simple  but  effective  device  is  in  use  at  Lens  Colliery 
(France).  The  inlet  valves  are  of  the  ordinary  poppet  type, 
closing  being  effected  by  a  spring,  a,  Fig.  58 ;  when  opened,  how- 
ever, the  pull  of  this  spring  is  taken  off  in  the  following  manner : 
Each  end  of  the  cylinder  is  provided  with  two  inlet  valves,  the 
spindles  of  which,  6,  pass  outside  the  cylinder  cover.  Opposite  these 
valves  is  fixed  a  small  shaft  c,  which  performs  one  revolution  to 
FIG.  57. 
Compressed  Air  Production  (Wm.  L.  Sannders,  New  York,  1891),  p.  20. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  55 
each  revolution  of  the  engine,  and  on  this  shaft,  opposite  each 
valve,  is  keyed  a  cam  d.  At  the  commencement  of  the  stroke,  the 
face  of  each  cam  engages  with  the  spindle  of  the  inlet  valve,  pushes 
it  wide  open,  and  keeps  it  there.  The  small  revolving  shaft  turns 
this  cam,  and  its  shape  is  so  arranged  that  when  the  piston  starts 
to  make  its  return  stroke,  the  cam  is  past  the  spindle,  and  the 
spring  brings  the  valve  back  into  its  seat. 
Conduits. — Air  is  conveyed  from  the  producing  machine  to  the 
motors  through  pipes,  and  a  loss  of  work  takes  place  from  friction, 
governed  by  the  following  laws :  (i)  Resistance  varies  directly  as  the 
length  of  the  pipe,  (2)  inversely  as  the  diameter  of  the  pipe,  and  (3) 
directly  as  the  square  of  the  velocity.  The  loss  from  the  first  law 
cannot  be  done  away  with,  as  it  is  impossible  to  alter  the  distance 
between  the  compressor  and  the  motor.  By  using  pipes  of  large 
diameters,  the  loss  from  the  two  latter  laws  can  be  kept  within 
FIG.  58. 
narrow  limits,  but  the  expense  of  doing  so  is  considerable.  The 
experiments  at  Paris*  show  that  when  the  velocity  in  the  pipes exceeds  50  feet  a  second,  the  loss  in  pressure  becomes  serious  even 
in  the  distance  of  one  mile.  The  loss,  however,  for  two  miles  is not  double  that  of  one  mile.  The  size  of  the  mains  can  best  be 
reduced  by  adopting  high  initial  air  pressures.  Friction  in  mains 
may  be  reduced  to  a  considerable  extent  by  employing  glass-lined 
pipes,  an  invention  lately  introduced. 
Receivers. — From  the  compressors  the  air  is  discharged  into 
a  receiver,  fitted  with  a  safety-valve  and  pressure-gauge,  placed 
near  by,  which  not  only  serves  the  purpose  of  a  reservoir,  but 
corrects  the  irregular  delivery  from  the  compression  cylinders. 
Receivers  also  rid  the  air  of  moisture,  and  should  be  so  arranged 
that  the  air  passes  in  and  out  on  the  same  side.  Drain-cocks  are provided  at  the  bottom,  to  get  rid  of  the  water.  If  the  motors 
are  any  considerable  distance  away,  small  subsidiary  receivers 
should  be  placed  near  to  them  in  the  workings. 
Motors. — In  these,  the  greatest  loss  takes  place  through  leak- 
age past  the  piston ;  with  an  ordinary  engine  the  condensed  moisture 
*  Inst.  C.E.  cv.  192. 

--- Page Break ---
56  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
on  the  sides  of  the  cylinders  acts  like  packing,  and  helps  to  keep 
the  piston  tight ;  but  compressed  air  is  dry  and  hot,  and  leakage 
becomes  serious.  The  most  economical  results  are  obtained  by 
heating  the  air  before  it  passes  into  the  motor,  which  serves  the 
double  purpose  of  not  only  heating  the  air,  but  helps  to  pack  the 
piston  It,  however,  introduces  this  disadvantage,  that  the  exhaust 
ports  are  likely  to  choke  up  with  ice,  through  the  moisture  freezing  ; 
but  this  can  be  prevented,  to  a  certain  extent,  by  having  large 
ports,  and  by  allowing  the  exhaust  to  take  place  directly  into  the 
atmosphere,  and  not  through  pipes. 
ELECTRICITY. — It  would  be  quite  foreign,  in  such  a  work  as 
this,  to  enter  into  an  elaborate  description  of  what  electricity  is,  how 
it  is  produced,  and  the  different  systems  and  methods  of  using  it ; 
but  as  the  mining  engineer  of  the  future  will  require  to  know  a 
considerable  amount  about  it,  some  brief  description  here  will  not 
be  out  of  place.  Every  one  is  familiar  with  a  magnet — its  power  of 
attracting  bodies — and  knows  that  each  end  is  called  a  pole.  This magnetic  influence  is  exerted  in  certain  lines,  radiating  from  the 
poles,  which  were  called  "  lines  of  force  "  by  Faraday,  who  dis- covered that  if  a  closed  loop  of  wire  were  passed  through  them, 
a  current  of  electricity  was  set  up  in  the  wire.  This  is  the  prin- 
ciple of  the  dynamo,  which  consists  of  a  number  of  coils  of  wire 
revolving  rapidly  in  a  magnetic  field.  The  electro-motive  force 
depends  on  the  rapidity  of  revolution,  strength  of  magnet,  and  the 
angle  at  which  the  coils  of  wire  pass  through  the  magnetic  field, 
which  should  be  as  near  right  angles  as  possible.  The  current, 
however,  set  up  by  such  action  does  not  flow  in  one  direction,  but 
consists  of  a  series  of  reversals  in  opposite  directions. 
Alternating  and  Continuous  Currents. — At  this  point  is 
reached  the  division  line  separating  the  two  systems  of  electricity. 
In  one,  the  current  is  transmitted  through  conductors,  and  used 
as  it  is  generated  in  the  machine,  that  is  to  say,  in  a  series  of  starts 
and  stops  or  complete  reversals,  such  being  called  the  alternating 
current;  in  the  other,  by  introducing  into  the  dynamo  a  device 
called  the  commutator,  the  current  produced  in  the  armature  is, 
so  to  say,  straightened  out,  flows  in  one  direction,  and  there  is  then obtained  what  is  called  the  continuous  current. 
The  latter  is  the  system  most  generally  applied,  especially  for 
the  transmission  of  power,  because  up  to  the  present,  with  probably 
one  exception,  an  efficient  alternating  current  motor  has  not  been 
discovered.  Once  started,  they  work  very  well,  but  the  great 
difficulty  is  to  get  them  to  move  against  a  load.  There  is  little 
doubt  that  this  will  be  overcome,  and  then  a  very  fine  field  will  be 
open  for  such  system,  especially  in  mines,  as  an  alternating  motor 
is  more  compact  than  a  direct-current  one,  possesses  no  com- mutator, or  brushes,  sparking  only  results  by  severing  action,  and 
the  extreme  simplicity  of  the  winding  and  general  construction 
makes  it  very  unlikely  to  get  out  of  repair. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  57 
The  great  advantage  of  the  alternating  system  is  the  ease  with 
which  currents  of  high  tension  can  be  converted  into  currents  of 
lower  tension,  but  of  a  larger  quantity.  This  is  a  point  of  con- 
siderable importance,  because  in  mines  it  is  often  necessary,  in 
order  to  obtain  the  fullest  benefits  from  any  system  of  trans- 
mitting power,  that  small  machines  can  be  worked  at  isolated 
points  where  required.  Now,  small  motors  developing  a  few  horse- 
power are  exceedingly  difficult  and  costly  to  make  to  work  with 
currents  of  high  electro  motive  force.  As  pointed  out  further  on, 
for  any  extended  application  of  power,  the  cost  of  conductors  can 
only  be  cut  down  by  transmitting  the  current  at  high  potential  in 
the  mains.  To  transform  this  into  a  lower  pressure,  is  wasteful 
with  the  continuous  current,  and  expensive  machines  have  to  be 
employed  to  do  it.  With  the  alternating  system,  however,  the 
problem  is  a  simple  one.  It  is  well  known,  that  if  two  wires  be 
placed  side  by  side,  not  in  mechanical  contact,  and  a  current 
passed  through  one  wire,  a  current  is  developed  in  the  second  wire 
at  the  moment  of  starting  or  stopping  the  current  in  the  primary 
wire.  It  therefore  becomes  necessary,  if  a  permanent  flow  is  to 
be  produced  in  the  second  wire,  that  the  current  in  the  primary 
wire  must  consist  of  a  series  of  starts  and  stops,  which  is  actually 
what  takes  place  in  the  alternating  current  system.  If  the  two 
coils  of  wire  are  of  the  same  length  and  diameter,  the  current  in 
No.  2  will  be  the  same  as  in  No.  i,  but  if  the  relative  length  and 
diameter  of  the  wires  in  the  two  coils  are  varied,  and  the  secondary 
coil  consists,  comparatively  speaking,  of  a  few  coils  of  a  larger 
diameter  wire,  while  the  primary  coil  is  a  large  number  of  coils 
of  a  smaller  diameter  wire,  the  current  generated  in  the  former 
will  be  feebler  in  its  intensity,  but  larger  in  its  quantity. 
Terms  Used. — The  only  difficulty  in  understanding  the  question 
of  the  electrical  transmission  of  power  consists  in  not  knowing  the 
meaning  of  the  various  terms  used.  The  whole  question  of  elec- trical distribution  has  been  popularly  illustrated  by  its  analogy  to 
hydraulics.  Supposing  a  pump  is  circulating  water  through  a  circuit 
of  pipes,  every  engineer  understands  the  meaning  of  such  terms 
as  pressure,  gallons  per  minute,  friction,  &c.,  when  applied  to  such 
a  current  of  water.  If  dynamo  be  substituted  for  pump,  wire  for 
pipes,  and  electricity  for  water,  the  conception  of  the  elementary 
phenomena  of  electrical  transmission  by  a  continuous  current 
becomes  clear.  In  dealing  with  water,  the  pressure  in  Ibs.  per 
sq.  in.,  the  number  of  gallons  to  be  delivered,  and  the  friction  of 
the  pipes,  has  to  be  known  ;  in  electricity  the  pressure  is  spoken 
of  as  Electro  Motive  Force  (usually  written  E.M.F.),  and  is  measured 
by  volts,  the  quantity  is  called  amperes,  and  the  friction  is  called 
resistance,  and  measured  byo/ms.  To  obtain  the  measure  of  electrical 
energy,  the  pressure  (volts)  is  multiplied  by  the  quantity  (amperes), 
the  product  being  volt-amperes,  called  watts.  One  watt  =  one  volt 
x  by  one  ampere,  and  746  watts  are  equal  to  one  horse-power. 

--- Page Break ---
5 8  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
As  in  hydraulics,  the  longer  the  pipes  and  the  smaller  their 
diameter,  the  greater  will  be  the  loss  in  transmission  ;  so  with 
electricity,  the  longer  the  wire,  and  the  smaller  its  diameter,  the 
greater  will  be  the  resistance  and  the  loss.  On  the  contrary,  if 
the  wire  is  short  and  its  diameter  large,  no  appreciable  loss  should 
(theoretically)  result.  The  resistances  of  a  long  length  of  wire 
may  be  so  great,  that  all  the  current  may  be  wasted  in  overcoming 
them,  and  none  reach  the  points  where  it  is  required  to  do  work. 
In  such  a  case,  increase  the  size  of  the  wire  and  lessen  its  resist- 
ance. Copper  is  the  metal  generally  used  for  electrical  conductors, 
and  it  is  a  costly  one.  The  resistances  in  a  long  length  of  wire 
may  be  so  great  that,  to  overcome  them,  a  wire  of  so  large  a 
diameter  would  have  to  be  used,  that  its  cost  would  be  outside  the 
bounds  of  possibility.  One  other  alternative  is  open  :  increase  the 
E.M.F.  Electricians  have  from  the  first  recognised  the  press- 
ing necessity  of  a  current  whose  voltage  is  as  high  as  possible, 
since  the  cost  of  copper  for  line  wire  varies  in  the  inverse  ratio  of 
the  square  of  the  voltage  employed.  Thus,  supposing  2000  Ibs. 
of  copper  are  required  to  transmit  a  given  quantity  of  power  a 
certain  distance  under  an  E.M.F.  of  50  volts,  125  Ibs.  only  will 
be  necessary  if  the  E.M.F.  is  increased  to  200  volts.  For  the 
voltage  having  been  increased  four  times,  the  cost  of  line  wire  will 
be  reduced  sixteen  times.  Currents  can  be  produced  in  practice, 
whose  E.M.F.  is  10,000  volts,  and  if  a  current  of  such  high 
tension  be  used,  the  cost  of  conductors  could  be  reduced  to  a 
minimum.  This,  however,  is  the  point  with  which  the  mining 
engineer  is  directly  concerned.  Currents  of  high  tension  are 
dangerous ;  if  the  circuit  became  broken,  the  current  would  leap 
the  break,  and  produce  a  spark  which  would  ignite  gas  in  a  fiery 
mine;  while  if  the  current  were  by  any  accidental  means  passed 
through  the  human  body,  death  would  result.  The  colliery 
manager  is,  therefore,  placed  in  a  difficult  position — he  wishes  to 
use  high-tension  currents  for  the  sake  of  economy,  and  low-tension 
ones  for  safety.  The  general  opinion  seems  to  be,  that  500 
to  700  volts  must  be  considered  the  maximum  E.M.F.  for  use  in mines. 
Means  to  Prevent  "  Sparking." — The  chief  danger  is  feared from  the  production  of  sparks,  either  at  the  brushes,  or  by  the 
severance  of  the  cable.  To  remove  the  probability  of  gas  being 
ignited  by  the  former,  Messrs.  Atkinson*  enclose  the  armature, brushes,  and  commutator  in  a  casing,  which  bears  on  a  turned 
ring  fixed  to  the  pole  pieces,  and  also  on  a  turned  plate  or  ring 
which  acts  as  a  brush-holder,  and  which  may  be  rocked  like  a 
brush-holder,  so  that  the  position  may  be  altered  to  the  point 
where  sparking  is  nil.  The  safety  arrived  at  by  this  method, 
depends  on  the  principle  of  excluding  gas. 
*  Inst.  C.E.  civ.  93. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND.  59 
Messrs  Davis  and  Stokes  have  recently  patented  an  arrange- 
ment,* where  the  brushes  are  placed  inside  the  commutator,  and 
also  enclosed  in  a  casing ;  sparks  take  place  inside  the  commutator, 
and  cannot  get  through  to  explode  the  atmosphere  outside. 
To  prevent  the  breaking  of  the  cable  by  falls  of  roof  or  sides, 
and  consequent  sparking,  the  general  method  is  to  allow  plenty  of 
"  slack  "  between  the  points  of  support,  so  that  if  a  weight  falls, the  slack  is  drawn  up,  and  the  cable  accommodates  itself.  To 
still  further  reduce  the  probability  of  severance,  the  cables  at 
Plymouth  Colliery  t  are  protected  by  a  double  sheath  of  No.  8 
steel  wire  on  the  outside  of  the  insulation,  the  first  stranding 
being  of  thirty-eight  wires,  and  the  second,  thirty-six  wires,  laid  in 
reverse  directions.  As  a  result,  the  cable  is  capable  of  resisting 
heavy  falls,  its  tensile  strength  being  about  30  tons. Mr.   L.  B.  Atkinson  has 
recently  introduced  a  safety  FIG.  59. 
cable,;}:   constructed   on   the    cu_&   ^_   3 
following    principles  :  —  In     *T    *T  ~"/JT""  ~T* 
Fig.  59,  a,  a'  are  the   two       ^*   
poles  of  the  dynamo,  and  £>,  b' 
those  of  the  motor,  or  lamps.  ^£r   <j£/   
These  are  each  connected  by  <£,  \    *  |  5' 
two  wires,  a  main  conductor,  ^e7  o* 
c,  c',  and  a  subsidiary  conduc- 
tor, d,  d',  which,  as  they  are  of  the  same  length,  carry  current  in 
proportion  to  their  area.  Cut-outs  (e  e'  and  //'),  proportional to  the  carrying  capacity,  are  arranged  in  each  main,  and  in  each 
subsidiary  conductor.  If  the  main  conductor  c  gets  broken, 
and  the  subsidiary  conductor  d  does  not,  no  spark  is  pro- 
duced, as  the  circuit  is  still  closed,  but  the  whole  current  now 
passes  through  the  secondary  wire,  and  at  once  melts  its  cut-out. 
A  weight  suspended  by  the  fuse  then  drops  on  to  a  switch,  and 
the  whole  circuit  is  instantly  disconnected.  In  its  practical  form, 
the  cable  consists  of  a  close  wound  spiral  of  tinned  copper  wire, 
braided  over,  but  not  heavily  insulated.  Over  this  is  laid  a 
properly  insulated  stranded  conductor  of  the  required  area.  If 
the  cable  be  torn  down,  or  broken  in  any  way  by  tension,  this 
inner  conductor  extends  to  an  indefinite  extent,  for  as  it  gets 
drawn  out,  the  diameter  of  the  spiral  decreases,  and  it  becomes 
quite  loose  in  its  tube. 
Efficiency. — The  absolute  efficiency  of  the  ordinary  means  of  pro- 
ducing the  electric  current  by  a  steam-driven  dynamo  is  small,  as  the 
electrical  energy  developed  is  only  6.4  %  of  the  energy  existing  in  the 
coal  burnt  under  the  boiler,  and  little  advance  is  to  be  hoped  for,  so 
long  as  steam  furnishes  the  motive  power,  as  modern  dynamos  and 
motors  have  already  high  efficiencies  in  themselves.  Looking  at  the 
*  Fed.  Inst.  ii.  161.  t  Colliery  Guardian,  Sept.  4,  1891,  p.  395. J  Ibid.,  Sept.  25,  1891,  p.  525. 

--- Page Break ---
60  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
ease  with  which  electricity  is  converted  into  heat,  it  seems  probable 
that  the  solution  of  the  cheap  generation  of  electricity  will  come 
about  from  the  reverse  operation.  The  direct  conversion  of  heat 
into  electricity  has  been  possible  since  1823,  but  the  low  efficiency 
of  the  process  (only  0.35  %  of  the  heat  in  the  gas  burnt)  prevents 
its  commercial  application.  Experiments  are,  however,  being 
carried  on,  and  the  last  results  announce  an  efficiency  of  nearly 
5  % ,  with  hopes  of  a  still  greater  increase.  It  is  not  too  much  to 
say  that  the  discovery  of  a  successful  process  with  high  efficiency, 
will  revolutionise  the  generation  and  transmission  of  power. 
A  new  departure,  giving  great  promise,  was  tried  in  1891  at  the 
Frankfort  Exhibition.  A  dynamo  100  miles  away  produced 
three  alternating  currents  of  different  phases  at  a  tension  of  50 
volts,  which  were  transformed  into  three  currents  of  17,000  volts, 
and  conveyed  along  three  wires  ^  in.  diam.  to  Frankfort,  where  they 
were  re-transformed  into  60  volts,  and  used  for  the  production  of 
power  and  lighting  in  the  Exhibition.  The  motors  were  of  stronger 
construction  than  usual,  thick  bars  and  plates  being  used  (suited  to 
the  work  of  a  miner),  instead  of  the  fine  wire  and  delicate  insula- 
tion which  so  often  gives  trouble. 
POWER  MACHINE  DRILLS. — These  machines  impart  to 
the  tool  a  reciprocating  motion.  They  consist  of  a  cylinder  and  piston, 
to  the  rod  of  which  is  attached  a  drill.  The  requirements  of  a  good 
machine  are,  that  it  should  be  of  simple  and  strong  construction, 
occupy  little  space,  be  easily  handled,  and,  above  all,  the  wearing 
parts  should  not  only  be  easy  of  access,  but  easily  replaced  when 
broken.  As  all  the  work  of  the  drill  is  done  during  the  forward 
stroke,  while  in  the  return  only  the  weight  of  the  tool  and  friction 
of  the  machine  have  to  be  overcome,  the  piston  is  reduced  in  area 
on  one  side.  In  order  to  bore  a  round  hole,  the  tool  is  partly 
rotated  after  each  stroke,  and  as  the  hole  deepens,  means  are  pro- 
vided for  moving  the  machine  forward,  so  that  each  blow  is 
delivered  with  full  force.  Numerous  attempts  have  been  made 
to  perform  the  feed  automatically,  but  although  success  has 
attended  these  efforts,  the  machines  become  much  more  compli- 
cated. With  an  automatic  feed,  the  advance  is  regular,  while 
often,  owing  to  the  varying  nature  of  the  ground,  it  is  required  to 
be  anything  but  regular — sometimes  faster,  sometimes  slower. 
Then,  again,  men  have  to  be  kept  to  look  after  drills  while  they 
are  working,  and  may  just  as  well  employ  themselves  in  feeding 
forward  the  tool  to  the  best  advantage,  as  to  stand  by  and  do 
nothing.  In  the  old  type  of  machine  drills,  the  piston  was  made 
to  admit  and  cut  off  the  admission  of  air  into  the  cylinder,  by 
striking  tappets  attached  to  a  valve,  and  although  these  parts 
were  made  as  light  as  possible,  yet  for  every  stroke  of  the  drill 
two  blows  were  struck,  with  the  result  that  the  parts  were  rapidly 
worn  away,  numerous  breakages  occurred,  and  the  expense  of 
maintenance  became  very  great.  In  modern  power  drills,  the  use 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND.  61 
of  tappets  has  been  abandoned,  and  what  are  known  as  steam  (air) 
moved  valves  are  adopted;  their  construction  is  therefore  more 
simple,  as  the  machine  only  consists  of  two  moving  parts.  In  some 
types,  a  further  simplification  has  been  carried  out ;  by  means  of 
suitable  ports  and  openings  in  the  cylinder,  the  piston  is  made  to 
admit  and  cut  off  steam  by  its  own  movement.  They  then  consist 
of  only  one  moving  part,  and  that  the  piston  itself. 
It  would  be  quite  impossible  to  give  a  description  here  of  even 
the  majority  of  good  machines  that  exist,  so  well  known  repre- 
sentatives of  the  two  main  types  have  been  selected  for  illustrating 
the  way  in  which  they  work. 
The  Ingersoll  Rock-drill. — The  cylinder  A  (Fig.  60)  has 
admission  ports,  P,  P',  and  exhaust  port  E,  and  also  two  open 
passages,  F,  F',  connected  direct  with  the  exhaust  port  through  the 
small  passages,  D,  D',  so  that  if  there  were  nothing  in  the  cylinder  to 
close  D,  D',  each  end  of  the  valve  would  be  open  to  the  exhaust.  The piston  B  has,  however,  a  movement  from  X  to  Y,  and  is  provided 
with  an  annular  space  or  chamber  SS',  whose  length  is  such  that  it can  never  be  open  to  both  the  passages  at  D,  D'  at  the  same  time. The  valve  C  is  spool-shaped  and  travels  on  the  guide-pin  T.     In the  bottom  of  the  steam  chest  are  two  passages  wossing  each 
other,  which  connect  R  with  D',  and  R'  with  D.     In  the  illustra- tion the  drill  is  ready  to  deliver  a  blow.     Air  is  admitted  at  0, 
and  fills  the  spaces  N,  N'  and  R'.     As  R'  is  connected  with  D, which  is  closed  by  the  piston,  no  outlet  is  possible.     R  is  connected 
to  D',  and  is  open  to  the  atmosphere  through  the  annular  space  S and  passage  F'.     No  motion  of  the  valve  therefore  takes  place until  the  piston  moves.     Air  passes  from  N  through  P'  to  the back  of  the  piston  at  M,  and  drives  it   forward;  the   exhaust 
passage  SS'  approaches  D,  and  when  the  distance  DD'  is  traversed, 
is  open  to  it.     At  the  same  instant,  D;  is  shut  off  by  the  back  end of  the  piston,  D  is  suddenly  opened  to  the  atmosphere,  and  the 
chamber  R'  being  connected  with  it,  is  exhausted.     The  air  around the  valve  rushes  towards  this  opening,  carrying  the  valve  with  it. 
Thus  the  valve  is  reversed,  the  machine  exhausts,  and  the  motion of  the  piston  also  reversed. 

--- Page Break ---
62 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  Adelaide  Rock-drill. — This  contains  only  one  moving 
part,  the  piston,  in  this  respect  resembling  the  Darlington 
drill  invented  in  1873,  but  possessing  an  advantage  over  that 
type,  as  the  air  is  used  expansively  and  the  consumption 
reduced.  It  will  be  seen  from  Fig.  61,  that  the  one  moving 
part  (the  piston  C)  works  in  a  cylinder  having  ports  and  pas- 
sages so  arranged  that  the  air  or  steam  is  automatically  cut  off 
and  admitted  by  the  piston  itself.  Air  is  admitted  through  an 
annular  port  A,  by  which  means  the  pressure  is  equalised  on  all 
sides  of  the  piston  rod,  and  unequal  wear  avoided.  The  exhaust 
takes  place  through  port  B.  The  piston  rod  is  hollow,  and  small 
ports  through  the  piston  head  allow  free  communication  between 
the  back  end  of  the  cylinder  and  the  interior  of  the  piston  rod ; 
the  front  end  of  the  piston  is  of  smaller  area  than  the  back  end* 
As  illustrated,  the  piston  is  just  completing  its  forward  stroke. 
FIG.  61. 
The  piston  performs  the  action  of  a  valve  in  the  following 
manner :  as  soon  as  it  reaches  B,  free  communication  is  opened 
with  the  atmosphere,  and  exhaust  takes  place,  not  only  here,  but 
also  through  B',  which  has  by  this  time  passed  outside  the cylinder  cover.  The  inlet  aperture  A,  being  always  in  free 
connection  with  the  air  receiver,  the  pressure  now  acts  on  the 
small  area  at  the  front  of  the  piston,  and  drives  it  backward,  until 
such  time  as  this  part  also  is  brought  in  connection  with  the 
exhaust ;  at  the  same  moment  as  this  takes  place,  B'  comes  opposite A,  compressed  air  enters  through  the  hollow  rod  C,  passes  into^ 
the  back  end  of  the  piston,  and  drives  the  drill  rapidly  forward 
against  the  rock.  Admission  takes  place  during  half  the  stroke, 
the  air  working  expansively  for  the  second  part. 
The  object  of  discharging  a  portion  of  the  exhaust  at  the 
gland,  or  working  end,  is  of  great  practical  importance,  as  by  this 
simple  device  all  the  fine  dust  which  falls  on  the  machine  when 
drilling  uphill  holes  is  blown  away  from  the  piston-rod,  and the  wear  and  tear  of  the  rod  and  gland  from  this  cause  is  entirely avoided. 
The  means  employed  to  rotate  the  tool  are  the  same  as  those 
adopted  in  all  modern  drills.  A  spiral  or  rifled  bar  D,  having 
three  grooves,  is  fitted  at  its  head  with  a  ratchet  wheel  E,  which, 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  63 
is  recessed  into  the  cover  of  the  cylinder.  Two  detents,  also  fixed 
in  the  cylinder  cover,  are  forced  by  small  springs  to  engage  with 
the  teeth  E.  The  grooves  in  the  spiral  bar  accurately  fit  into 
corresponding  projections  on  the  recess  in  the  piston-rod,  and hence,  through  the  action  of  the  detents,  the  piston  turns  the 
bar  during  the  out-stroke,  but  in  the  in-stroke  the  bar  turns  the 
piston,  and  the  tool  assumes  a  new  position  for  the  delivery  of the  next  blow. 
Brandt's  Drill. — This  machine  is  of  an  entirely  different character  to  any  others.  It  consists  of  a  hollow  steel  drill,  fastened 
to  a  head-piece,  which  is  again  fastened  to  a  cylinder,  and  rotated 
by  means  of  worm-gearing  from  two  water-power  engines,  driven by  hydraulic  pressure.  The  stone  is  neither  powdered,  as  with 
percussive  borers,  or  worn  away,  as  with  diamond  drills,  but  is 
broken  in  the  path  of  tool  into  small  pieces,  and  a  core  formed  in 
the  centre.  The  water  under  pressure  not  only  rotates  the  drill 
and  presses  it  against  the  face  of  the  rock,  but  keeps  the  hole 
clean  and  free  from  debris.  By  opening  a  valve,  water  is  conveyed 
to  the  front  of  the  revolving  piston,  so  that  the  drill  can  be  drawn 
out  of  the  hole  when  required.  The  drill  itself  is  of  conical  shape, with  the  base  turned  towards  the  rock.  It  is  furnished  with  four 
cutting  edges,  two  arranged  in  the  outer  circumference  of  the 
annulus,  one  set  directly  to  the  front,  and  the  other  outwards, 
while  the  other  two  edges  are  arranged  on  the  inner  circumfer- 
ence, directly  ahead  of  the  other  towards  the  inside,  thereby 
reducing  the  core. 
At  Shamrock  Colliery,  Westphalia,*  this  drill  has  been  em- ployed several  years  driving  a  drift  5000  ft.  long,  the  water 
being  obtained  from  behind  tubbing,  and  conveyed  in  pipes 
2 \  in.  diam.  Two  drills  were  worked,  and  a  ventilator  driven  by 
a  turbine.  Three  sets  of  holes,  2 fin.  diam.  and  from  4ft.  to 
4j  ft.  long,  were  drilled  and  fired  in  each  24  hours,  each  set 
occupying  about  2  hours.  Each  drilling  machine  used  about 
i  cub.  ft.  of  water  per  minute.  "With  hand-drilling  in  sandy shale  and  sandstone,  the  average  speed  was  1 7  in.  per  day,  at  a 
cost  of  i  Ss.  6d.  per  ft.  With  the  machine  in  similar  strata,  the 
average  speed  was  6J  ft.  per  day,  at  a  cost  of  295.  6d.  per  ft.  An 
elaborate  series  of  experiments  have  been  carried  out  at  Beihilfe 
Mine,  near  Freiberg,!  on  the  power,  effect,  cost,  and  wages  earned, 
by  driving  with  Brandt's,  compressed  air,  and  hand-drills ;  the three  systems  being  simultaneously  employed  in  three  levels,  with 
six  men  in  three  eight-hour  shifts  per  day.  Taking  the  diameter 
of  the  hand-drilled  holes  as  unity,  the  ratio  of  the  sizes  of  the  holes 
with  the  compressed  air,  and  Brandt's  drills,  were  respectively as  i  :  2.44  :  8.05,  and  the  power  necessary  to  drive  them  as 
i  :  3.26  :  8.04.  The  useful  effect  of  the  compressed-air  drills 
*  For.  Abs.  N.  E.  I.  xxxvii.  34.  f  Ibid.  xxxi.  45. 

--- Page Break ---
64 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
was  25%,  while  the  hydraulic  ones  only  had  a  duty  of  8.5%. 
The  speed  of  driving  by  hand  was  .0774  feet  per  man  per 
shift ;  by  compressed  air  drills,  ,423  feet  per  man  per  shift ; 
while  Brandt's  drill  advanced  .472  feet  per  man  per  shift. This  machine  can  only  be  used  in  situations  where  water  is 
easily  got  rid  of.  As  a  rule,  mining  engineers  have  quite  enough 
difficulty  in  dealing  with  water  already  existing  in  mines  without 
introducing  any  more. 
Supports. — The  supports  upon  which  a  drill  was  carried  were 
originally  either  a  rigid  framework  of  clumsy  construction,  intro- 
duced with  difficulty  into  narrow  and  uneven  rock  excavations,  or 
a  heavy  carriage  moving  on  rails,  the  latter,  although  carrying 
FIG.  62. FIG.  63. 
\:     II     \s- 
JEj^ft 
several  machines,  requiring  that  the  road  should  be  clear  of  debris 
before  the  drills  could  be  set  to  work.  The  modern  form  consists  of  a 
vertical  column  (a,  Fig.  62)  resting  on  a  base,  in  which  lengthen- 
ing screws  are  provided.  By  this  means  the  necessary  breadth  of 
base  is  obtained  to  give  stability  to  the  column,  and  to  permit  the 
mounting  on  it  of  a  swinging  arm  b,  upon  which  the  drill  is 
attached.  This  arrangement  allows  the  drill  to  be  used  upon  all 
sides  of  the  column,  for  drilling  holes  inclined  in  any  direction. 
Bars  are  passed  through  the  holes,  c,  c,  in  the  top  of  the  length- 
ening screws,  and  prevent  them  from  becoming  loosened  by 
vibration.  With  a  stretcher  bar,  drilling  can  be  recommenced 
immediately  after  blasting,  as  the  drill  and  column  can  be 
separately  carried  over  the  debris.  With  such  a  support,  the 
machine  is  adjustable  in  all  directions.  It  may  be  shifted  side- 
ways on  the  arm,  raised  and  lowered  on  the  column,  and,  by  first 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  65 
tightening  the  clamp  d,  the  arm  and  machine  may  be  bodily 
swung  round  the  column. 
Instead  of  attaching  the  drill  to  the  clamp  through  a  centre- 
bolt,  the  R-and  Drill  Co.  have  designed  an  arrangement  (Fig.  63) 
in  which  the  foot  of  the  shell  carrying  the  drill  is  made  of  a  cone 
shape,  and  grasped  by  a  hooked  bolt  6,  which  is  distinct  from  the 
bolts  binding  the  clamp  to  the  arm.  If  a  similar  clamp  is 
attached  to  a  tripod,  the  drill  can  be  changed  from  one  support  to 
the  other  with  little  labour,  and  without  disconnecting  the  feed- 
screw and  removing  the  machine  from  its  guides,  which  has  to  be 
done  with  the  old  arrangement. 
Where  the  length  of  the  stretcher-bar  exceeds  8  ft.,  an  amount 
of  objectionable  vibration  is  set  up,  and,  in  high  places,  drills 
have  to  be  mounted  upon  tripods.  These  consist  of  a  light,  strong 
frame,  generally  made  of  steel,  consisting  of  three  cylindrical  tele- 
scopic legs,  which  can  be  lengthened  or  shortened  to  accommodate 
uneven  ground.  These  legs  are  fastened  into  sockets  in  the  top, 
and  are  kept  in  position  by  having  weights  hung  upon  them  when 
the  tripod  is  in  place.  The  socket- joints  are  so  designed,  that  the legs  can  be  moved  backwards  or  forwards,  or  one  or  more  may  be 
thrown  up  into  the  air  out  of  the  way,  and  indeed  adjusted  into 
any  position  whatever,  so  that  the  tripod  may  be  adapted  to  the most  uneven  surface. 
Electric  Percussive  Drills. — Numerous  attempts  have  been made  to  construct  a  percussive  electrical  drill,  but  until  recently 
with  little  success.  The  difficulty  has  been  largely  overcome  by 
employing  the  principle  of  the  solenoid.  A  solenoid  consists  of 
insulated  copper  wire  coiled  in  the  form  of  a  spiral,  but  is  only 
complete  when  a  portion  of  the  wire  passes  in  the  direction  of  the 
axis  in  the  interior  of  the  spiral.  If  a  current  be  passed  through 
a  solenoid,  it  has  the  same  power  of  attraction  as  a  magnet. 
In  the  Marvin  drill,*  two  solenoids  are  placed  against  each other,  end  to  end,  and  a  plunger  plays  freely  from  the  centre  of 
these  solenoids.  The  whole  is  placed  in  a  boiler  tube  casing, 
having  a  spiral  spring  in  the  back  part.  The  plunger  is  composed 
of  a  central  portion  made  of  wrought  iron,  and  a  forward  and 
backward  portion  made  of  aluminium  bronze,  all  rigidly  connected 
together.  The  generator  furnishing  the  current  is  of  the  simplest 
kind,  so  that  the  polarity  of  the  wires  is  reversed  at  each  half 
revolution  of  the  armature,  with  the  result,  that  through  the 
action  of  this  current  on  the  solenoids,  a  reciprocating  action  of 
the  plunger  is  obtained,  as  first  one  and  then  the  other  solenoid 
attracts  it,  and  pulls  it  in  opposite  directions.  About  600  blows 
per  minute  is  found  to  be  the  best  speed.  The  object  of  the  spiral 
spring  is  to  store  up  the  energy  of  the  back  stroke,  and  return  it 
in  the  forward  stroke,  helping  the  magnetic  impulse,  and  greatly 
assisting  the  strength  of  the  blow. 
*  Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  May  23,  1891,  li.  600 

--- Page Break ---
66  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
In  a  trial  made  in  the  hard  granite  of  Quincy  Quarries,*  a  hole 
1 1  in.  diam.  was  drilled  at  an  average  rate  of  2  j  in.  per  minute, 
with  an  expenditure  of  less  than  4  H.P.  delivered  to  the  gene- rator. The  chief  features,  however,  were  the  extreme  ease  with 
which  the  power  could  be  transmitted  from  the  generating  station, 
and  the  great  simplicity  of  the  drill  itself.  For  the  purpose  of 
exhibiting  the  ease  with  which  the  drill  could  be  taken  to  pieces, 
and  defective  parts  replaced  by  others,  it  was  several  times  opened 
and  entirely  taken  apart,  the  time  required  for  this  being  less  than 
three-quarters  of  an  hour. 
The  Engineering  and  Mining  Journal  f  states  that  the  results 
obtained  from  the  machines  in  practice  are  unsatisfactory,  as  not 
only  are  they  of  faulty  construction,  a  defect  probably  easily  cor- 
rected, but  they  present  a  more  serious  trouble — viz.,  the  heating 
of  the  solenoids  and  piston.  The  heating  of  the  solenoids  seems  to 
be  due  to  the  rapid  reversing  of  the  electric  current  through  their 
coils.  This  not  only  means  loss  of  efficiency,  but  the  heating 
is  often  so  intense  as  to  make  the  drill  objectionable  in  a  small 
heading.  An  important  installation  of  these  machines  was  made 
at  Lake  City,  Colorado,  in  1891,  but  after  experiments  through 
September  and  October  they  were  withdrawn  owing  to  the  ob- 
jectionable heating.  The  inventors  are  now  endeavouring  to  over- 
come the  defects  thus  shown,  with  every  probability  of  ultimate success. 
Forms  of  Bit. — Like  ordinary  hand  tools,  the  first  form  of  bit 
for  machine  drills  was  that  of  a  chisel.  In  order,  however,  to  ob- 
tain more  striking  surface,  two  chisel  edges  crossing  each  other  at 
right  angles  were  tried.  This  did  the  work  better,  but  as  the  hole 
got  deep,  ready  escape  of  the  debris  was  prevented,  as  the  tool 
nearly  filled  the  hole.  To  remove  this  difficulty,  the  two  chisels 
were  made  to  cross  each  other  on  a  slope,  forming  a  tool  like  the 
letter  X,  which  is  the  shape  now  generally  adopted.  Bits  like  the 
letter  Z  have  been  tried  with  most  satisfactory  results,  so  far  as 
the  efficiency  of  the  boring  is  concerned,  but  the  difficulty  of  sharp- 
ening them  prevents  their  general  application.  For  making  and 
dressing  the  drill  bits,  a  set  of  tools  called  "  swages  "  are  employed. These  are  like  moulds,  shaped  to  the  form  of  the  bits  required. 
Use  of  Water  in  Boring  Holes. — Experience  has  proved  that 
by  using  water  in  the  holes  the  speed  of  drilling  is  considerably 
increased,  and  such  is  always  done  in  drilling  down-hill  holes. 
With  up-hill  holes,  water  cannot  be  employed  with  ordinary 
means.  Messrs.  Dubois  and  Fra^ois  exhibited  at  the  Paris  Exhi- 
bition a  device  which  has  overcome  the  difficulty.  Water  is  in- 
jected right  on  to  the  cutting  edge  of  the  drill,  instead  of  simply 
into  the  mouth  of  the  hole.  A  small  copper  pipe  is  fixed  in  a 
*  Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  April  4,  1891,  li.  400. t  Vol.  lii.  720,  Dec.  26,  1891. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND. 
groove  extending  throughout  the  length  of  the  drilling  bit,  and  is 
connected  by  a  small  flexible  tube  to  a  tank  fitted  to  the  back  of 
the  piston-rod,  but  prevented  by  suitable  means  from  rotating with  it.  With  each  stroke  of  the  piston,  water  is  thrown  right  on 
to  the  place  where  the  cutting  edge  strikes,  the  bottom  of  the  hole 
is  always  kept  clear,  and  the  full  effect  of  the  blow  from  the  drill 
is  obtained ;  the  deeper  the  hole,  the  greater  the  effect. 
Cost  of  Machine  and  Hand  Drilling. — For  two  years  at 
Ramsbeck  lead  mines,*  careful  comparisons  have  been  made between  the  cost  of  driving  levels  by  hand  and  by  machines.  The 
strata  consist  of  hard  schists  and  greywacke.  With  hand  boring, 
the  average  speed  of  driving  double  tramway  roads  was  found  to 
be  9  ft.  10  in.  per  month,  while  with  machines  it  was  35  ft.  The 
saving,  taking  economy  and  speed  into  account,  was  304  per  cent. 
Saving  in  money  by  using  machine  drills  .        .    £116    14    5 
„  „         per  yard  driven       .        .        .  i     n     3 
„  „         per  cent.  ;  20.6 
Interest  on  capital  and  amortizement was  taken  at  13  percent. 
Repairs  to  drills  amounted  to  10.49  Per  cent-  of  the  total  working cost. 
Experiments  have  been  conducted  at  the  Rammelsberg  Mine 
in  the  Hartz,f  where  six  types  of  machine  drills  have  been  tried  for 
several  years.  It  appears  there  was  a  saving  equal  to  28.  3.89^. 
per  ton  of  ore  won  in  favour  of  machine  as  compared  with 
hand  drilling,  including  all  costs,  during  the  year  T  880-81.  The 
saving  in  favour  of  machine  drilling  for  the  years  1877,  '78 
and  '79,  was  10.39^.,  is.  .ojd,  and  is.  $.2d.  per  ton  respectively, which  shows  a  progressive  increase,  probably  due  to  improvements 
in  the  machines  and  training  of  the  men. 
The  following  figures  relating  to  the  Vosberg  Tunnel,  U.S.A.,:}: 
show  the  difference  in  the  speed  of  machine  drilling  compared with  hand : 
East  End. West  End. 
Length, (ft.) 
Excavation, 
(cub.  yds.) 
Length. 
(ft.) 
Excavation, 
(cub.  yds.) 
Hand  drilling        . 
Machine  drilling  . 
60.  8  1 
i8i.ii 
537-50 
1069.27 
65.73 
138-63 
419.62 
1095.77 
Average  for  hand  drilling,  both  ends,  63.27  feet,  for  machine  drilling, 
159.87  feet ;  a  gain  in  speed  equal  to  252.7  per  cent. 
COAL    CUTTING    BY    MACHINERY— Under   suitable 
•conditions,  coal  can  be  holed  much  cheaper  by  machinery  than  by 
*  For.  Abs.  N.E.I,  xxxi.  24.  t  Ibid,  xxxii.  43. 
4:  The  Vosberg  Tunnel  T.eo.  von  Rosenberg  (New  York,  1887),  p.  26. 

--- Page Break ---
68  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
hand,  except,  probably,  when  wages  are  low.  The  great  advantage, 
however,  is  that  less  small  coal  is  produced,  as  with  the  pick  a  man, 
to  under-cut  a  certain  distance,  has  to  remove  enough  height  at  the 
face  to  get  his  arms  in.  To  a  certain  extent,  machines  cannot  well 
be  used  in  old  mines,  the  work  requiring  to  be  specially  laid  out 
for  them.  With  a  good  roof  requiring  little  timber,  they  are  used 
with  a  considerable  amount  of  success,  but  in  a  tender  coal,  the 
roof  is  crushed  down  upon  them,  or  supports  have  to  be  set  near 
the  face.  These  get  in  the  way  of  a  machine,  which  cannot  move 
round  them  like  a  collier.  The  different  types  employed  may  be 
divided  into  (a)  the  circular-saw  class,  (b)  the  band-saw  class, 
(c)  the  percussive,  and  (d)  the  bar  type. 
Machines  worked  by  Compressed  Air. — Gillott  and 
Copley's  is  a  representative  of  the  circular-saw  type.  The  cutter wheel  is  a  malleable-iron  disc,  4  ft.  diam.,  furnished  on  its  outer 
periphery  with  a  series  of  chisels,  these  being  of  two  kinds,  single 
FIG.  64. 
and  double,  placed  alternately.  Power  is  supplied  by  an  engine 
having  cylinders  9  in.  diam.  by  10  in.  stroke,  geared  down  about 
5  to  i.  The  machine  is  drawn  forward  by  a  wire  rope,  which  is 
attached  to  the  hook  (a,  Fig.  64),  then  passed  round  a  pulley  at  the 
end  of  the  face,  and  finally  brought  to,  and  coiled  on,  the  drum  b, 
by  the  action  of  a  ratchet-wheel  and  pawl,  which  can  be  so  regu- 
lated that  either  one  or  more  teeth  are  taken  at  a  time,  thereby 
allowing  the  machine  to  be  fed  slower,  if  the  under-cutting  is 
hard.  This  machine  cuts  from  back  to  front,  and  brings  its  debris 
out,  if  the  cut  is  above  the  floor. 
Rigg  and  Meiklejohris  machine  also  cuts  like  a  circular  saw,  but 
with  this  advantage  :  it  holes  into  the  face  on  the  underside  of  the 
sleepers  ;  or,  in  other  words,  flush  with  the  bottom  of  the  coal.  It 
can  be  employed  in  the  thinnest  seams,  as  its  height  is  only  16  in. 
It  is  provided  with  four  adjustable  screws,  one  on  each  corner,  by 
means  of  which  the  cutters  can  be  made  to  work  at  any  angle,  and 
the  axle-boxes  are  also  adjustable  to  allow  the  machine  to  progress 
at  any  angle,  irrespective  of  the  level  of  the  rails.  It  revolves, 
however,  from  front  to  back,  and  carries  the  debris  into  the  cutr 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  69 
requiring  the  services  of  an  assistant  to  clean  it  out  The  cut  can 
be  made  alternately  in  opposite  directions. 
Baird's  machine  represents  the  band-saw  type.  The  cutters  are 
of  various  shapes,  and  are  mounted  on  an  endless  chain,  carried 
by  a  jib  which  projects  beneath  the  coal,  from  3  ft.  up  to  5  ft.  as 
required.  Motion  is  given  by  an  8  in.  cylinder  by  12  in.  stroke 
engine,  through  gearing,  to  a  cylindrical  shaft  in  the  centre 
of  the  machine.  On  the  bottom  of  this  shaft  is  a  cam,  or  sprocket 
wheel,  which  drives  the  chain  carrying  the  cutter  teeth.  As  this 
chain  has  to  be  carried  over  the  top  of  the  rails,  the  machine  can- not undercut  in  the  bottom  of  the  seam  unless  the  floor  is  taken 
up.  The  difficulty  is  got  over  to  a  certain  extent  by  canting  the 
machine  when  at  work. 
Harrison's  machine,  which  is  largely  employed  in  the  United 
States,  consists  of  a  percussion  drill  which  chips  away  the  coal.  A 
broad  pick  bit  is  secured  to  the  end  of  the  piston-rod  of  a  small  cylin- 
der mounted  on  wheels.  The  cutting  tool  is  chisel-shaped,  with  a 
triangular  slit  in  its  face. 
To  perform  the  under-  FIG.  65. 
cut,  two  boards,  6  ft.  by       H?J®^*^§"  "  "   XI   
3  ft.,  are  laid  on  the  floor    J^ifj^^'^^Jb  fo  JB^t»^ close    to   the   face   and 
slightly  inclined  towards 
it.    The  machine,  moun- 
ted on  14  inch  wheels,  is 
run  on  these  boards,  air        ^    *  ._.  V   J^^J!     *     "     ~     ~     .7     ~, 
turned  on,  and  the  face        **'^'  f~"  &•*—-•*?&*•' attacked    at    the   angle 
shown  in  Fig.  65.  The  machine  is  balanced  on  the  wheels, 
and  the  operator,  lying  behind  it,  sprags  the  wheels  with  his  feet, 
keeps  the  machine  up  to  its  work,  and  by  means  of  the  handles 
swings  it  about  and  regulates  the  direction  of  the  blow. 
Machines  of  a  similar  type  have  often  been  designed,  but  the 
violent  shock  against  the  rear  head  of  the  cylinder,  when  the 
piston  made  its  backward  movement,  not  only  made  it  impossible 
to  keep  them  to  their  work,  but  broke  them  to  pieces.  India- 
rubber  cushions  are  not  sufficient  remedy  for  this  evil.  Here  the 
difficulty  is  surmounted  by  interposing  between  the  piston  and 
cylinder  head,  an  air-cushion  of  adjustable  pressure,  and  in  addition 
the  valves  are  so  arranged  that  the  rebound  of  the  pick  actually 
aids  in  moving  them.  Prof.  Wheeler  *  states  that  it  takes  about 
6  minutes  to  shift  the  boards,  i  \  min.  to  change  the  bit,  and  16 
min.  to  cut  4  ft.  wide  by  4  ft.  deep.  To  disconnect,  load  up  the 
outfit  on  a  truck  and  remove  to  the  next  place,  unload  and  start 
to  work  again,  takes  about  20  min.  The  cutting  capacity  is  found 
to  be  between  60  and  70  lineal  ft.  per  jo-hours  shift,  with  an  air 
*  School  of  Mines  Quarterly,  New  York,  ix.  308. 
JE?  O 

--- Page Break ---
70  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
pressure  of  80  Ibs.,  the  average  for  six  machines  fora  month  being 
63.8  ft.  A  Harrison  machine  weighs  only  700  Ibs.  and  costs  about 
,£120.  The  cost  per  day  for  power,  repairs,  interest,  and  depre- 
ciation, is  put  at  3<2.  per  ton. 
The  Inger soil- Sergeant  machine  is  similar  in  general  appearance 
to  the  Harrison,  but  is  furnished  with  an  air-moved  valve  like 
their  drills.  It  is  claimed  to  be  simpler  in  construction,  to  be 
more  under  control,  to  deliver  a  harder  blow,  and  to  be  more economical  in  air  than  the  Harrison. 
The  Legg  coal-cutter  is  a  representative  of  the  bar  type,  and  differs from  all  others  not  only  in  the  way  power  is  transmitted  to  the  cutter 
FIG.  66. 
bar,  but  in  the  direction  in  which  the  cut  is  made.  The  machine 
consists  of  a  bed  frame,  occupying  a  space  about  2  feet  wide  by 
7  ft.  6  in.  long,  composed  of  two  steel  channel  bars,  the  top  plates 
on  each  forming  racks,  with  the  teeth  downwards,  into  which  the 
feed  wheels  of  the  sliding  frame  engage.  On  the  rear  end  of  the 
latter  is  mounted  a  pair  of  5  in.  by  5  J  in.  engines,  from  which 
power  is  transmitted  through  straight  gear  and  worm  wheels  to 
the  rack,  which  feeds  the  sliding  frame  forward.  The  cutter-bar is  mounted  on  the  front  end  of  this  sliding  frame,  and  contains 
the  bits,  «,  a  (Fig.  66),  made  of  tool  steel,  held  in  place  by  set  screws, 
and  so  set  in  a  spiral  along  the  horizontal  bar  as  to  make  a  con- 
tinuous semi-cylindrical  cut  in  one  revolution.  The  cutter-bar  is 
revolved  by  an  endless  curved  link  steel  chain  b,  and  as  it  is 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  7t 
revolved,  is  advanced  into  the  coal,  the  bed  plate  being  clamped 
firmly  by  two  braces  fitted  with  lengthening  screws,  one  of  which 
is  shown  at  c.  Small  link  belts,  d,  behind  the  cutter-bar,  push 
back  the  chippings  produced  during  holing,  by  the  aid  of  the  bhort 
projections,  ey  e,  and  keep  the  under-cut  free. 
The  essential  difference  between  this  and  other  machines,  is  the 
direction  in  which  the  cut  is  made.  Here  it  is  parallel  to  the  face, 
while  in  all  others  it  is  at  right  angles.  This  machine  really  does its  work  in  the  same  direction  as  a  miner.  When  the  cut  has 
reached  the  required  depth,  usually  about  5  ft.,  the  bar  is  thrown 
out  of  gear  and  withdrawn,  the  machine  moved  sideways  along  the 
face  over  the  length  of  the  cutter-bar,  and  another  cut  made. 
This  gets  over  two  disadvantages :  (a)  the  inability  of  most  coal- cutters to  work  in  stalls  which  are  set  with  timber  at  short 
intervals,  since  so  long  as  the  props  are  wide  enough  for  this 
machine  to  be  got  between  (about  3  ft.  6  in.),  it  can  easily  be  placed 
in  position,  even  if  they  are  close  to  the  face ;  (b)  the  irregular 
holing  generally  produced  when  the  floor  of  the  seam  is  undulating. 
Rotary  wheel  machines  must  cut  a  straight  groove  ;  this  machine 
can  follow  any  variation  in  the  floor  which  takes  place  within  the 
length  of  the  cutter-bar. 
The  rapidity  of  the  cutting  is  claimed  as  a  further  advantage 
of  the  machine.  It  is,  however,  expensive  in  first  cost,  and  in 
repairs.  The  present  cutter- bar  is,  however,  an  improvement 
on  those  formerly  used.  Instead  of  being  weakened  at  the  sprocket 
by  being  squared  to  admit  the  straight  link  driving  chain 
formerly  used,  it  is  now  increased  in  diameter  at  this  point,  made 
round,  and  a  curved  link-chain  used,  thus  not  only  strengthening the  bar,  but  greatly  increasing  the  leverage  of  the  chain,  which 
lessens  the  power  required,  and  reduces  the  friction  and  wear  on 
the  chain.  The  feed  can  readily  be  thrown  off  and  on  by  means of  a  lever. 
Machines  Driven  by  Electricity. — Although  machines 
under-cut  coal  cheaper  than  manual  labour,  under  suitable  con- 
ditions, the  difficulty  of  driving  them  by  compressed  air  or  wire 
ropes,  nullifies  the  advantages  to  a  certain  extent,  even  where 
favourable  conditions  exist.  The  cost  of  installing  compressed  air 
is  not  only  considerable,  but  its  transmission  to  the  face  presents 
serious  difficulties  in  coal  mines  ;  not  only  are  the  pipes  expensive, 
but  the  cost  of  labour  in  laying  them  is  large.  If  the  pipes  are 
carried  along  the  side  of  the  road  on  supports,  any  fall  of  roof  or 
sides  will  break  them  ;  while  if  they  are  buried  beneath  the  floor, leaks  cannot  be  detected.  These  latter  considerations  are  not  so 
important  in  the  main  roads  as  they  are  in  those  approaching  the 
face  which  are  constantly  being  altered  in  dimension,  and  in 
which  repairs  are  frequent. 
Electricity  appears  to  be  particularly  applicable  to  the  operation 
of  coal-cutting.  In  the  facility  with  which  power  can  be  carried 

--- Page Break ---
72  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
about,  this  medium  stands  unrivalled,  and  the  cost  of  up-keep  is 
less  than  with  other  systems.  The  only  objection  seems  to  be  the 
danger  that  may  result  from  sparking  at  the  motors  in  situations 
where  explosive  atmospheres  exist.  In  the  author's  opinion  this danger  appears  to  have  been  exaggerated.  Tn  the  first  place,  the 
great  majority  of  mines  do  not  contain  explosive  atmospheres,  and 
in  the  event  of  a  sudden  outburst  of  gas,  the  motor  might  be 
immediately  stopped.  Sparking  at  known  points,  or  by  short 
circuiting,  appears  to  be  preventible,  as  it  depends  on  the  design 
of  the  machine,  on  the  intelligence  of  the  workmen  operating  it, 
and  last,  but  not  least,  on  the  common-sense  of  the  purchaser. In  the  desire  to  secure  economy  in  outlay,  less  money  is  often 
spent  on  safeguards  than  should  be  the  case. 
The  Goolden  *  cutter  consists  of  a  long  bar,  taper  or  parallel, 
having  a  series  of  steel  tools  arranged  on  it.  This  bar  is  rotated 
at  the  rate  of  about  500  revolutions  per  minute,  the  electric  motor 
running  at  about  700  revolutions.  The  cutter-bar  is  drilled  with  a series  of  holes,  each  of  which  is  placed  in  a  direction  nearly,  but 
not  quite,  at  90°  to  the  next  adjacent  one,  with  the  result  that the  cutters  form  a  left-handed  spiral,  which  serves  to  equalise  the 
cutting  action,  and  also  a  right-handed  spiral,  which  acts  as  a  sort of  corkscrew,  and  draws  the  debris  out  of  the  cut.  After  trying 
various  forms  for  the  cutters,  a  V-  shape  has  been  adopted,  with 
the  edge  nearest  the  machine  sloping  across  the  cut ;  so  that  when 
the  tool  has  entered  about  ^  or  J  in.  a  wedging  action  commences, 
and  the  ridge  of  coal  left  between  succeeding  cutters  is  split  off. 
This  machine  is  practically  the  only  one  which  has  been  at 
work  in  England.  Messrs.  Atkinson  state  that  on  an  average 
20  to  30  sq.  yds.  per  hour  may  be  cut  in  fairly  hard  coal,  all 
stoppages  being  included,  while  as  a  maximum  performance,  55  yds. 
were  holed  an  average  depth  of  3  ft.  8  in.  in  75  minutes  at 
Nostell  Colliery. 
The  Jeffrey  machine,  which  is  most  in  favour  in  America,  consists 
practically  of  the  Legg  machine,  already  described,  with  the 
ordinary  engines  replaced  by  an  electric  motor.  The  current 
required  is  from  30  to  50  amperes  at  a  pressure  of  220  volts; 
the  armature  is  calculated  to  run  at  1000  rev.  per  min.,  while 
the  cutter-bar  makes  200  revolutions.  The  momentum  of  the 
armature  is  such,  that  obstructions  met  with  by  the  cutter-bar 
are  not  perceptible,  so  that  the  machine  is  caused  to  run  steadily. 
Mr.  H.  C.  Spauldingf  states  that  23  of  these  machines  have 
been  applied,  and  that  the  amount  of  work  done  by  each  averaged 
from  600  to  900  sq.  ft.  of  under-cut  in  TO  hours. 
Van-Depode.^. — A  machine  of  the  percussive  type  has  recently been  placed  on  the  market  in  America.  With  a  stroke  of  from 
*  Inst.  C.E.  civ.  104.  t  Amer.  Inst.  M.E.  xix.  276. J  Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.,  Aug.  29,  1891,  p.  245. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROCJND. 
73 
d  o 
as 
B  •"•  •£  M  NO          O\w>00   N  00 
«2         "o  ^.00      -^-^      -£.8  rovrf      COM*  MOO" w  {v>  ir>  ff) 
j5 
02         5^ 
S3  e.2  -  «   
>3  ^xnO         ir>>~'        -J^n^f^         tOMM   wy -rtrt  ro^*"^        ^•^'        WN         ^ 
O O 
H 
8 
5        ^         25_oo     JN.^*-     J-  .2  *O  o_      M    -    •  >  rood  .o 
1    i    " 
™    | 
*?  88    ^^^po*^*^* 
-M-CO         >7^    >M°°^  "^ 
...M*     -hC*     •&<"*•'   
S.      |       ||  S. 
•••$•>•&  V*  '  '551   
C5  "1        S  «        S3 
.  .  /-a  .  .g5  .^  .  .§  .g   ^5          VO  -5  M 
^3          o      M          *      S 
!::t:1  t;;i;Iji;; «         P  *'  8  8     £         «?  P^ 

--- Page Break ---
74 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
5  to  6J  in.,  obtained  by  the  action  of  a  solenoid,  it  delivers  from 
300  to  350  blows  per  min.,  and  weighs  a  little  over  700  Ibs. 
Cost  of  Coal-cutting. — Mr.  R.  W.  Clark*  gives  the  actual 
figures  for  a  day's  work,  taken  at  haphazard,  as  6f  lineal  yds.  of under-cutting  per  hour,  as  the  average  performance  of  four  ma- 
chines during  three  shifts.  He  states  that  the  holing  was  exceed- 
ingly hard,  and  that  this  may  be  taken  as  a  fair  performance,  as, 
almost  always,  little  delays  will  occur.  The  working  place  should 
not  be  too  long,  as  if  there  is  any  delay  in  filling  the  coals  out, 
the  machine  will  be  stopped  on  its  own  journey.  The  chief  point 
on  which  success  depends,  is  the  removal  of  the  machine  from  one 
place  to  another.  This  must  be  made  as  expeditious  and  as  simple 
as  possible.  A  great  deal  depends  on  the  readiness  of  the  men. 
Three  men  have  moved  the  machine  about  2000  yds.  up  some  very 
low  roads,  taking  about  16  hours  in  unfixing,  removing,  and  fixing 
FIG.  67. 
a 
up  again.  The  deputies  should  be  men  of  quick  observation 
and  ready  resource,  and  able  to  estimate  how  much  work  there  is 
to  be  done  in  every  shift  in  every  face,  and  to  arrange  for  the 
regular  working  of  the  machines.  In  1888,  3 Jo?,  was  paid  per 
lineal  yd.  cut,  this  including  removal  of  machine  and  laying  pipes. 
in  the  roads  leading  to  the  face. 
Mr.  Geo.  Blake  Walker  gives  a  comparison,  reproduced  on  p.  73, 
of  the  relative  cost  of  coal-getting  by  hand  and  by  machine.! 
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  greatest  saving  results  from  the  re- 
duction in  the  amount  of  small  made  by  machines. 
Stanley's  Heading  Machine. — None  of  the  machines  yet  de scribed,  except  the  Legg,  can  be  applied  for  driving  narrow  roads. 
The  Stanley  Header  (Fig.  67),  has  been  designed  for  such  purpose, 
and  consists  of  a  cutter-bar  driven,  through  gearing,  by  a  pair  of 
vertical  engines.  The  cutter-bar  is  composed  of  a  massive  iron 
casting,  placed  parallel  to  the  face  of  coal,  and  carrying  on  each 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  x.  124. t  Fed.  Inst.  i. 

--- Page Break ---
BBEAKING  GROUND.  75 
extremity  a  bar  of  iron,  2  ft.  long,  to  the  ends  of  which  the  cutter- knives  are  attached.  This  tool  is  revolved,  and  cuts  out  an  annular 
excavation,  leaving  in  the  centre  a  core  of  coal,  which  is  removed 
by  hand-wedging. 
The  machine  may  be  considered  a  practical  success.  It  has  now 
been  working  several  years,  and  has  given  satisfaction  in  every 
case.  The  actual  speed  of  cutting  is  from  2  to  3  in.  per  min. 
The  wedging  down  of  the  core,  and  placing  machine  in  position  for 
a  fresh  cut,  takes  on  an  average  about  an  hour.  The  chief  saving 
results  from  the  increased  proportion  of  large  coal,  and  the  rapidity 
of  the  work.  The  actual  cost  of  driving  is  said  to  be  less  than  by hand. 
Boring  Cross  Cuts. — Machine  drills,  for  boring  air-holes  *  to 
serve  as  connections  between  winning  head-ways,  are  largely  em- 
ployed in  the  Saarbrucken  coal-field.  They  are  of  the  rotary  type, 
having  jagged  teeth  cutting-edges  in  the  circumference  of  the 
drill.  Four  men  can  drill  from  34  to  46  ft.,  12  in.  diam.  hole,  in  an 
8-hours  shift.  With  the  Munscheid  and  the  Hussmann  machines, 
two  men  are  required,  who  will  bore  a  hole  20  in.  diam.  at  the 
rate  of  1.09  yds.  per  hour ;  with  holes  uf  in.  diam.,  the  cost  of 
boring  is  given  at  is.  4^d.  per  yard.  The  ordinary  sizes  are  for  holes 
14,  1 6,  1 8,  and  20  inches  diam.,  the  first  cost  of  a  machine  being 
about  ^"35. EXPLOSIVES. — Gunpowder. — This  is  the  explosive  com- 
monly used  in  mines,  and  although  numerous  attempts  have  been 
made  to  replace  it  with  other  substances,  it  still  remains  unrivalled 
for  the  special  operation  of  getting  down  coal.  Normal  gunpowder 
consists  of  a  mechanical  mixture  of  75  per  cent,  saltpetre,  properly 
refined,  15  per  cent,  charcoal,  preferably  made  from  alder  or 
willow  wood,  and  10  per  cent,  of  sulphur.  With  a  view,  how- 
ever, of  producing  something  cheap,  not  only  have  the  proportions 
of  charcoal  and  sulphur  been  increased  and  saltpetre  decreased, 
but  instead  of  putting  in  pure  articles,  impure  ones  have  been  em- 
ployed, with  the  result,  that  in  common  gunpowders,  the  pur- chaser pays  for  quantities  of  useless  material  that  do  no  work. 
In  the  manufacture,  the  ingredients  are  first  pulverised  sepa- 
rately, and  then  mixed  together  and  ground  under  heavy  rollers 
for  from  2\  to  10  hours.  Even  if  suitable  proportions  and 
materials  are  employed,  grinding  must  be  carried  on  for  some 
time,  or  the  mechanical  mixture  of  the  ingredients  is  incomplete  and 
combustion  imperfect.  High-grade  sporting  powders  are  milled 
for  10  hours,  not  so  much  with  a  view  to  increase  their  strength 
as  to  prevent  or  decrease  "  fouling,"  and  as  it  is  just  as  essential that  no  smoke,  or  as  little  as  possible,  should  be  given  off  when 
the  charge  is  fired  underground,  blasting  powders  should  be  milled 
for  a  similar  length  of  time.  The  best  results  have  been  obtained 
*  For.  Abs.  N.E.I,  xxxiii.  58. 

--- Page Break ---
76  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
in  Germany  by  the  use  of  rye  straw  for  charcoal,  carbonised  to 
brownness,  with  sulphur  reduced  from  TO  per  cent,  to  3  per  cent. 
The  problem  is  to  get  rid  of  the  sulphur  altogether. 
The  so-called  smokeless  powders  may  be  denned  as  chemical 
compounds,  and  generally  consist  of  gun-cotton  and  picric  acid, sometimes  alone,  sometimes  in  combination,  mixed  with  retarding 
agents  to  prevent  detonation.  The  absence  of  smoke  is  a  great 
advantage,  but  safety  in  storing  and  reliability  in  keeping  quality 
is  greater.  The  slow-burning  character  of  gunpowder  makes  it 
an  admirable  rending  compound.  It  gives  out  its  energy  in  a 
constant  heaving  force,  and  brings  down  coal  in  large  lumps.  No 
other  explosives  do  so  ;  their  energy  is  locally  developed,  smash- 
ing up  such  a  soft  substance  as  coal,  and  entailing  a  loss  to  colliers 
and  colliery  owners.  So  far  as  cost  is  concerned,  gunpowder  com- 
pares favourably,  in  all  ordinary  operations,  with  any  other  explosive. 
So  long  as  powder  will  blow  the  bottom  of  the  holes  out,  nothing 
is  gained  by  using  more  powerful  explosives ;  but  in  strong  rocks, 
the  employment  of  powder  means  shallow  holes  and  slow  progress. 
Where  everything  is  sacrificed  to  speed,  the  holes  are  bored  deep, 
and  sufficient  explosive  used  to  break  up  the  rock  into  small 
fragments,  and  so  hasten  its  subsequent  removal.  Gunpowder 
possesses  an  advantage  which  is  not  shared  by  any  other  explo- sive :  it  can  be  used  either  with  or  without  detonators,  and  be 
made  to  do  more  work  at  will. 
Nitro- Glycerine. — This  substance  is  formed  by  the  action  of 
a  mixture  of  nitric  and  sulphuric  acids  on  glycerine.  It  is  a 
bright,  oily,  colourless  and  odourless  fluid,  has  a  faint  sweet  taste, 
and  is  poisonous,  causing  headache  and  colic.  It  is  such  an 
unstable  compound,  that  its  use  has  been  forbidden  by  law  in  this 
country  and  in  several  continental  ones  ;  but,  mixed  with  other 
substances,  it  forms  the  base  of  the  majority  of  modern  high 
explosives. 
Dynamite  is  a  plastic  substance  of  reddish-brown  colour,  con- 
sisting of  nitro-glycerine  absorbed  in  porous  kieselguhr,  which  is 
earth  consisting  of  the  shells  of  diatoms  (nearly  pure  silica),  found 
in  Hanover  and  other  localities.  Many  other  absorbent  materials 
have  been  tried,  but  kieselguhr  has  given  the  best  results.  This 
choice  has  been  further  justified  by  the  absence,  after  explosion,  of 
the  noxious  fumes  of  carbonic  oxide,  which  render  charcoal,  although 
equally  absorbent,  so  hurtful  to  the  health  of  the  miner.  Ordinary 
dynamite  contains  75  parts  of  nitro-glycerine  and  25  parts  of 
kieselguhr.  In  the  open  air,  in  small  quantities,  it  burns  freely, 
quietly,  and  without  explosion.  One  advantage  of  the  dynamite 
class  of  explosives  is  that  they  are  plastic,  and  therefore,  when 
tamped,  fit  accurately  into  the  hole.  Metal  rods,  or  rammers, 
should  never  be  employed  to  tamp  the  charge.  A  wooden  rod 
should  be  used,  and  the  cartridges  gently,  though  firmly,  squeezed 
into  place. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GEOUND.  77 
Blasting  Gelatine  is  said  to  be  the  most  powerful  of  known 
explosives,  and  is  a  tough,  slightly  elastic,  semi-transparent  sub- 
stance, resembling  ordinary  gelatine.  It  contains  93  per  cent,  of 
nitro-glycerine,  together  with  7  per  cent,  of  nitro-cotton,  and  on 
explosion  resolves  itself  into  carbonic  acid,  water,  and  nitrogen, 
there  being  just  enough  oxygen  to  combine  with  the  carbon  and 
hydrogen.  It  is  stated  to  be  50  per  cent,  stronger  than  dyna- mite, and  more  insensible  to  shocks  than  that  substance. 
Gelatine-Dynamite. — This  is  a  compound  better  known  to 
miners  and  contractors,  being  more  used  for  blasting  in  rock 
which  is  required  to  be  removed  in  as  large  pieces  as  possible,  as 
its  action  is  a  heaving  and  rending,  rather  than  a  disruptive  one. 
In  appearance  it  is  more  opaque  than  blasting  gelatine,  and 
consists  of  80  per  cent,  of  that  explosive,  with  nitrate  of  potash 
and  wood-pulp  added  in  proportion. 
Gelignite  is  similar  in  composition.  It  consists  of  65  per 
cent,  of  blasting  gelatine  and  35  per  cent,  of  the  absorbing  powder. 
In  cold  weather,  all  nitro-glycerine  compounds  freeze,  even  at  a 
temperature  of  46°  F.,  and  are  very  dangerous  to  use  when  in such  a  state.  The  cartridges  may,  however,  be  softened,  without 
danger,  in  warm-water  warming-pans.  They  must  not  be  put  in  the 
warm  water  to  do  so,  but  first  in  a  water-tight  vessel,  and  then that  vessel  placed  in  warm  water. 
Kackarock. — This  explosive  is  largely  employed  in  America. 
It  is  composed  of  80  per  cent,  of  potassium  chlorate  and  20  per 
cent,  of  nitro-benzol.  The  former  of  these  ingredients  is  solid,  and 
the  latter  liquid,  and  both  are  non-explosive  during  their  manu- 
facture, storage,  and  transport.  Little  danger  attends  the  use  of 
this  explosive  as  explosion  can  only  take  place  after  mixture,  this 
being  generally  done  immediately  before  charging. 
BLASTING  IN  DRY  AND  DUSTY  MINES.— The 
passing  of  the  Mines  Regulation  Act,  1887,  materially  modified  the 
use  of  explosives  underground,  as  General  Rule  1 2  states  that  "  in 
places  likely  to  contain  either  accumulations  of  gas  or  coal-dust,  a 
shot  shall  not  be  fired  unless  the  explosive  is  so  used  with  water  or 
other  contrivance  as  to  prevent  it  inflaming  gas,  or  is  of  such  a 
nature  that  it  cannot  inflame  gas."  The  one  fault  of  gunpowder  is that  it  gives  off  a  certain  amount  of  flame  on  explosion,  and  its  use 
is,  therefore,  not  allowable  under  the  circumstances  just  stated.  To 
meet  the  altered  conditions,  and  yet  to  continue  the  use  of  ex- 
plosives, numerous  methods  have  been  proposed. 
Water  Cartridge. — A  cartridge  of  gelignite  (usually  of  such  a 
size  that  only  one  is  necessary)  is  held  in  a  skeleton  case  (a,  Figs. 
68-70)  having  a  number  of  thin  metal  diaphragms  b,  which  keep 
the  cartridge  in  the  centre  of  the  case  (c,  Figs.  68  and  70)  con- 
taining the  water.  A  detonator  is  inserted  into  the  last  cartridge, 
and  a  fuse,  or  electric  wires,  passed  from  it  to  the  outside,  of  the 
bore-hole.  The  space  between  the  charge  and  the  case  is  filled 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING 
FIGS.  68,  69,  AND  70. 
with  water,  and  the  outer  end  firmly  tied  round  the  project- 
ing fuse  or  wires  d.  A  guide  wire  e,  is  also  placed  in  the  bag  to 
keep  the  charge  in  the  centre  long  ways.  The  objections  to  this 
apparatus  are  (i)  the  large  number  of  parts  and  delicate  handling 
they  require  5(2)  the  water  acts  as  a  sort 
of  cushion  between  the  explosive  and the  sides  of  the  hole  and  so  lessens  the 
effect  y  (3)  the  large-sized  hole  which  has 
to  be  bored ;  (4)  and  a  liability  of  rup- turing the  case  and  letting  out  the water. 
To  overcome  these  disadvantages,  which 
reduce  efficiency  and  convenience,  several 
new  explosives  have  b  3en  developed. 
Roburite. — This  belongs  to  the  hydro- 
carbon class  of  explosives,  and  consists 
of  two  compounds  (which  are  harmless 
and  inert  separately)  mixed  and  ground 
up  together  in  a  mill,  the  resulting  pro- duct having  a  sandy  granular  appearance, 
resembling  common  yellow  sugar.  The 
two  substances  are  nitro-benzol  and  am- 
monium-nitrate, the  latter  being  the 
oxygen-yielding  body.  During  the  pro- cess of  mixture  these  two  substances 
are  subjected  to  a  process  of  chlorinisa- tion,  with  the  result  that  the  compound 
produced,  upon  being  detonated  in  the  usual  manner,  evolves  gases 
which  quench  any  flame  produced  by  the  explosion.  The  practical 
effect  is  somewhat  similar  to  that  produced  by  the  water  cartridge, 
with  the  distinction,  that  the  quenching  element  being  chemically 
combined  with  the  explosive,  there  is  a  smaller  risk  of  failure. 
Roburite  cannot  be  exploded  by  blows  of  a  hammer,  as  it  requires  a 
very  powerful  detonator,  and  when  ignited  burns  slowly.  It  is  very 
safe,  as  far  as  regards  storing,  and  has  more  of  a  heaving  action 
than  the  nitro- glycerine  class.  It  does  not  freeze  when  exposed 
to  cold,  but  is  affected  by  damp  and  loses  power,  although  its 
strength  can  be  restored  by  drying ;  the  cartridges  are,  however, 
placed  in  a  special  waterproof  covering,  which,  to  a  certain  extent, 
removes  this  disadvantage.  Statements  have  been  made  from  time 
to  time  that  the  fumes  produced  on  explosion  have  an  injurious 
effect  on  the  health  of  the  workmen,  but  in  every  instance  where 
these  have  been  investigated  (in  Lancashire  and  the  North  of 
England)  no  ground  has  been  found  for  such  complaints.*  Some 
cases  of  illness  have  been  traced  to  its  use,  but  these  have  gener- 
ally been  found  to  be  due  to  the  neglect  of  the  proper  precautions 
in  its  use  which  are  published  by  the  manufacturers.  Workmen 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND.  79 
having  cuts,  or  skin  knocked  off  their  hands,  should  be  careful 
when  handling  the  cartridges,  and  should  wash  their  hands  before 
eating  food,  or  there  is  a  danger  of  some  of  the  substance  getting into  their  mouths. 
Ardeer  Powder. — Under  this  title  Messrs.  Nobel  have  re- 
cently introduced  an  explosive  practically  identical  in  composition 
with  "  Grisoutite,"  which  has  given  such  good  results,  and  has  met 
with  much  favour  on  the  Continent.*  The  base  of  the  compound 
is  dynamite  mixed  with  45  per  cent,  of  Epsom  Salt.  This  sub- stance contains  5 1  per  cent,  of  water,  and  is  introduced  for  the 
object  of  reducing  the  temperature  of  the  products  of  explosion. 
Carbonite  is  another  explosive  of  late  introduction.  It  is  said 
to  be  composed  of  nitro-glycerine,  sulphur,  and  nitre-benzol. 
Tonite. — Tonite,  which  consists  of  52.5  per  cent,  of  gun-cotton 
and  47.5  per  cent,  of  barium  nitrate,  by  itself  fires  gas  in  the 
same  manner  as  ordinary  gunpowder,  but,  if  tamped  with 
Trench's  Compound,  flame  produced  by  the  explosion  is  quenched. Ammonite. — An  explosive  of  recent  introduction  is  that  known 
as  Ammonite  or  Favier's  explosive,  which  belongs  to  the  hydro- 
carbon class,  being  composed  of  ammonium  nitrate  and  nitro- 
naphthalene.  It  can  only  be  exploded  by  a  very  strong  detonator, 
is  not  affected  by  heat  or  cold,  but  readily  by  moisture ;  for  this 
reason  each  cartridge  is  enclosed  in  a  tinfoil  case  hermetically 
sealed,  which  has  to  be  cut  into  just  before  use  to  insert  the detonator. 
There  are  numerous  other  new  explosives  each  claimed  by  the 
makers  to  possess  advantages  over  the  others.  All  are  stated  to  be 
flameless,  but  none  are  absolutely  so.  Everything  seems  to  depend 
on  the  tamping.  Mr.  Walton  Brown  f  states  that  the  experiments 
of  the  French  Commission  showed  that  the  retardation  of  ignition 
characteristic  of  fire-damp  mixtures,  the  almost  instantaneous 
mixture  of  the  gases  resulting  from  the  explosive  with  the  sur- 
rounding atmosphere,  and  the  quick  cooling  consequent  thereon, 
combine  to  make  explosives,  whose  temperature  of  detonation  is 
less  than  4000°  F.,  incapable  of  igniting  explosive  fire-damp mixtures  under  normal  conditions  of  use ;  that  is  to  say,  if  pro- 
perly stemmed.  The  degree  of  safety  becomes  greater  as  the 
temperature  of  detonation  falls  below  the  above  value.  With  any 
of  the  dual  mixture  explosives,  the  greatest  care  in  manufacture 
is  necessary,  as  it  is  essential  that  perfection  be  ensured  in 
the  mixture.  The  safety  of  ignition  in  explosive  atmospheres  also 
depends  upon  the  almost  instantaneous  mixture  of  the  gases 
resulting  from  detonation  with  a  sufficient  volume  of  surrounding 
air,  it  being  highly  probable  that  it  may  be  dangerous  to  fire  a 
shot  in  a  too  limited  space,  and  with  a  weight  of  explosive  too 
*  La  stcurite  de   minage  a  la  grisoutite  dans  les  milieux  grisouteux   et 
poutsitreux.     A.  Macquet.     Mons.     1889. 
f  Fed.  Inst.  ii.  488. 

--- Page Break ---
8o  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
great  for  the  volume  of  the  surrounding  air,  as  compared  with  the 
volume  of  the  gases  produced  by  the  detonation. 
Firing  the  Charge. — Explosions  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes — (a)  where  combustion  proceeds  slowly  through  the  mass 
of  the  compound,  and  (b)  where  instant  ignition  takes  place,  called 
detonation.  The  power  in  (a)  is  applied  slowly,  with  rending 
effect ;  while  in  (b)  the  gases  are  instantly  generated,  their  force 
is  localised,  and  a  shattering  effect  results.  To  produce  the  latter 
action  detonators  have  to  be  used,  these  consisting  of  a  small 
quantity  of  a  powerful  explosive,  fulminate  of  mercury,  enclosed 
in  a  copper  capsule. 
Three  modes  of  firing  charges  are  in  use — (i)  squibs  or  Germans, 
(2)  fuses,  (3)  electricity.  The  first  can  only  be  employed  with 
gunpowder,  but  the  second  and  third  with  any  explosive. 
(1)  Squibs,  or  Germans. — These  consist  either  of  a  straw  or 
paper  spill  filled  with  fine  powder.     When  "  Germans "  are  em- 
ployed, a  copper  rod,  about  ~s  in.  diameter,  called  a  "  needle,"  has to  be  inserted  in  the  hole  during  tamping.    This  needle  reaches  from 
the  outside  to  the  cartridges,  and  is  turned  from  time  to  time  to 
prevent   it  getting  jammed,  and  finally  withdrawn,  leaving  an 
open  passage  through  the  tamping  to  the  powder.     The  squib  is 
then  inserted  in  this  hole,  and  a  slow  match  applied  to  the  outside 
end. 
(2)  Puses. — Frequent  misfires  with  straw  squibs,  and  prema- ture explosions,  together  with  the  production   of   a   shower   of 
sparks,  led  to  the  introduction  by  Bickford,  in  1831,  of  safety 
fuses,  the  principle  of  which  is  to  enclose  a  thin  string  of  gun- 
powder in  a  sheath  of  some  material  or  combination  of  materials, 
with  a  view  of  protecting  the  core  from  rough  usage  and  moisture. 
Many  different  qualities  are  made  to  meet  the  varying  condi- 
tions of  employment — viz.,  the  time  stored  before  use,  influence 
of  climate,  temperature   of   mine,  and   presence  or  absence  of moisture. 
For  ordinary  work  the  thread  of  powder  is  protected  with  rope 
yarn,  coated  with  different  varnishes,  or,  if  moisture  is  present,  a 
further  lining  of  tape  and  varnish  is  given.  For  blasting  under 
water,  gutta-percha  coverings  are  employed,  but  such  fuses  cannot 
be  stored  long,  owing  to  the  rapid  oxidation  of  the  gutta-percha.  To 
prevent  this,  an  exterior  coating  of  tape  and  composition  varnish 
is  applied,  which  not  only  delays  oxidation,  but  retains  the  efficiency 
for  a  long  time.  Metallic  fuses,  in  which  the  core  is  covered  with 
lead  pipe,  have  been  introduced,  but  are  not  much  employed, 
owing  to  their  weight,  brittleness,  and  liability  to  damage  by torsion. 
Ordinary  fuses  are  sold  in  coils  24  ft.  long,  and  burn  at  the  rate 
of  2  ft.  per  minute.  Misfires  occur,  generally  through  deterioration 
and  the  use  of  inferior  qualities.  The  store-room  should  be  dry,  or 
the  powder  will  be  affected,  and  the  fuse  should  not  be  in  contact 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING   GROUND. 81 
FIGS.  71  AND  72. 
with  any  oily  or  greasy  article.  All  gritty  and  sharp  substances 
should  be  avoided  in  ramming,  as  the  fuse  is  often  cut  through, and  a  misfire  follows. 
Under  the  Mines  Regulation  Act,  powder  can  only  be  taken  into 
a  mine  in  cartridges.  These  generally  consist  of  a  reel,  or  bobbin, 
of  compressed  powder,  having  a  hole,  conical  at  one  end,  passing 
through  the  centre.  In  firing  with  a  fuse,  it  is  first  cut  to  obtain 
a  fresh  surface,  and  threaded  through  the  bobbin.  One  end  of the  fuse  is  doubled  back  into  the  conical  hole  at  the  bottom  of  the 
cartridge,  and  pulled  tight,  the  subsequent  bobbins  being  threaded 
over  the  front.  In  doubling  the 
fuse  back  to  bind  it  in  the  cart- 
ridge, care  should  be  taken  that 
the  string  of  powder  rests  directly 
against  the  cartridge  (Fig.  71), 
and  not  against  the  return  por- 
tion of  the  fuse  (Fig.  72).  Nu- merous misfires  may  be  traced 
to  the  neglect  of  this  simple  precaution. 
With  detonating  explosives,  a  piece  of  safety  fuse  is  cut  clean, and  inserted  into  a  detonator  until  it  reaches  the  fulminate.  The 
upper  part  of  the  cap  is  then  squeezed  with  a  pair  of  nippers, 
with  a  view  not  only  of  securing  the  fuse  in  position,  but  also  of 
developing  the  power  of  the  fulminate. 
For  use  under  water,  care  should  be  taken  to  make  the  upper 
end  of  the  detonator  water-tight,  where  it  joins  the  fuse.  With 
nitro-glycerine  explosives,  a  cartridge  is  opened  at  one  end,  the 
detonator  pushed  in  (leaving  about  one-third  of  the  copper  tube 
outside  the  cartridge)  and  securely  tied  in  position.  The  deto- 
nator should  not  be  pushed  too  far  into  the  cartridge,  or  the  fuse 
may  set  fire  to  it  before  the  spark  can  explode  the  detonator. 
Holes  are  charged  by  putting  in  one  or  more  cartridges,  and 
squeezing  each  with  a  wooden  rammer,  a  cartridge  with  detonator 
and  fuse  is  then  inserted,  but  must  not  be  squeezed.  Loose  sand,  or 
water,  is  all  that  is  required  for  tamping,  but  the  power  of  the 
explosive  is  increased  by  tamping.  A  good  plan  is  to  insert  on 
the  top  of  the  priming  cartridge  and  detonator  a  ball  of  soft  clay 
and  press  it  home,  then  put  further  tamping  on  this. 
In  firing  shots  in  mines,  where  naked  lights  are  not  allowed,  a 
small  copper  wire  is  commonly  employed,  one  end  of  which  is 
made  red-hot  by  putting  it  into  the  flame  of  a  safety  lamp,  while the  other  is  inserted  into  the  fuse.  The  wire  is  generally  passed 
through  a  small  hole  in  the  glass  of  the  lamp.  To  get  rid  of  the 
difficulty  of  passing  wires  into  lamps,  and  prevent  the  emission  of 
sparks  when  the  fuse  is  fired,  Messrs.  Bickford  have  designed  an 
ignitor,  which  consists  of  a  small  tin  tube,  containing  a  small  glass, 
phial,  holding  sulphuric  acid,  resting  against  a  small  quantity  of 
chlorate  of  potash  and  sugar ;  one  end  of  the  fuse  is  inserted  into 

--- Page Break ---
82  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  open  end  of  the  tube,  and  the  glass  phial  broken  by  gripping 
the  tube  with  a  pair  of  pincers  (Fig.  73).  The  sulphuric  acid  acts 
on  the  mixture,  lights  the  end  of  the  fuse,  and  all  sparks  produced 
are  kept  within  the  tube. 
FlG-  73-  At  the  Aubin  Colliery  in  the 
department  of  Aveyron,  France, a  modification  of  the  device  for 
lighting  pipes,  cigarettes,  &c.,  by 
the  heat  generated  by  the  com- 
pression of  air,  has  been  in  use  for 
some  time.  It  consists  of  a  metal  cylinder,  in  which  a  well-fitting 
piston  moves,  the  rod  of  this  carrying  a  cross-piece  so  that  a  firm hold  is  given  for  the  hand.  One  end  of  the  fuse  is  passed  through 
a  small  hole  in  an  india-rubber  ring  into  the  cylinder.  A  quick 
and  strong  thrust  is  given  to  the  piston,  the  air  in  the  cylinder  is 
compressed  and  heated,  and  the  core  of  the  fuse  ignited.  It  is 
said  that,  with  a  little  practice,  ignition  always  takes  place  at  the 
first  thrust,  and  as  the  sparks  from  the  burning  of  the  first  inch  of 
fuse  are  thrown  out  inside  the  cylinder,  they  are  thereby  cut  off 
from  the  surrounding  atmosphere. 
Blasting  by  Electricity. — The  practice  of  igniting  shots  by 
the  aid  of  the  electric  current  has  been  gaining  ground  for  a  con- 
siderable number  of  years ;  with  it,  no  question  can  arise  as  to 
whether  shots  have  missed  fire  or  not.  Ignition  with  ordinary  fuse 
sometimes  hangs  for  a  considerable  time,  even  up  to  twenty-four 
hours ;  sparks  from  the  fuse  are  got  rid  of  by  numerous  devices, 
but  as  no  sparks  are  produced  by  electricity,  it  must  be  better. 
Then  again,  there  is  no  chance  of  premature  explosion.  Every 
one  can  be  in  a  place  of  safety  before  the  shots  are  fired ;  indeed, 
in  some  collieries  where  blasting  might  produce  an  explosion,  all 
the  shots  are  fired  from  the  surface  when  the  pit  is  free  from men. 
Two  systems  are  in  use ;  in  one,  electricity  of  high  tension  and 
small  quantity  is  employed,  while  in  the  other,  the  electricity  is  of 
low  tension  and  of  large  quantity.  The  former  are  called  "  tension," 
or  "  machine,"  fuses,  and  the  latter,  "  quantity,"  or  "  battery," fuses. 
Tension  Fuses. — These  consist  of  two  copper  wires,  with  the  ends 
separated  from  each  other  by  a  small  interval,  in  which  is  placed 
a  priming  composition,  and  the  whole  inserted  into  a  detonator. 
The  current,  in  leaping  across  the  interruption,  meets  with  great 
resistance  from  the  low  conductivity  of  the  material  passed  through, 
heat  is  generated,  and  the  priming  and  detonator  fired.  The 
priming  composition  generally  employed  is  known  as  "Abel's," and  consists  of  a  mixture  of  10  parts  of  sub-phosphide  of  copper, 
45  parts  of  sub-sulphide  of  copper,  and  15  parts  of  chlorate  of potash,  well  rubbed  together  in  a  mortar,  with  sufficient  alcohol 
to  moisten  the  mass,  and  afterwards  carefully  dried. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  83 
Quantity  Fuses. — Here  the  two  copper  wires  are  joined  together 
by  a  very  thin,  short  length  of  platinum  wire,  and  surrounded 
by  a  substance  inflammable  at  a  low  temperature.  The  current 
passing  down  the  copper  wires  meets  with  great  resistance  in 
passing  across  the  small  section  platinum  wire,  and  generates 
sufficient  heat  to  fire  the  priming.  As  the  circuit  is  uninterrupted, 
quantity  only  is  required  to  heat  the  wire  to  redness,  and  there- 
fore an  ordinary  battery  may  be  used. 
Comparison. — The  advantages  of  high  tension  lie  chiefly  in  the 
convenient  form  and  ready  action  of  the  machines  employed  to 
excite  electricity.  These  are  of  small  dimensions,  light  weight, 
simple  in  construction,  and  do  not  readily  get  out  of  order.  In 
addition  the  means  of  discharging  the  machine  may  be  removed 
until  the  required  moment.  For  this  reason,  such  system  is  useful 
in  mines  where  the  operations  are  carried  out  by  men  of  no  scien- 
tific knowledge.  A  great  advantage,  however,  is  the  fact  that  a 
large  number  of  shots  can  be  fired  simultaneously  with  more 
certainty  than  with  a  battery,  and  that  line  resistance  has  a  small 
effect  on  the  current,  so  that  cables  of  small  diameter  can  be  used. 
The  disadvantages  are,  that  the  fuses  are  more  or  less  affected 
by  moisture  and  heat,  and  that  the  wires  carrying  the  current 
have  to  be  well  insulated.  Low  tension  fuses  are  more  trustworthy 
than  high.  Certainty  of  action  is  always  possible,  as  each  fuse  can 
be  tested  before  use  by  passing  a  weak  current  through  it,  and 
the  insulation  of  the  line  wires  need  not  be  very  perfect.  For 
ordinary  mining  work,  low  tension  is  not  so  convenient  as  high 
tension.  In  the  first  place,  only  a  limited  number  of  shots  can  be 
fired  simultaneously,  unless  a  large  battery  power  is  available. 
Batteries  soon  get  very  cumbersome,  and,  furthermore,  always 
require  a  considerable  amount  of  attention.  Low  tension  fuses 
can,  however,  be  fired  from  an  electric  light  or  power  circuit  while 
high  tension  ones  cannot,  and  as  dynamos  are  becoming  common at  collieries  the  natural  result  is  that  low  tension  fuses  are  more 
and  more  applied. 
For  firing  tension  fuses,  two  types  of  machines  are  employed — (a)  those  in  which  the  current  is  generated  by  friction,  (b)  the 
magneto  type. 
fractional  Machines. — The  machine  most  in  favour  is  that  of 
Bornhardt,  which,  from  its  simplicity,  compactness,  and  porta- 
bility, possesses  many  advantages.  Electricity  is  generated  by 
the  friction  of  two  revolving  discs  of  ebonite  against  two  small 
cushions  covered  with  cat-skin,  and  is  received  by  two  cones,  and 
transmitted  by  a  metallic  conductor  into  the  interior  of  a  Leyden 
jar,  from  which  it  is  discharged  by  pressing  a  button.  The 
apparatus  is,  however,  very  delicate;  both  glass  and  ebonite 
being  so  hygroscopic,  that  a  machine  can  rarely  be  depended  upon 
to  work  many  hours  consecutively.  Unless  the  places  in  which 
it  is  used,  and  the  rubbers,  are  dry  and  warm,  the  machine  will 

--- Page Break ---
84 
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
furnish  no  current,  as  the  electricity  is  conducted  away  by  the 
condensed  moisture  as  fast  as  it  is  generated. 
Magneto- Machines. — These  consist  of  an  electro-magnet,  between 
whose  poles  an  armature,  wound  to  a  very  high  resistance,  is 
caused  to  rapidly  revolve  by  means  of  crank  motion  and  gearing. 
An  electric  current,  of  high  potential,  is  generated,  and  at  the 
moment  of  maximum  intensity  is  sent  out  to  the  outside  circuit 
in  which  are  the  fuses,  the  explosion  of  these  being  instantly 
accomplished. 
Simultaneous  Blasting. — The  advantages  of  firing  a  number 
of  shots  simultaneously,  especially  in  shafts  or  headings,  are  self- 
evident,  particularly  where  machine  drills  are  employed.  In 
the  first  place,  as  soon  as  the  machines  have  been  removed  and 
the  holes  charged,  the  rock  should  be  shot  down  as  quickly  as  pos- 
sible. Then  all  the  shots  going  off  at  once  assist  each  other,  their 
force  is  applied  collectively,  and  the  whole  of  the  rock  is  brought 
clean  away,  w.hile  if  fired  separately,  each  individual  blast  has  to 
tear  out  the  mass  of  rock  allotted  to  it,  the  result  being  that  in 
the  former  case  less  explosive  is  required,  and  in  addition  a  mini- 
mum amount  of  time  is  taken  up  in  the  operation.  Another 
advantage  of  simultaneous  firing,  is  that  all  the  smoke  produced 
by  the  explosion  is  generated  at  one  time,  and  the  men  only  have 
to  wait  for  this  to  clear  away,  while  if  shots  are  fired  indepen- 
dently, they  have  to  wait  after  each  blast. 
For  firing  a  large  number  of  shots  at 
FIGS.  74,  75  AND  76.  once  electricity  is  particularly  useful,  the 
reduced  quantity  of  explosive  used  balancing 
the  cost  of  the  electric  fuse,  the  saving  in 
time,  already  referred  to,  remaining  as  an 
advantage.  Another  point  of  importance 
is  the  question  of  missed  shots.  When 
firing  with  fuse,  one  can  never  be  sure 
whether  the  shot  has  really  missed  or  only 
hung  fire,  and  unless  explosion  takes  place 
the  working  has  to  be  fenced  off  for  a  con- 
siderable time,  thus  entailing  a  loss;  but 
with  electricity,  nothing  of  the  sort  occurs. 
After  the  current  has  been  passed  through 
the  wires  the  place  can  be  approached  at 
once  without  danger. 
For  firing  by  electricity  two  main  systems 
of  connecting  the  wires  to  the  machines 
are  in  use.  In  the  first,  the  fuses  are  con- 
nected in  series — that  is  to  say,  one  wire of  the  first  hole  is  connected  to  one  wire 
of  the  second  hole,  and  the  remaining  wire 
of  the  second  hole  to  one  wire  of  the  third  hole,  and  so  on,  until  all 
are  joined,  when  there  will  be  one  wire  of  the  last  hole  and  one 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  85 
wire  of  the  first  hole  left  unconnected.  These  are  now  joined  by 
means  of  conducting  wires,  to  the  machine  a  considerable  distance 
away  in  a  place  of  safety  (Fig.  74). 
The  second  system  is  known  as  the  parallel  one.  In  this,  one 
wire  of  each  shot  is  connected  to  one  cable,  and  the  other  wire  to 
the  second  (Fig.  75). 
Modifications  of  both  these  systems  are  possible,  as  the  holes 
may  be  connected  in  multiple  series  (Fig.  76). 
The  disadvantage  of  the  series  system,  is  that  the  power  of  the 
machine  has  to  be  equal  to  that  required  to  fire  each  fuse,  multi- 
plied by  the  number  of  fuses,  and  that  unless  the  fuses  have  all 
the  same  resistance,  or  vary  only  within  narrow  limits,  only  the most  resistant  will  be  fired. 
Bickford's  Volley  Fuse. — To  render  the  operation  more  simple than  with  electricity,  Messrs.  Bickford  have  designed  a  method 
in  which  ordinary  and  special  fuses  are  employed  for  simultaneous 
blasting.  A  length  of  safety  fuse  is  connected  to  one  side  of  an 
explosive  disc  in  a  tin  tube.  The  required  number  of  special  fuses 
are  snugly  tied  together,  their  ends  cut  clean  and  level,  and  in- 
serted into  the  tin  tube,  touching  the  other  side  of  the  explosive 
disc.  The  mouth  of  the  tube  is  protected  by  a  waterproof  sub- 
stance, sudh  as  pitch.  To  fire,  the  length  of  the  safety  fuse  is 
lighted,  this  ignites  the  explosive  disc,  which  starts  all  the  special 
fuse  burning  at  the  same  time.  The  particular  point,  however,  con- 
sists of  the  special  fuse,  which  is  manufactured  to  burn  at  the 
rate  of  9000  ft.  per  minute,  the  speed  of  ordinary  fuse  being  only 
2  ft.  per  minute.  To  enable  operators  to  adapt  the  instantaneous 
fuse  to  any  available  length,  to  suit  their  particular  requirements, 
the  inventors  supply  on  de- 
mand the  igniters  with  fuse  FlG< looped  as  in  Fig.  77,  so  that 
if  the  whole  length  of  fuse 
so  looped  is,  say  10  ft.,  the 
miner  can  cut  it  into  single 
lengths  of  3  ft.  and  7  ft.,  or 
any  proportion  of  10  ft. 
(taking  care  not  to  detach 
it  from  the  ignitor).  This  does  not  affect  the  simultaneousness 
of  the  explosion,  as,  owing  to  the  rapidity  of  burning,  small 
differences  in  the  lengths  of  the  special  fuse  are  not  of  any 
moment. 
Position  of  Holes. — The  situation  and  inclination  of  holes  in 
rock  drifts,  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  rock,  and  on  the  system  of 
drilling  employed.  With  hand  drilling  and  single  blasts,  every- 
thing depends  on  the  skill  of  the  miner,  who  carefully  examines 
the  faces,  and  decides  on  the  position,  direction,  and  depth  of  the 
hole ;  the  conditions  that  have  to  be  fulfilled  being,  that  the  rock 
should  be  as  free  as  possible  on  one  side,  and  that  neither  too 

--- Page Break ---
86 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
much,  nor  too  little,  rock  should  be  attempted  to  be  dislodged.  In 
the  former  case,  if  there  is  too  much  resistance  the  hole  will  act 
like  a  cannon,  and  the  tamping  will  be  forced  out,  producing  what 
is  known  as  a  "blown-out  shot,"  while  in  the  latter  case  the explosives  will  be  wasted. 
With  machine  drills  and  simultaneous  blasting,  there  is  not  so 
much  necessity  to  consider  the  lines  of  least  resistance,  although 
such  is  generally  done.  Many  different  arrangements  can  be  em- 
ployed. The  following  may  be  considered  a  typical  example.*  A wedge,  or  core,  is  first  blasted  out  of  the  centre  of  the  heading, 
this  being  known  as  a  centre-cut,  the  sides  being  blasted  out  after- 
wards. A  centre-cut  needs  about  eight  holes,  divided  into  two 
sets,  four  each,  arranged  in  nearly  vertical  lines,  at  equal  distances 
FIGS.  78  AND  79. 
FIGS.  80  AND  bi. 
longitudinal/  Section/ 
-through-  «fcZe   Holes, 
from  the  centre  line  of  the  heading.  Each  hole  of  one  set  of  the 
centre-cut  is  drilled  in  a  direction  intended  to  meet  the  corre- 
sponding one  of  the  other  set  at  the  centre  line  of  the  heading,  so 
as  to  form  a  wedge.  These  are  drilled  fully  ten  feet  deep.  Where 
the  character  of  the  material  only  requires  one  set  of  holes  in  the 
sides,  these  are  usually  three  in  number,  and  drilled  from  seven 
to  nine  feet  deep.  The  inclination  of  the  holes  in  the  different 
sets  are  shown  in  Eigs.  78-81.  The  holes  inclining  upwards,  are 
drilled  dry,  those  horizontal,  or  inclined  downwards,  wet.  Some- 
times second  side  rounds  are  required ;  these  will  consist  of  two holes  each. 
Blown-out  Shots. — The  combustion  of  powder  produces  large 
quantities  of  gaseous  products,  which,  in  the  case  of  blown-out 
shots,  are  driven  violently  into  the  roadways  and  at  the  point  of 
discharge  act  like  a  piston,  driving  back  the  air  flowing  past  the 
*  Tlie  Vosberg  Tunnel,  Leo  V.  Rosenberg,  p.  24. 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  87 
hole  in  both  directions,  and  producing  a  partial  vacuum,  into 
which  the  gas  contained  in  the  coal  is  exhausted,  and  diluted  with 
the  air  current  until  the  firing  point  is  reached.  Clouds  of  dust 
may  be  raised  at  the  same  time,  and  if  this  mixture  comes  into 
contact  with  flame,  a  serious  explosion  is  readily  produced.  It 
has  also  been  suggested,  that  the  sound  wave  produced  by  a  blown- out  shot,  may  cause  sufficient  pulsation  in  the  atmosphere  to  force 
flame  through  an  ordinary  safety  lamp. 
It  is,  therefore,  desirable  that  blown-out  shots  should  be  pre- 
vented, care  being  taken  that  all  the  holes  are  placed  in  such  posi- tion that  they  do  the  work  allotted  to  them,  and  bring  down  the 
coal.  It  is  most  important  that  the  stemming  should  be  unfis- sured,  and  adhere  closely  to  the  sides  of  the  hole,  so  that  the 
gaseous  products  cannot  escape  before  the  complete  ignition  of 
the  powder.  To  remove,  however,  any  chance  of  such  an  occurrence, 
various  tamping  plugs  have  been  designed,  the  majority  of  which 
consist  of  an  arrangement  of  metal  wedges  tightly  secured  in  the 
hole,  generally  by  the  aid  of  a  screw.  They  are  expensive  in  first 
cost  and  easily  lost.  A  later  device  is  the  employment 
of  a  cylinder,  or  rough  octagon  of  pine-wood,  with  a 
wedge-shaped  piece  cut  out  of  it  and  a  saw  cut  made 
as  a  continuation  of  the  wedge-shaped  cut.  The 
wedge  a  (Fig.  82)  is  placed  against  the  charge,  the 
block  b  above  it,  and  the  explosion  drives  the  wedge 
up  into  the  body  of  the  block,  and  binds  it  firmly 
against  the  sides  of  the  hole. 
The  use  of  tamping  plugs  does  not  seem  to  afford 
any  greater  security  than  ordinary  tamping,  if  the 
latter  is  properly  applied. VARIOUS  METHODS  TO  SUPERSEDE 
BLASTING. — Numerous  methods  have  been  pro- posed to  do  away  with  blasting,  the  chief  of  which 
consists  of  the  application  of  compound  wedges,  which 
may  either  be  driven  in  by  hand  or  by  different  mechanical combinations. 
Elliott  Multiple  Wedge. — The  construction  and  method  of 
FIG.  87. 
FIG.  82. 
using  these,  can  be  readily  seen  trom  Jb'ig.  83,  the  advantage claimed  being  that  only  a  small-sized  hole  is  required,  and  that 
the  weight  of  the  whole  apparatus,  including  boring  machine  and 
wedge,  is  very  small,  while  the  expansive  force  developed  is  large, 
owing  to  the  fact  that  the  impact  of  a  blow  is  more  effective  than 
other  means  of  applying  wedging  power. 

--- Page Break ---
88  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Haswell  Mechanical  Coal-getter.* — In  this  machine,  the 
rending  action  is  accomplished  by  a  wedge  between  two  feathers, 
the  wedge  being  drawn  out  by  a  combination  of  a  screw  and  lever. 
The  bursting  action  takes  place  towards  the  back  of  the  hole,  and 
not  at  the  face  where  least  required. 
Burnett's  Roller  Wedge. — The  amount  of  friction  between the  sides  of  the  wedge  and  feathers,  in  ordinary  systems,  is  very 
great.  To  overcome  this  difficulty,  Mr.  Burnett  f  has  designed  a 
roller  wedge,  in  which  rolling  is  substituted  for  sliding  friction. 
It  consists  of  two  external  plugs,  or  feathers,  with  an  internal 
wedge  running  on  roller  bearings.  This  wedge  is  drawn  out  by 
the  action  of  a  screw  and  nut,  driven  by  a  ratchet  and  pawl  arrange- ment. 
Hydraulic  Wedges. — To  increase  the  power  of  these  machines 
hydraulic  pressure  has  been  called  into  requisition.  A  man's strength  acting  on  a  lever  working  the  piston  of  a  small  hydraulic 
pump,  is  capable  of  producing  an  enormous  pressure,  which  can  be 
applied  to  driving  in  wedges.  Instead  of  applying  the  hydraulic 
apparatus  directly  to  the  wedge,  which  compels  the  operator  to 
stand  close  to  the  face,  in  some  designs  the  pressure  pump  is  fixed 
a  considerable  distance  away,  and  the  water  is  conveyed  to  the 
wedge  through  a  pipe. 
Lime  Cartridges. — Messrs.  Smith  and  Moore  have  designed  a 
process  for  bringing  down  coal  by  utilising  the  expansion  of  quick- 
lime, when  water  is  applied  to  it.  Ordinary  mountain  limestone  is 
calcined  and  ground  to  a  fine  powder,  and  compressed  by  hydraulic 
power  into  a  cartridge,  having  a  groove  running  along  its  full 
length.  The  cartridge  is  about  5  in.  long  and  2J-  in.  diam.,  and when  taken  from  the  press  is  wrapped  in  a  sheet  of  paper,  and 
placed  in  an  air-tight  box  to  keep  away  damp.  Coal  is  holed  and 
shot-holes  drilled,  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  cartridges  placed  in 
them.  An  iron  tube  J  in.  diam.,  having  a  small  external  channel 
on  the  upper  side,  and  provided  with  perforations,  is  inserted 
along  the  full  length  of  the  hole.  Several  cartridges  are  placed 
in  each  hole,  the  grooves  formed  in  them  during  the  process  of 
manufacture  lying  against  the  tube  just  referred  to,  and  the 
mouth  of  the  hole  is  tamped  in  the  usual  way.  A  small  force- 
pump  is  connected  by  suitable  means,  to  the  end  of  the  tube 
projecting  from  the  hole,  and  water  forced  in.  The  hand  pump  ' is  then  detached  and  carried  away  to  another  hole.  The  water 
\cting  on  the  lime  greatly  expands  its  bu'k,  and  the  coal  is  forced down. 
This  system  has  been  employed  am!  given  good  results  at 
Snipley  Colliery  for  a  considerable  time,  but  has  not  met  with 
much  favour  elsewhere.  It  can  only  be  used  for  certain  classes  of 
coal,  and  great  care  has  to  be  exercised  to  keep  the  cartridges  dry. 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxxiii.  37.  f  Min.  Inst.  Scot.  viii.  2. 

--- Page Break ---
BKEAKING  GBOTJND.  89 
They  readily  absorb  moisture  from  the  atmosphere,  and  completely 
lose  their  efficiency. 
Bosseyeuse. — For  a  considerable  length  of  time  an  apparatus has  been  in  use  at  the  Marihaye  Colliery,  Belgium,  which  consists 
of  a  rock  drill  of  the  Dubois-Frangois  type,  boring  a  series  of  holes, 
grouped  in  a  certain  pattern,  in  the  face  of  the  work.  The  drilling 
tool  is  removed  and  replaced  by  a  hammer  head,  a  number  of  plug 
and  feather  wedges  are  then  put  in  the  holes,  and  driven  in  by  the 
battering  ram,  till  the  rock  is  broken  down  and  split  up.  No 
explosives  are  used,  and  trials  over  a  period  of  many  years  show 
that  the  employment  of  the  machine  has  not  increased  the  cost  of 
working. 
Prohibition  of  Blasting. — From  time  to  time,  suggestions  are 
made  that  blasting  should  be  prohibited  in  mines.  Undoubtedly, 
there  are  seams  of  coal  which  can  be  economically  worked  by 
wedges,  but  such  are  few  and  far  between.  With  a  seam  that  is 
thin,  hard,  and  blocky,  and  adheres  tenaciously  to  the  roof, 
wedging  is  of  no  use,  the  coal  breaks  short,  and  wedge  after  wedge 
is  inserted  with  little  effect.  On  the  other  hand,  where  the  coal 
is  soft,  the  wedge  on  expanding  simply  widens  the  sides  of  the 
bore-hole ;  As  in  too  many  cases  the  cl.'rect  causes  of  explosions can  only  be  conjectured,  every  cause  to  which  explosions  have  been 
traced  shares  a  prejudice  which  evidently  does  not  rightly  belong 
to  them  all.  Although  the  occurrence  of  some  explosions  can  be 
directly  traced  to  blasting,  it  must  not  be  assumed  that  all  are 
due  to  this  cause,  or  that  if  it  was  stopped  entirely,  they  would 
cease.  When  a  large  explosion  takes  place,  the  loss  of  life  is  so 
serious  that  public  attention  is  directed  to  it,  and  the  other  acci- 
dents which  happen  in  mines  are  apt  to  be  lost  sight  of.  Statis- 
tics, however,  show  that  the  death-rate  is  higher  from  several 
other  causes  than  from  explosions  ',  for  instance,  falls  of  roofs  and sides.  Now.  with  blasting,  the  men  are  away  from  the  working 
face,  but  with  wedging  they  must  be  there,  and  are  liable  to  be 
injured  by  falls  which  take  place,  especially  in  thick  seams. 
Wedges  are  claimed  to  produce  more  round  coal  than  when  shots 
are  used,  but  such  is  not  necessarily  the  case.  If  the  charge  em- 
ployed is  properly  proportioned,  it  can  be  made  to  do  what  is 
required;  all  that  has  to  be  done  to  produce  the  coal  in  a  large 
round  state,  is  to  vary  the  amount  of  explosive. 
To  show  the  increase  in  cost  due  to  prohibition  of  blasting,  Mr. 
W.Y.  Craig*  arranged  for  the  best  miners  at  Podmore  Hall  Col- liery to  be  employed  to  work  at  day  wages  on  two  places  for  one 
month  with,  and  one  month  without,  powder.  In  a  12  yd.  drift, 
working  one  month  without  powder,  the  wages  paid  were 
;£i6  os.  iod.,  quantity  produced  233  tons,  n  cwt.,  3  qrs.,  cost  per 
ton  is.  ^d ;  same  worked  with  powder,  wages  ^17  95.  $d.,  including 
*  N.  Staff.  Inst.  i  .  53. 

--- Page Break ---
90  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
8s.  for  powder  and  fuse,  coal  produced  327  tons,  16  cwt.,  cost  per 
ton  is.  To  this  has  to  be  added,  the  increased  cost  per  ton  of 
the  fixed  charges,  such  as  superintendence,  timber,  and  road  main- 
tenance due  to  the  diminution  in  quantity.  In  each  shift,  10.64 
tons  were  got  without  powder,  14*26  tons  with  powder,  the  dif- ference being  3.2  tons  per  shift,  so  that  the  quantity  was  24!  per 
cent,  less  than  when  worked  with  blasting.  The  total  increase 
of  cost,  minutely  and  carefully  calculated,  was  is.  2\d.  per  ton  by 
working  without  powder. 
The  accidents  due  to  firing  can  be  best  prevented  by  careful 
supervision  of  the  work,  by  placing  the  operations  under  the  con- 
trol of  a  well-regulated  staff  with  a  steady  and  attentive  person at  the  head,  by  careful  examination  of  the  working  face  before 
firing,  and,  above  all,  by  good  ventilation.  Finally,  the  loss  of  life 
may  be  entirely  removed  by  firing  all  the  shots  simultaneously 
from  the  surface,  when  all  the  workmen  are  out  of  the  pit,  this 
being  the  procedure  at  some  of  the  South  Wales  Collieries. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : — 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Notes  on  Coal-  Cutting  Machinery,  G.  B.  Begg,  i.  269  ; 
TJie  Harrison  Coal-Getting  Machine,  v.  58  and  77  ;  Burnett's  Patent Hotter  Mining  Wedge  and  Drilling  Machine,  C.  Burnett,  viii.  20. 
ENG.  &  MIN.  JOUE. :  Edison  Electric  Percussion  Drill,  li.  400 ;  Electric 
Percussion  Drills,  li.  609,  Hi.  49,  and  lii.  720 ;  Compressed  Air 
Formulas,  W.  L.  Saunders,  lii.  48. 
BEIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD.  Coal  Getting  by  the  Compressed  Lime  Process,  J.  H. 
W.  Laverick,  vii.  34  ;  Brandt's  Hydraulic  Hock-Boring  Machine,  C. Z.  Bunning,  viii.  6  j  Notes  on  Roburite,  Gr.  B.  Walker,  x.  109  ;  Coal 
Getting  by  Machinery  at  Lidgett  Colliery,  K.  W.  Clarke,  x.  124  ;  Com- 
parative .Results  obtained  from  Drilling  Machines  worldng  Ironstone  in 
Cleveland,  W.  Walker,  Jan.,  x.  130;  The  Inger  soil- /Sergeant  Digger W.  Bell,xiv.  115. 
INST.  C.B.  :  Notes  on  Compressed  Air,  J.  Kraft,  Ixxix.  311  j  Notes  on  Electric 
Blasting  in  China,  C.  W.  Kinder,  Ixxx.  188;  The  Transmission  of 
Power  to  Great  Distances  by  Compressed  Air,  W.  C.  Unwin,  xciii.  421 ; 
Electric  Mining  Machinery,  L.  B.  and  C.  W.  Atkinson,  civ.  89 ;  The 
Transmission  and  Distribution  of  Power  from  Central  Stations  by 
Compressed  Air,  W.  C.  Unwin,  cv.  180. 
SO.  WALES.  INST.:  Brain's  System  of  Mining  by  means  of  Boring  Machinery, 
Dynamite,  and  Electrical  Blasting,  Saml.  Davis,  viii.  228';  Large  and Small  Boreholes  as  employed  in  Blasting  Operations,  Henry  Lewis,  xi. 
220 ;  Compressed  Air  Machinery,  A.  J.  Stevens,  xi.  263  ;  Notes  on 
Compressed  Air,  W.  H.  Massey,  xii.  344. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Notes  sur  ^application  des  moyens  me"caniques  au  creusement des  puits  et  des  galeries  au  rocJier,  A.  Pernolet  (2°  Serie),  i.  381,  ii.  5, and  iii.  595  >  Appareils  de  perforation  mfoanique  a,  V Exposition  de 
Paris,  1878,  Ch.  Buisson  (2°  Serie),  viii.  873 ;  L'air  comprime  aux 
mines  de  Blanzy,  F.  Mathet  (3°  S£rie),  ii.  65  ;  Appareils  de  perfora- 
tion a  la  main,  MM.  Dinoire  et  Maillard  (3e  Serie),  ii.  305. 
N.  E,  I.  :  On  the  Application  of  Machines  worked  by  Compressed  Air  at  the 
Collieries  of  Saars  Longchamps,  J.  Daglish,  xxi.  199  ;  Dangers  of 

--- Page Break ---
BREAKING  GROUND.  91 
SparTcs  produced  from  Prickers  and  Stemmers  used  for  Blasting 
Purposes,  H.  Lawrence,  xxxiii.  3  (see  also  Colliery  Guardian,  Ixi.  207, 
Jan.  1891) ;  The  Haswell  Mechanical  Coal- Getter,  W.  F.  Hall,  xxxiii. 
37 ;  Transmission  of  Power  by  Steam,  Messrs.  Liddell  &  Merivale, 
xxxv.  159,  and  xxxvi.  13  ;  System  of  Working  Ironstone  at  Lumpsey 
Mine  with  Hydraulic  Drills,  A.  L.  Steavenson,  xxxvi.  67 ;  Bornefs 
Hand-Boring  Machine,  E.  L.  Dumas,  xxxvii.  117. 
FED.  INST.  :  The  Distribution  of  Electrical  Energy  over  Extended  Areas  in 
Mines,  A.  T.  Snell,  i.  141  ;  Coal- Getting  by  'Machinery,  G.  B.  Walker, i.  123  ;  Experiments  with  Explosives  used  in  Mines,  M.  Walton  Brown, 
ii.  49 ;  Experiments  with  Carbonite,  M.  Walton  Brown  and  W. 
Foggin,  ii.  85  ;  An  Investigation  as  to  whether  the  Fumes  produced  by 
the  use  of  Roburite  and  Tonite  in  Coal  Mines  are  injurious  to  health, 
with  Appendixes,  ii.  368  ;  The  Low  Tension  System  of  Shot  .Firing, 
T.  M.  Winstanley-Wallis,  ii.  553. 
AMEK.  INST.  M.E.  :  A  new  Bode  Drill  without  Cushion,  A.  C.  Eand,  xiii.  249  ; 
Electric  Power  Transmission  in  Mining  Operations,  H.  C.  Spaulding, xix.  258. 
CUES.  INST.  :  On  Compressing  Air,  J.  Sturgeon,  viii.  290 ;  Stanley's  Coal Heading  Machine,  K.  Stanley,  xvi.  192. 
MID.  INST.  :  Simultaneous  Blasting  in  Sinking  Pits,  C.  Walker,  vi.  196  and 
261 ;  Hydro-carbon  Explosives,  G.  B.  Walker,  xi.  101  and  138. 
N.  STAFF.  INST.:  Prohibition  of  Blasting  in  Coal-Mines;  its  Effect  on  the 
Cost  of  Production,  W.  Y.  Craig,  iv.  53;  The  Compressed  Air  Power 
System,  J.  Sturgeon,  ix.  45  ;  Mechanical  Coal-Getter,  E.  Mould,  ix. 186. 
EEV,  UNIV.  :  Note  sur  Tttablissement  de  machines  d,  comprimer  lair  au 
charbonnages  du  Ltvant-du-Flenu,  H.  Mativa  (2°  Serie),  i.  69 ; 
Rapport  sur  les  experiences  faites  au  Levant-du-Flenu  sur  la  perfor- 
ation mecanique,  H.  Mativa  (2e  Serie),  iii.  652 ;  Note  sur  la  perfora- tion mecanique  aux  mines  de  Ramsbeck  ( Westphalie),  C.  Haber 
(2e  Serie),  xii.  557  ;  Notes  sur  des  experiences  faites  sur  les  nouveaux explosifs  et  notamment  sur  la  grisoutite  en  presence  des  poussieres 
de  charbon  et  du  gaz,  E.  Braive  (3°  Serie),  iv.  248  and  v.  67 ;  Note 
sur  les  nouveaux  explosifs  hydro-carbon^,  J.  Henrotte  (3°  Serie), v.  87  ;  Experiences  faites  le  n  Septembre  1890,  au  charbonnage  de 
Marchienne  sur  divers  explosifs  en  presence  du  grisou  et  de  lapoussiere 
de  charbon,  E.  Larmoyeux  (3°  Serie),  xiii.  193;  Transmission  du 
travail  a  distance  par  Vair  comprim.6,  G.  Hanarte  (3°  Serie),  xvi.  113. 
ANN.  DES  MINES  :  Note  sur  femploi  de  Vair  comprimS  pour  lepercement  des 
long  tunnels,  D.  Colladon  (8e  Serie),  xii.  469  ;  Rapport  sur  I  etude  des questions  relatives  d,  Vemploi  des  explosifs  en  presence  du  grisou, 
(8e  Serie),  xiv.  197  ;  Essais  pratique  faites  dans  quelques  exploitations des  mines  sur  divers  explosifs  indiques  par  la  commission  des  substance 
explosifs,  M.  Mallard  (8e  Serie),  xvi.  15  ;  Note  relative  d  des  essais faites  aux  mines  de  Liemn  sur  les  explosives  de  sureU,  A.  Simon 
(8e  Serie),  xviii.  580. 
Compressed  Air  Production,  W.  L.  Saunders,  New  York,  1891. 
L'Air  Comprime,  A.  Pernolet,  Paris,  1876. Machine  Mining  in  the  St.  Louis  Coal  Region,  H.  A.  Wheeler,  School  of 
Mines  Quarterly,  New  York,  vol.  ix.  p.  299. 
Blasting ;  A  Handbook  for  the  Use  of  Engineers,  O.  Guttmann,  London,  1892. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER  V. 
SINKING. 
Position  of  Shaft. — The  commercial  success  of  collieries  depends 
in  a  great  measure  on  the  position  of  the  shafts,  and  before  deciding 
on  their  situation,  every  point  should  be  given  careful  consideration. 
In  proved  districts  where  the  inclination  of  the  seams  is  known, 
the  shaft  is  generally  placed  in  the  deepest  point,  especially 
where  quantities  of  water  are  expected,  as  both  water  and  coal 
gravitate  to  the  shaft  and  render  haulage  easy.  Dealing  with 
water  in  dip-workings  is  most  expensive.  It  is  advisable  to  place 
the  main  shaft  somewhere  about  the  centre  of  the  royalty  so  that 
equal  areas  can  be  worked  on  all  sides  of  it.  Surface  considerations 
may,  however,  overweigh  the  majority  of  the  underground  points. 
The  disposal  of  the  produce  must  be  carried  on  easily  and  cheaply ; 
proximity  to  towns  or  places  where  a  household  trade  can  be 
carried  on  is  important.  Communication  with  railways  or  water- 
ways should  be  studied.  A  supply  of  water  for  boilers,  &c.,  is 
requisite,  many  collieries  labouring  under  great  cost  and  dis- 
advantages through  being  unable  to  obtain  this.  In  unexplored 
districts,  it  is  well  not  to  make  the  first  shaft  a  principal  one, 
but  to  sink  it  down  to  the  seams,  and  after  proving  their  inclina- 
tion, &c.,  to  decide  on  the  position  of  the  main  winding-shaft, from  data  so  obtained. 
Form  of  Shaft. — At  the  present  time,  so  far  as  European  prac- 
tice is  concerned  (except  in  Scotland),  the  general  custom  of  colliery 
districts  is  to  make  shafts  circular.  Various  other  shapes  have  been 
tried — square,  elliptical,  and  polygonal — but  have  been  abandoned in  the  majority  of  cases.  In  order  to  economise  space,  many  of 
the  earlier  shafts  were  made  rectangular,  and  are  still  often  so  sunk 
in  Scotland,  and  in  the  United  States,  but  it  has  been  found  that 
round  shafts  are  easier  and  cheaper  to  sink,  more  capable  of  resisting 
the  pressure  of  "  heavy  "  strata,  absolutely  necessary  in  running ground  (the  pressure  being  equalised),  and  more  suitable  for  the 
application  of  metal  tubbing.  The  waste  of  space  and  other  disad- vantages due  to  circular  form  are  less  considerable  than  had 
been  supposed  ;  indeed,  by  careful  arrangements  the  space  wasted 
may  become  almost  nothing.  The  ventilation  of  large  coal-mines 
could  not  be  well  carried  out  with  rectangular  shafts,  as  the 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  93 
running  of  the  cages  would  interfere  too  much  with  the  passage 
of  the  air ;  indeed  the  space  unoccupied  by  the  cages  is  a  positive 
advantage  in  numberless  instances. 
Where  stone,  bricks,  or  iron  are  cheap,  the  circular  form  is  pre- 
ferred, but  where  wood  is  abundant  and  largely  employed  for 
securing  the  sides,  and  other  material  absent,  the  rectangular 
shape  is  adopted. 
Size  of  Shaft. — This  depends  entirely  on  the  size  of  tub  employed 
and  on  the  output  required.  After  deciding  on  what  daily  quantity 
is  to  be  extracted,  and  the  weight  that  each  tub  shall  contain,  the 
number  of  tubs  to  be  drawn  each  day  and  each  hour  can  be 
obtained.  Knowing  the  depth  of  the  shaft,  the  speed  at  which 
winding  is  to  take  place,  and  the  time  occupied  in  changing  the  tubs 
on  the  cage,  and  allowing  a  margin  for  interruptions,  the  number  of 
tubs  to  be  raised  at  each  lift  is  easily  found.  Then  after  deciding 
how  many  decks  or  platforms  there  are  to  be  in  the  cage,  the 
number  of  tubs  on  each  deck  is  established.  As  the  tubs  have  to 
be  of  a  certain  size  to  hold  the  quantity  they  have  to  contain,  the 
number  on  each  deck  determines  the  size  of  the  cage.  If  the  shaft 
is  only  to  have  one  cage  working  in  it,  its  diameter  must  be  such  as 
will  allow  a  rectangle  of  the  size  of  the  cage  to  pass  through  freely f 
allowing  a  margin  for  clearance  of  from  three  to  six  inches  at  the 
corners.  If  two  cages  are  to  be  employed,  two  rectangles  should  be 
plotted  on  paper,  with  a  clearance  space  between  of  from  nine  to 
fifteen  inches,  and  a  circle  inscribed  round  them,  allowing  a  similar 
space  as  before  for  clearance  at  corners.  The  diameter  of  this  circle 
gives  the  size  of  the  shaft. 
Where  pumps  are  required  and  have  to  be  placed  in  the  winding 
shaft,  the  room  they  take  up  must  also  be  allowed  for.  The  better 
plan  is,  however,  to  keep  everything  except  winding  appliances  out of  the  main  shaft. 
OPERATION  OF  GETTING  DOWN  TO  THE  "STONE- 
HEAD."— The  first  operation  in  sinking,  is  to  get  down  to  solid 
regular    strata,   technically  called    the   "stone-head/"'      In    the majority  of  instances,  some  drift  or  loose  deposits  have  to  be  passed 
through  before  firm  ground  is  reached,  and  a  foundation  obtained 
for  the  masonry,  or  other  means  which  are  to  be  employed  for 
permanently  securing  the  sides  of  the   excavation.     Often  this 
preliminary  operation   is   very  trouble- 
some and  expensive,  depending  entirely  FlGS>  g4  AND  85> on  the  nature  of  the  strata. , 
(a)  Where  the  ground  is  moder- ately hard  it  is  usual  to  first  dig  down 
a  few  feet  and  then  place  at  the  bottom 
of  the  excavation  a  circular  frame  of 
timber  called  a  "  crib"  or  "  curb."  This 
consists  of  an  annulus  divided  into  a  number  of  segments  having 
joints  (Figs.  84  and  85);  with  narrow  curbs,  the  segments  are 

--- Page Break ---
94 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  86. 
usually  connected  together  by  one  bolt,  but  in  broader  ones,  two 
will  be  employed.  At  the  surface,  a  square  frame  is  formed  by 
four  pieces  of  timber  intersecting  each  other,  held  by  notches 
where  they  cross,  and  with  the  ends  projecting  to  some  distance  be- 
yond. This  is  often  held  down  by  pegs  which  give  it  a  grip  on  the 
ground.  Tiniber  laggings  will  now  be  driven  behind  the  curbs,  at 
necessary  points  where  the  nature  of  the  ground  requires  them  for 
support,  and  the  two  frames  are  then  connected  by  nailing  on 
strips  of  stronger  planks  (called  "stringing  deals")  at  intervals round  the  shaft  on  the  inside  ;  in  addition,  short  vertical  struts 
called  punch  props  are  placed  between  the  curbs  to  keep  them  in 
position  (c,  Fig.  86).  Then  the  ground  is  removed  for  a  further 
distance  down,  a  third  frame  put  in, 
lagged  behind,  and  hung  by  a  further 
set  of  planks  from  the  second  curb 
(Fig.  86,  f,  2,  3,  are  the  curbs,  a  a  the 
laggings,  b  b  the  stringing  deals). 
Instead  of  timber  laggings,  the  space between  the  curbs  is  often  filled  in 
with  a  dry  walling  of  bricks  called 
"  back  casing,"  the  curbs  being  hung from  each  other  by  stringing  deals  as before. 
If  the  ground  is  soft  and  does  not 
afford  sufficient  support  for  the  curb 
at  the  bottom  of  the  excavation,  the 
whole  structure  is  hung  by  chains  or 
iron  bolts  from  strong  baulks  of  timber  placed  transversely  across 
the  shaft  at  the  surface.  These  tie-bolts  are  added  to,  and  length- 
ened, as  additional  curbs  are  fixed  below  until  the  firm  ground  is reached. 
Instead  of  employing  wooden  curbs  for  timbering  through  loose 
ground,  the  practice  is  becoming  general  of  using  iron  "  binding  " rings.   Four  of  these  go  round  the  circumference  of  the  shaft  outside 
brickwork,  and  are  made  of  flat  strip  iron  about  3  in.  by  f  in.    They 
are  connected  together  by  bolts,  each  segment  overlapping  at  the 
joints.    When  placed  in  position  laggings  are  driven  down  between 
them  and  the  sides  of  the  excavation.     By 
FIGS.  87  AND  88.       arranging  a  number  of   bolt-holes  in  each 
segment  (Figs.  87  and  88)  they  can  be  made 
fa  overlap  each  other  more  or  less  as  desired, 
and  thus  fit  a  smaller  or  larger  excavation if  necessary. 
The  permanent  lining  is  then  put  in  by- one  of  the  methods  described  further  on,  care  being  taken  that 
all  the  temporary  timbering  is  removed. 
(b)  Where  the  ground  is  loose,  different  methods  to  the  fore- 
going have  to  be  employed.      Sinking  through  quicksands  and 
\  ^ 
•-c 
a ~        i 
—2 
k 
c ti/ 
*—  i 
•  i—^  ^jj 
Q  p  o 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  95 
heavily  watered  beds,  is  one  of  the  most  costly  operations  connected 
with  mining,  and  calls  forth  all  the  skill  and  experience  of 
engineers.  The  means  used  for  reaching  the  "  stone-head"  where quicksands  are  present,  depend  in  a  great  measure  on  the  thick- 
ness that  has  to  be  passed  through. 
(i)  Pile-Driving. — At  one  time  the  general  method  adopted  was 
by  what  is  known  as  "  piling,"  which  consists  of  driving  vertically downwards,  all  around  the  circumference  of  the  shaft,  wooden 
planks  with  their  edges  touching  each  other,  and  supporting  them 
internally  with  curbs.  The  planks  or  piles  used  are  generally 
from  ten  to  fifteen  feet  long,  six  inches  broad,  and  three  inches 
thick,  having  their  lower  end  tapered  off  to  a  cutting  edge,  and 
their  upper  one  strengthened  with  a  wrought-iron  hoop,  so  that 
they  are  not  split  by  the  blows  of  the  wooden  driving  maul.  In 
forming  the  cutting  edge,  all  the  taper  is  given  on  the  inside,  the 
outer  side  not  being  touched,  as  if  it  was  cut  to  a  V  form  the 
piles  could  not  well  be  driven  down  vertically,  as  the  tendency would  be  for  them  to  incline  towards  the  centre  of  the  shaft.  In 
hard  ground,  the  cutting  ends  of  the  planks  are  shod  with  iron 
to  enable  them  to  penetrate  more  easily. 
The  width  of  the  supporting  curbs  depends  on  the  size  of  the 
excavation.  They  are,  however,  generally  made  about  six  inches 
broad,  and  placed  at  closer  vertical  distances  in  large  shafts  than in  smaller  ones. 
When  the  bottom  of  the  first  length  of  piles  has  been  reached, 
and  a  curb  placed  round  as  a  support,  a  second  set  are  driven 
down  inside  the  lower  supporting  curb,  so  that  the  diameter  of  the 
shaft  is  reduced  in  that  length  by  twice  the  thickness  of  the 
laggings  and  twice  the  breadth  of  the  curb,  or,  if  6  in.  curbs 
and  3  in.  piles  are  used,  by  18  inches.  As  this  reduction  takes 
place  with  each  course  of  piles,  the  shaft  has  to  be  commenced  at 
the  surface  with  a  diameter  sufficiently  large  to  allow  it.  It  there- 
fore becomes  necessary  that  the  thickness  of  the  quicksand  to  be 
passed  through  should  be  approximately  known,  such  being  usually 
found  by  boring.  If  piles  1 5  feet  long  are  used,  a  fresh  course 
will  have  to  be  put  in  about  every  twelve  feet,  therefore  if  the 
quicksand  is  60  ft.  thick,  five  reductions  will  take  place,  alto- 
gether amounting  to  5  x  ij  =  7j  ft.  If  a  15  ft.  shaft  is  being sunk  with  brickwork  lining  18  in.  thick,  the  diameter  at  the 
bottom  of  quicksand  must  be  at  least  18  ft.,  and  at  the  surface 
the  excavation  will  require  to  be  18  +  7 J  =  25 1  ft.  diameter. 
Commencing  at  the  surface,  the  ground  is  excavated  as  far  as  it 
will  stand,  and  the  first  curb  carefully  laid  down,  with  its  centre 
coinciding  with  the  centre  of  the  shaft ;  the  lining  of  piles  is  then 
driven  down  as  far  as  possible,  and  the  ground  taken  out  on  the 
inside  till  a  sufficient  distance  has  been  sunk  to  require  the  sup- 
port of  another  curb,  which  is  accordingly  placed  in  position.  The 
piles  will  then  be  driven  down  a  further  distance,  more  ground 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIGS. AND   90. 
FIG.  91. 
excavated,  and  so  on  until  the  bottom  of  the  first  set  of  piles  is 
nearly  reached.  A  supporting  curb  (a,  Figs.  89  and  90)  will  then 
be  fixed  against  the  piles  and  a  second  one  6,  18  in.  less  in  dia- 
meter, will  be  placed  inside  it,  leaving  an 
angular  space  of  3  in.  between  the  two.  A 
second  set  of  laggings,  c,  will  now  be  driven 
down  in  the  space  left  between  the  two  curbs, 
and  the  same  cycle  of  operations  gone  through 
as  before.  This  process  is  repeated  until  the 
solid  ground  is  reached. 
The   method   just    described    is    the    one 
generally  adopted  in  the  North  of  England, 
and  where  the  ground  is  very  loose  and  of  a 
watery    description.       Sometimes,    however, 
instead  of  driving  down  the  piles  vertically 
they  are  inclined  outwards  (a,  Fig.  91),  and 
then  as  the  ground  is  excavated  towards  their 
lower  end,  the  pressure  gra- dually drives  them  forward. 
When  the  ground  has  been 
got  out  for  a  short  distance 
in    the   bottom,    supporting 
curbs  b  are  fixed  in  the  same 
manner  as  before.     As  the 
piles  in  this  instance  do  not touch   each   other  at   their 
lower  ends,  straw,  or  similar 
material,  is  pushed  between 
the    joints,   to   prevent  the 
sand  from  flowing  into  the shaft. 
"When  the  ground  is  very  loose,  or  watery,  the  difficulty  of  using the  latter  class  of  piling  is  surmounted  by  the  so-called  method  of 
"  quartering,"  in  which  only  a  portion  of  the  circumference  is attacked  at  a  time.  Commencing  from  the  upper  curb,  ground  is 
taken  out  for  a  depth  of  3  ft.  in  the  centre  of  shaft,  piles  4  ft. 
long  are  driven  down  for  a  length  of  about  8  ft.  round  the  circum- ference of  the  shaft,  and  when  each  has  gone  in  its  full  length,  the 
top  end  is  knocked  back  under  the  curb.  The  ground  is  got  out 
for  a  length  of  3  ft.  in  front  of  the  piles,  a  segment  of  a  curb  laid 
on  the  bottom  perpendicularly  under  the  upper  one,  and  the  space 
between  filled  in  with  dry  brickwork  ;  when  this  is  completed  the 
two  curbs  are  connected  by  nailing  on  stringing  deals,  and  a  fur- 
ther series  of  piles  driven  down  at  the  end  of  those  already  in 
position.  Sufficient  ground  is  then  excavated  in  front  of  the  piles, 
until  room  is  obtained  for  another  segment  of  the  curb,  this  join- 
ing up  to  the  first  one  laid.  The  space  between  this  and  the  upper 
curb  is  then  filled  in  with  dry  brickwork  as  before,  more  piles 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING 
FIG.  92. 
driven  down,  the  ground  excavated,  a  third  segment  laid,  and  the 
process  repeated,  segment  after  segment  being  "  quartered  "  in, until  the  whole  circumference  is  firmly  secured  for  the  length 
under  consideration.  A  lower  length  is  then  attacked  in  a  similar 
manner,  and  then  another,  and  so  on  until  solid  ground  is  reached. 
(2)  Drums. — The  method  of  pile-driving  is  an  exceedingly  ex- 
pensive one,  and  is  often  superseded  by  one  of  the  so-called  "drum" methods.  In  this  system,  a  drum  either  of  wood  or  iron  of  a 
diameter  sufficiently  large  to  allow  the  permanent  walling  being 
inserted  inside  it,  is  sunk  through  the  sand. 
(a)  Wood. — A  curb  (Fig.  92),  14  or  18  in.  broad  by  6  in thick,  is  first  laid  truly  level  on  the  top  of 
the  bed  to  be  sunk  through,  and  a  tier  of 
masonry  built  on  it  to  a  height  of  about  3  ft., 
when  a  second  curb  will  be  laid,  and  con- 
nected to  the  first  by  iron  tie-bolts  passing 
through  the  brickwork.  In  order  to  prevent 
the  dislocation  of  the  masonry,  and  to  reduce 
friction  during  descent,  a  close  lining  of 
planks  is  nailed  around  the  outer  circum- 
ference, these  being  planed  at  the  edges  where 
they  meet,  to  ensure  a  water-tight  joint.  A further  length  of  masonry  is  then  built  on 
the  second  curb,  a  third  one  laid  and  con- 
nected with  bolts,  and  laggings  placed  round  the  outer  circum- 
ference, as  before.  In  Fig.  92,  a  and  b  are  curbs,  c  a  wrought- 
iron  connecting  bolt,  and  d  the  lagging  planks.  Where  the 
ground  is  of  loose  description,  the  weight  causes  this  drum  to 
sink,  but  if  the  beds  are  more  coherent,  the  bottom  curb  is  pro- 
vided with  a  cutting  edge,  either  by  bevelling  off  the  inside,  or  by 
attaching  an  iron  shoe.  Opinions  differ  as  to  the  advisability  of 
employing  cutters  at  all,  it  being  contended  that  they  are  merely 
a  source  of  weakness,  as  when  any  exceptionally  hard  substances 
are  met,  the  tendency  is  to  turn  the  cutter  outwards,  and  often 
rupture  the  drum.  The  ground  in  the  centre  of  the  shaft  is  then 
slowly  removed,  and  the  cylinder  sinks.  A  man  stands  on  the 
drum  with  a  straight  edge  and  level,  and  gives  directions  as  to 
where  material  is  to  be  excavated  if  one  side  "  hangs"  behind,  but care  is  taken  not  to  remove  any  ground  near  the  curb  for  fear  the 
drum  should  suddenly  sink,  and  "  cant "  over. When  the  drum  has  sunk,  say  a  distance  of  3  ft.,  more  brick; 
work  and  another  curb  will  be  added  at  the  top,  and  connected  to 
the  others  by  bolts  as  before.  This  is  repeated  every  time  the 
drum  sinks  the  certain  specified  distance,  until,  in  the  course  of 
time,  the  solid  ground  is  reached. 
The  great  difficulty  encountered  in  sinking  by  this  operation  is 
in  keeping  the  drum  truly  vertical.  Constant  supervision  and 
care  must  be  exercised  to  prevent  "  canting  "  As  a  matter  of  fact, G 

--- Page Break ---
98  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  drum  never  goes  down  regularly,  but  does  so  by  fits  and  starts, 
sometimes  falling  through  five  or  six  inches  at  a  time.  With  each 
such  movement,  cross-staffs  are  placed  on  the  curbs,  and  a  spirit 
level  applied,  to  see  if  the  apparatus  is  horizontal.  If  it  is  not, 
either  a  small  quantity  of  ground  is  taken  away  from  beneath  the 
highest  part,  or  additional  weights  are  added  to  the  drum  on that  side. 
(b)  Iron  Drums. — The  objection  to  wood  drums  is,  that  they require  nearly  as  large  an  excavation  as  if  piling  was  employed, 
for  often,  after  getting  down  some  distance,  the  whole  structure 
sticks,  and  cannot  be  moved.  A  second  one  has  then  to  be  sunk 
telescope  fashion  inside  the  first.  To  get  over  this,  wrought  or 
cast  iron  drums  are  used,  as  although  they  sometimes  have  to  be 
f/elescoped  one  within  the  other,  comparatively  little  space  is 
lost.  With  cast  iron  ones,  the  circle  is  composed  of  a  certain 
number  of  segments,  varying  from  4  to  5  feet  long  by  2  feet  deep, 
strengthened  by  vertical  and  horizontal  ribs,  similar  to  Fig.  115. 
As  these  strengthening  ribs  are  on  the  inside,  the  outside 
surface  is  smooth,  and  meets  with  little  resistance  in  passing 
through  the  ground.  The  joints  between  the  different  segments 
are  made  with  sheet  lead  and  bolts,  and  a  cutting  edge  is  attached 
to  the  bottom  segment.  The  procedure  is  very  similar  to  that 
with  brick  drums.  They  are  usually  weighted,  and  to  make  this 
more  easy  to  carry  out,  the  ribs  are  made  broader.  If  sufficient 
weight  cannot  be  applied  by  placing  material  on  these  ribs,  two 
sets  of  timber  buntons  are  placed  across  at  right  angles  to  each 
other,  and  a  platform  laid  on  them,  upon  which  any  amount  of 
debris  can  be  placed,  a  passage  being  left  through  the  centre  for 
the  workmen  to  reach  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  often  happens  in  very  watery  ground, 
that  the  drum  has  a  tendency  to  sink  too  fast,  and,  unfortunately, 
not  to  do  this  equally,  but  to  get  lower  on  one  side  than  the  other, 
and  as  this  is  a  point  which  it  is  particularly  desirable  to  prevent, 
the  tubbing  is  hung  at  four  points  by  a  chain  and  lowering-screw 
arrangement  from  strong  transverse  beams  at  the  surface. 
Where  such  means  are  employed,  the  tubbing  is  easily  kept 
perpendicular,  as,  even  if  the  sand  is  watery  on  one  side,  or 
boulder- stones  cause  an  obstruction,  it  is  only  necessary  not  to 
let  out  a  screw  on  the  side  which  requires  checking.  Instead  of 
cast-iron  drums,  which  are  liable  to  break,  owing  to  the  unequal 
strain  to  which  they  are  subjected,  wrought  iron  ones  are  some- times employed. 
Comparing  the  two  systems,  there  is  little  doubt  that,  where 
the  thickness  of  ground  to  be  passed  through  is  large,  the  iron 
drum  possesses  certain  advantages,  as  by  its  use  a  smaller  excava- tion is  necessary ;  its  sides  do  not  offer  such  a  resistance  in  passing 
through  the  strata,  and  the  time  of  sinking  is  less,  owing  to  the 
ready  way  in  which  the  various  parts  are  put  together  and  added 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
99 to ;  but  unfortunately  it  often  breaks,  which  occasions  months  of 
delay,  and  increases  the  cost  of  sinking.  This  is  the  only  advan- 
tage possessed  by  wooden  drums ;  instances  are  to  be  found  where 
such  have  been  pushed  into  an  oval  form,  and  yet  have  not 
collapsed. 
When  the  sinking  has  reached  the  stone-head,  no  matter  what 
system  has  been  used,  the  procedure  afterwards  is  always  of  a 
similar  character.  The  ground  is  carefully  prepared  for  the 
seating  of  a  curb  upon  which  the  permanent  lining  is  brought 
up  to  the  surface  by  one  of  the  methods  to  be  described  further 
on,  all  temporary  timbering  being  removed  as  the  work  comes 
upwards.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  lining  is  usually  carried  a 
short  distance  above  the  surface  of  the  surrounding  ground  to 
secure  some  "  tip  "  for  the  debris  which  is  excavated  from  the sinking. 
METHOD  OF  PROCEEDING  AFTERWARDS.— On 
reaching  the  solid  ground,  excavation  proceeds  with  the  tools  de- 
scribed in  the  previous  chapter,  those  employed  depending  entirely 
on  the  nature  of  the  strata  which  have  to  be  passed  through.  Several 
difficulties  are  encountered  where  machine  drills  are  employed. 
Owing  to  the  uneven  nature  of  the  bottom,  the  ordinary  tripod 
stand  is  used  with  difficulty,  taking  from  5  to  10  minutes  to  fix, 
and  then  the  legs  move  during  drilling  if  the  ground  is  soft. 
As  no  roof  exists,  the  vertical  stretcher  bar  has  to  be  replaced  by 
a  horizontal  one.  This  is  not  easy  to  fix,  and  takes  so  much 
time  to  adjust,  that  often,  instead  of  moving  the  bar  and  drilling 
holes  in  the  most  favourable  position  for  blowing,  they  are  put 
down  in  such  places  as  suit  the  drill,  and  consequently  are  not  so 
effective.  Considerable  time 
is  also  lost  in  raising  drills  FIG.  93. 
and  bars  out  of  the  way 
when  blasting  takes  place. 
To  obviate  these  disad- 
vantages a  boring  frame  is 
employed  consisting  of  4 main  stretcher  bars  a  a 
(Fig. 9 3), hinged  to  a  central 
support,  6,  and  suspended 
by  a  chain,  c,  and  capstan 
rope.  Each  of  these  bars 
is  provided  with  a  lengthen- 
ing screw  and  claw,  so  that 
the  whole  structure  can  be 
readily  clamped  in  position, 
and  as  it  shuts  up  when  not 
fixed  against  the  side  of  the  shaft,  it  is  equally  easily  withdrawn. 
To  keep  the  structure  from  lifting  by  the  impact  of  the  drills 
when  boring,  four  secondary  arms,  d  d,  are  arranged  near  the 

--- Page Break ---
IOO TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
top  of  the  frame,  these  being  strutted  against  the  sides  at  a  slight 
inclination  upwards.  If  the  drills  are  mounted  on  swinging  arms 
(see  Fig.  62)  they  can  be  placed  at  any  angle  and  clamped  in  any 
position,  and  the  holes  put  in  anywhere. 
Where  drills  are  adopted,  the  general  procedure  is  to  first  bore 
all  the  holes  required,  hoist  up  the  frame  and  drills  with  an  engine, 
fire  the  holes  simultaneously,  and  then  load  up  the  debris  until 
the  bottom  is  clear,  when  the  drills  are  again  lowered  and  fixed, 
and  drilling  recommenced.  In  hard  ground,  probably  only  one  set  of 
holes  will  be  bored  and  blasted  and  the  rock  removed  in  24  hours. 
Another  practice  gaining  ground,  is  to  lower  the  walling  stage 
to  about  8  or  10  feet  from  the  bottom,  wedge  it  there  and  form 
an  artificial  roof,  and  then  use  ordinary  vertical  stretcher  bars. 
Another  method  proposed,  and  indeed,  tried  in  two  instances, 
is  to  start  at  the  surface  and  bore  a  series  of  boles  200  or  300  feet 
deep  with  the  aid  of  diamond  drill,  and  fill  them  up  with  sand. 
Blasting  then  commences  by  removing  4  or  5  feet  of  sand  from 
the  holes,  and  firing  them  in  groups,  this  process  being  repeated 
until  the  bottom  of  the  holes  is  reached,  when  the  drills  are  again 
introduced,  and  a  further  distance  bored.  The  Pottsville  shaft, 
U.S.A.,  was  sunk  in  this  manner,*  25  holes  being  bored  i  J  in. in  diameter  about  3  ft.  3  in.  apart  in  one  direction,  and  4  ft.  in 
the  other.  The  central  group  of  holes  was  always  fired  first,  and 
the  outside  rows  afterwards.  The  process  was  expeditious,  but 
the  financial  result  does  not  appear  to  be  satisfactory.  At  Harris 
Navigation  Colliery,  the  same  method  was  tried  for  about  70  yards but  abandoned. 
With  the  object  of  providing  support  for  the  curb  carrying  the 
upper  length  of  lining^  when  sinking  recommences,  the  excava- tion is  carried  down  for  about  3  to  5  ft., 
lineable  with  the  inside  of  the  curb  («, 
Fig.  94),  then  shorn  back  until  the  diam- 
eter is  large  enough  to  take  in  the  per- manent lining,  and  afterwards  carried 
downwards  this  size,  until  the  strata 
require  more  support  than  temporary 
timbering  affords.  A  seating  will  then 
be  made  for  a  curb  6,  leaving  a  space  c  in the  bottom  of  the  shaft  for  the  collection  of 
water,  &c.,  and  the  walling  built  on  it  up 
to  the  curb  above,  the  ground  a  being 
removed  for  this  purpose,  not  all  at  once, but  in  sections. 
Keeping  the  Shaft  Vertical. — This 
is  done  by  the  aid  of  a  centre  line  which 
is  either  a  cord  of  special  manufacture  about  f  in.  in  diameter, 
FIG.  94. 
*  A  New  Method  of  Sinking  Shafts.    E.  B.  Coxe.    Amer.  Inst.  M.  E.  i.  261. 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. ICI 
FIG.  96. 
or  preferably  a  copper  wire,  long  enough  to  reach  from  the  surface 
to  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  when  completed.     One  end  of  this line  is  coiled  on  a  small  drum  situated  near 
the  top  of  the  pit,  and  the  other  end  is  led  by 
pulleys  to  the  exact  centre  of  the  shaft.    As 
a  rule,  the  central  point  is  a  hole  bored 
through  a  baulk  of  timber  placed  across  the 
shaft,  but  the  best  plan  is   to   provide   a 
hinged  arm  (a,  Fig.  95)  built  firmly  into  the 
masonry.     When  in  use  this  is  kept  in  its 
proper  position  by  the  stop  £,  but  if  not,  it  is 
folded   upwards  into  the  position   shown  by  dotted  lines  at  c. 
After  the  line  has  been  passed  through  the  centre  hole,  a  link  is 
attached,  from  which  a  weight  can  be  hung,  this  dipping  into  a 
bucket  of  water  at  the  bottom,  so  that  the  line  is  steadied.     As 
soon  as  the  proof  has  been  made  the  weight  is  removed,  and  the 
cord  wound  up  again  on  the  drum. 
For  determining  whether  sufficient  ground 
is  removed,  the  master- sinker  is  provided 
with  a  "  centre  "  staff,  which  is  a  wooden 
rod  about  i|-  in.  square,  and  equal  in  length to  the  outside  radius  of  brickwork.  This  is 
moved  round  the  central  point  as  excava- tion continues. 
For  setting  out  the  curbs  exactly  beneath 
each  other  a  series  of  cords  (d,  Fig.  94)  are 
hung  all  round  the  circumference  of  the 
shaft  at  intervals  of  about  3  ft.  These  are 
attached  to  the  inside  of  the  upper  curb,  and 
serve,  not  only  to  set  the  curb  below,  but 
also  as  a  guide  for  the  amount  of  excavation. 
Every  third  curb  will  be  checked  by  the  main 
centre  line,  the  intermediate  ones  being  set 
out  by  the  side  lines. 
Winding  Debris. — The  material  exca- 
vated is  brought  to  the  surface  in  wrought- 
iron  barrels  called  kibbles,  hoppits,  or  bowks,  the  general  shape 
being  shown  in  Fig.  96.     At  the  top  is  a  bow  of  wrought-iron 
swung  to   the  body   by  two    eye-pieces   riveted  to  the 
sides  of  the  kibble.     Attachment  is  made  to  the  winding  FlG-  97- 
rope  through  a  spring  hook  (Fig.  97).     With  such  con- struction time  is  lost  at  the  surface,  as  the  full  bowk 
has  to  be  taken  from  the  rope  and  replaced  by  an  empty 
one.     For  this  reason  the  tipping  kibble  is  preferred.    Its 
body  is  similar  to  the  one  already  figured,  but  the  wrought- 
iron  bow  is  not  attached  at  the  top  but  at  a  point  below 
the  centre  of  gravity,  so  that  when  full,  the  tendency  is 
for  the  kibble  to  turn  over  and  empty  itself.     To  prevent  this 
CKIVEHblTI 

--- Page Break ---
102 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  98. 
happening  during  hoisting,  a  short  vertical  pin  (a,  Fig.  98)  is 
riveted  to  the  inside  of  the  bucket,  and  an  ordinary  chain  link, 
sliding  on  one  of  the  arms  of  the  bow, 
passed  over  it.  On  reaching  the  surface 
this  safety  link  is  lifted  off  the  pin,  when 
the  hoppit  immediately  turns  over  and 
empties  itself.  With  such  a  system  the 
kibble  is  only  removed  from  the  rope  at 
the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  one  disconnecting 
being  saved. 
Covering  over  Pit  Top. — This  was 
originally  done  by  means  of  a  travelling 
platform,  which  could  be  wheeled  over  the 
shaft  when  the  kibble  reached  the  surface, 
and  removed  again  when  descent  had  to 
be  made.  The  labour  here  is  considerable, 
and  time  is  lost.  To  get  over  these  draw- 
backs two  hinged  doors,  with  their  weight 
counter-balanced,  are  adopted.  These  when 
open,  form  a  fence  protecting  the  pit  top 
on  two  sides ;  the  other  two  are  guarded 
with  a  permanent  fence.  When  these  are 
down,  they  entirely  close  the  opening,  and  two  rails  on  the  upper 
side  of  each  door  form  a  continuation  of  the  tramway  going  to 
the  dirt  heap. 
Even,  however,  with  these  a  little  time  is  lost  as  each  door  has 
to  be  lifted  separately ;  so,  to  remove  this  complaint,  Mr.  Wm. 
Galloway  has  designed  an  arrangement  of  levers  and  counter- 
FIG.  99. 
balances  (Fig.  99),  by  means  of  which  both  are  opened  at  the 
same  time.  Two  hinges,  a  a,  are  bolted  to  each  door,  and  keyed 
on  cross  shafts,  b  ft,  to  which,  by  means  of  a  handle,  c,  and  con- necting links,  a  movement  of  rotation  can  be  given,  and  as  the 
hinges  are  fixed  to  the  cross  shafts,  the  doors  lift  when  the  latter 
turn.  The  weight  of  the  doors  is  counterbalanced  by  four 
blocks  of  metal,  d,  so  that  they  will  stand  at  any  position  in 
which  they  are  placed. 
Guides. — The  introduction  of  guides  in  sinking  pits  is  desir- 
able to  prevent  the  oscillation  of  the  kibble,  which  gets  especially 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
103 
FIG.  100. 
large  in  deep  undertakings,  considerable  time  being  lost  in  steady- 
ing it  before  winding  commences.  Two  methods  are  adopted, 
in  the  first  a  single  guide  rope  is  passed  down  the  centre  of  the 
shaft,  while  in  the  other  two  ropes  are  used.  In  each  system 
these  guides,  which  are  of  flexible  wire,  are  coiled  on  a  drum 
worked  by  a  capstan  engine  at  the  surface,  and  can  be  lengthened 
as  the  sinking  proceeds,  and  also  form  the  means  by  which  the 
walling  stage  is  raised  during  bricking  operations.  In  the  former, 
however  (see  description,  p.  124),  the  walling  stage  is  removed 
during  sinking,  and  the  kibble  is  guided  to  the  bottom  of  the 
shaft ;  while  in  the  latter,  one  end  of  each  guide  is  always 
attached  to  the  walling  stage  which  remains  in  the  shaft  during 
sinking,  and  the  kibble  is  only  guided  to  the  point  where  the 
walling  stage  is  suspended.  Each  system  has  its  advantages, 
as  with  one  central  rope  the  kibble  is  guided  all  the  way,  and  if 
a  heavy  weight  be  hung  at  its  lower  end, 
the  centre  line  of  shaft  is  obtained  with- 
out any  further  trouble,  while  in  the  two- 
rope  system  walling  can  proceed  while 
sinking  is  going  on  below,  thus  saving  con- 
siderable time,  an  advantage  not  possessed 
by  the  other  method. 
The  system  of  employing  two  guides 
was  patented  by  Mr.  Wm.  Galloway  in 
1875.     In  it,  two  wire  ropes  (a  a,  Fig.  i  oo) are  connected  at  their  lower  end  to  the 
walling  stage,  and  pass  over  two  pulleys 
on  the  headgear  to  drums  worked  by  a 
steam  crab,  each  drum  being  able  to  be 
moved  independently,  to  provide  for  any 
casual  irregularity  in  the  length  of  guides. 
An  iron  frame,  consisting  of  two  legs  joined 
together  by  a  cross-bar,  called  the  "  rider," clasps  the  two  guides  loosely  at  four  points,  6  6,  thus  preventing 
any  chance  of  cross-binding.   The 
winding  rope  passes  through  a hole  in  the  centre  of  the  rider. 
The  capping  connecting  the  wind- 
ing rope  and  chain  going  to  the 
kibble,  is  provided  with  a  buffer,  c, 
consisting  of  alternate  layers  of 
india-rubber  and  sheetiron,  which 
are  of  larger  diameter  than  the 
hole  in  the  rider  cross-bar,  and 
therefore  cannot  pass  through  it. 
When  the  kibble  arrives  at  the 
surface   the   balanced  doors  are 
closed,  a  tipping  waggon  (one  form  of  which  is  shown  in  Fig.  101, 
FIG.  101. 

--- Page Break ---
104  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  sketch  explaining  itself)  run  beneath,  and  the  kibble  emptied 
into  it.  The  waggon  is  then  removed,  the  doors  opened,  and  the 
bucket  and  rider  lowered  away,  until  the  walling  stage  is  reached, 
when  the  arms  of  the  rider  are  caught  by  two  buffers  on  the  bridle 
chains.  The  kibble  and  winding  rope  continue  their  descent,  passing 
through  the  square  opening  in  the  stage  until  the  bottom  of  the 
shaft  is  reached.  In  ascending,  the  winding  rope  slides  through 
the  central  opening  in  the  rider  cross-bar,  until  the  buffer  on  the 
capping  comes  in  contact  with  it.  The  rider  is  then  lifted  to  the surface. 
In  sinking  the  Harris  Navigation  shafts,  the  time  occupied  in 
winding,  changing,  &c.,  before  adopting  guides,  was  4  min.  49  sec. 
from  a  depth  of  475  yds.,  whereas  after  the  guides  were  put  in,  the 
time  fell  to  3  min.  26  sec.  from  a  depth  of  530  yds.* 
LINING  SHAFTS. — In  describing  the  operation  of  getting 
down  to  the  stone-head,  both  timber  and  iron  were  alluded  to  as 
being  employed  for  securing  the  sides  of  the  excavation,  only 
as  a  temporary  means.  As  soon  as  this  point  is  reached,  some 
other  method  of  a  more  permanent  character  is  adopted.  Several 
substances  are  employed  for  permanent  lining  under  ordinary  cir- 
cumstances, such  as  wood,  stone,  or  brickwork,  but  except  in  cases 
where  the  two  former  are  plentiful  and  cheap,  they  are  rarely 
used.  Bricks  are  plentiful  in  most  colliery  districts,  and  in  the 
great  majority  of  instances  are  adopted.  Sometimes  they  are 
moulded  to  the  shape  of  the  shaft,  and  when  such  is  done  the 
labour  of  laying  them  is  reduced,  and  the  joints  are  well  made, 
but  in  large  shafts,  where  the  curvature  is  small,  ordinary  9  in. 
bricks  are  generally  employed  as  they  are  much  cheaper. 
Bricks. — For  all  mining  purposes,  the  bricks  used  should  be good  hard  burnt  ones,  and  free  from  cracks  and  stones.  The  clay 
of  which  they  are  composed,  should  be  rich  in  alumina,  and 
thoroughly  ground  in  a  pug-mill ;  they  should  also  emit  a  ringing sound  when  struck.  The  surface  should  not  be  too  smooth,  a 
probable  result  of  over-burning,  or  the  mortar  does  not  readily 
adhere  to  them.  When  made  by  machines  in  which  wires  are  used 
for  cutting  the  blocks  of  clay  into  the  required  shape,  the  edges 
are  left  rough  and  this  instead  of  being  a  disadvantage  really 
assists  the  brick  in  laying  hold  of  the  mortar. 
Number  of  Bricks  required. — The  easiest  way  to  find  out  how 
many  bricks  are  required  for  walling,  is  to  calculate  the  cubic 
contents  of  masonry  for  each  yard  in  depth,  and  then  multiply 
by  the  total  depth. 
If  D  =  the  outside  diam.  of  brickwork  in  ft.  and  d  the  inside 
diam.,  (D2  -  d2)  x  .7854  will  give  the  area  in  sq.  ft.  of  the  annular 
ring  •  this  multiplied  by  3  (number  of  ft.  in  yd.)  and  divided  by  27 (cub.  feet  in  cub.  yard)  gives  the  number  of  cub.  yards  of  masonry 
"'?•,•-•,    *  Inst.  C.  E,  Ixiv.  26. 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  105 
for  each  yard  of  depth,  or  simpler  still,  divide  at  once  by  y  —  9. 
Ordinary  bricks  are  9  x  4^  x  3  inches,  so  that  a  cub.  yd.  of  masonry 
would  contain  4  x  8  x  12  =  384,  if  mortar  was  absent.  As  this  occu- 
pies a  certain  space  it  is  usual  to  consider  in  practice  that  1000 
bricks  will  build  3  cubic  yards. 
Mortar.  -  The  mortar  used  is  generally  composed  of  lime  and 
sand,  and  should  be  of  a  slightly  hydraulic  character.  The  ingre- 
dients whatever  they  may  be,  are  usually  mixed  in  a  mortar  mill, 
which  not  only  considerably  reduces  the  labour  of  production,  but 
also  the  cost,  as  with  it  all  rough  parts  are  ground  up,  and  no 
refuse  is  left,  as  there  would  otherwise  be  if  ordinary  hand-made 
mortar  was  employed.  As  a  substitute  for  sand,  clinker-ashes 
from  underneath  boilers  are  largely  employed  with  most  satisfac- 
tory results,  as  they  give  ordinary  lime  somewhat  of  an  hydraulic 
character,  and  the  mortar  sets  very  much  quicker  and  harder, 
than  when  sand  is  used.  It  is,  however,  very  necessary  that 
these  ashes  should  be  free  from  the  finer  or  smaller  parts.  As 
they  are  a  waste  product  at  collieries,  considerable  economy  results 
from  their  use.  Where  the  strata  are  wet,  and  the  brickwork  has 
to  resist  the  passage  of  moisture,  cement  is  often  used,  either  by 
itself,  or  mixed  and  ground  up  with  lime.  Where  cement  is 
adopted,  it  should  be  used  as  quickly  as  it  is  made,  if  not,  it 
partially  sets,  and  has  to  be  broken  up,  and  made  over  again.  Thus, 
not  only  is  time  lost,  but  the  cement  sets  neither  so  well  nor  so 
quickly  on  the  second  operation,  and  the  strength  is  materially reduced. 
Whatever  quality  of  mortar  is  employed,  too  much  must  not 
be  used,  as  it  is  not  so  good  for  resisting  pressure  or  the  passage 
of  water  as  a  brick.  The  proper  thing  to  do  is  to  lay  a  bed  of 
mortar,  and  not  place  the  brick  in  its  proper  position,  but  drop  it 
down  a  few  inches  away,  and  then  rub  it  towards  the  place  at 
which  it  is  to  be  fixed.  When  the  bricks  are  of  a  close-grained 
character  they  absorb  moisture  so  quickly  from  the  mortar,  that 
the  mixture  dries  before  it  is  properly  set,  so,  to  prevent  this,  it  is 
usual  before  laying  such  bricks  to  soak  them  in  water. 
Thickness  of  Brickwork. — The  thickness  of  walling  depends 
entirely  on  the  diameter  of  the  shaft  and  the  nature  of  the 
strata.  If  it  is  coherent  rock  a  single  brick  is  used,  more  as 
a  preventive  of  weathering  action  than  as  an  actual  support. 
In  looser  ground,  brickwork  from  14  to  22  in.  thick  is  put  in. 
Opinions  differ  as  to  whether  brickwork  in  shafts  should  be 
made  solid,  that  is  to  say,  whether  it  should  be  carried  up  to 
the  limits  of  the  excavation,  or  whether  it  should  be  finished 
off  at  a  certain  distance,  and  some  looser  substance  interposed 
between  it  and  the  strata.  The  author's  experience  is  decidedly in  favour  of  the  latter.  Where  the  brickwork  is  made  to  abut 
against  the  rocks,  and  heaving  takes  place,  it  is  either  bulged  or 
broken,  but  if,  on  the  other  hand,  some  soft  packing  substance 

--- Page Break ---
io6  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
is  interposed  between  the  sides  of  the  rock  and  the  brickwork 
in  the  shaft,  the  first  result  of  pressure  is  to  compress  and 
tighten  this  loose  material.  If  any  heaving  takes  place  at 
one  point,  all  the  pressure  is  not  thrown  on  the  brickwork 
opposite  to  it,  but,  owing  to  the  soft  compressible  stuff  being 
interposed  between,  is  distributed  over  a  larger  extent  of  surface. 
At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  no  spaces  or cavities  should  be  left  between  the  brickwork  and  the  sides  of  the 
shaft,  but  every  opening  carefully  filled  in  with  loose,  fine 
material.  Coke  dust  or  well-burnt  small  ashes  are  excellent  for 
such  use,  and  often  the  small  dust  from  stone- breaking  machines, 
where  such  can  be  obtained,  is  employed.  Sand  is  too  heavy  for shaft  work. 
Ordinary  Curbs. — The  brickwork  is  put  in  in  sections,  each 
length  being  supported  on  curbs.  Wooden  curbs  are  generally 
employed,  similar  to  those  already  described,  but  as  they  decay 
somewhat  readily,  cast  iron  ones  are  often  substituted.  A  curb 
of  this  material  employed  in  a  shaft  19  ft.  diam.  is  shown  in 
FIG.  102.  FIG.  103. 
Fig.  1 02.  It  is  i  o  in.  broad  by  4  in.  wide  by  J  in.  thick.  Ten  seg- 
ments form  the  circle,  and  each  one  is  strengthened  by  two  ribs. 
Two  holes  are  left  in  the  transverse  ribs  at  each  end,  through 
which  bolts  are  passed  to  connect  the  segments  together. 
"Water  Rings. — If  the  strata  are  at  all  wet,  more  or  less  moisture always  percolates  through  the  masonry,  and  is  collected  in  what 
are  called  "  water  rings  "or  "  garland  curbs,"  from  whence  it  is conducted  down  the  shaft  in  tubes.  The  ordinary  construction 
of  water  ring  consists  of  an  iron  curb  cast  with  a  hollow  groove. 
These  are  bedded  as  usual,  but  the  brickwork  for  a  short  distance 
above,  is  shorn  back  (Fig.  103),  so  that  the  water  readily  passes 
into  the  groove. 
A  superior  construction  for  larger  quantities  of  water  is  illus- 
trated in  Figs.  104  and  105.  For  a  few  courses  the  brickwork  is 
made  solid,  and  an  ordinary  curb  a  fixed  in  position.  All  the 
joints  in  the  curb  and  between  it  and  the  brickwork  are  made 
with  tarred  flannel,  and  the  space  behind  the  curb  is  well  rammed 
with  puddled  clay.  Two  courses  of  brickwork  b  are  laid,  but  are 
set  back  from  the  rest  of  the  work  as  figured.  A  shrouding,  c, 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
107 
provided  with  a  ledge  on  the  inside,  is  nailed  all  round  the  front 
of  the  curb,  the  horizontal  and  vertical  joints  being  made  with 
tarred  flannel  as  before.     A  series  of  bricks  d  are  then  placed, 
bridging  over  the  space  between  b  and  c,  but 
these  are  not  continuous  all  round  the  shaft,    FIGS.  104  AND  105. 
blank  spaces  being  left  alternately ;  the  result 
is,  that  a  series  of  pigeon-holes  are  formed,  e, 
Fig.  105,  the  object  of  which  is  both  to  allow 
water  to  readily  pass  into  the  space/,  Fig.  104, 
and  to  afford  means  for  removing  the  sediment 
which  collects  in  the  course  of  time.     After 
two  rows  of  these  bridge  bricks  have  been 
put  on,  a  light  curb  g  is  fixed,  and  on  it  the 
ordinary  brickwork  of  the  shaft  is  built. 
Walling  Stages. — When  commenced,  the 
operation  of  walling  is  carried  on  as  rapidly 
as  possible.  It  was  formerly  performed  on 
ordinary  scaffolds  supported  by  cross-baulks 
of  timber,  which  rested  on  the  brickwork 
already  put  in,  holes  being  left  at  intervals  for 
the  insertion  of  byatts.  This  necessitated  the 
labour  of  raising  the  scaffold  each  time  the  work  got  too  high  for 
the  masons  to  reach.  Such  procedure  is  entirely  superseded  by 
employing  a  circular  stage  a  little  less  in  diameter  than  the 
finished  size  of  shaft,  which  is  bodily  lifted  up  by  a  crab-engine 
on  the  surface.  In  its  ordinary  form  it  con- 
sists of  three  parts,  a  central  one,  and  two 
side  pieces  working  on  hinges,  connection  being 
made  to  the  ropes  by  two  sets  of  three  bridle 
chains.  The  great  advantage  derived  by  this 
latter  method  is  speed,  as  instead  of  having 
to  lift  the  scaffold,  it  is  only  necessary  to  signal 
to  the  engine  on  the  surface  to  have  it  drawn 
up.  As  soon  as  it  arrives  at  the  proper  point 
it  is  steadied,  either  by  pushing  a  series  of small  radial  bolts  into  holes  left  out  in  the 
brickwork,  or  by  driving  down  two  wedges 
into  the  annular  space  between  the  stage 
and  the  masonry. 
In  large  shafts  the  walling  stage  is  a  very 
elaborate  and  substantial  structure,  and  is  so 
constructed  that  sinking  can  be  carried  on 
underneath  while  bricking  proceeds  at  a 
higher  level.  Mr.  Wm.  Galloway,  in  the 
No.  i  pit  at  Llanbradach,  has  adopted  a  form, 
shown  in  Figs.  106  and  107,  which  consists 
of  a  wooden  floor  on  an  angle-iron  frame, 
part  fixfcd  and  part  movable,  and  an  upright  tube  connected  to 
FIGS,  106  AND  107. 

--- Page Break ---
io8 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
this  iron  frame.  The  lower  frame  consists  of  four  pieces  of 
angle-iron,  dl  d*,  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles,  a  circular 
band,  of  angle-iron  in  three  segments,  and  a  straight  piece  of 
angle  iron  joined  to  the  short  ends  of  d*  and  to  the  ends  of the  circular  frame  as  illustrated.  The  object  of  the  latter 
piece  is  to  enable  the  hinged  door,  A,  to  be  placed  in  the  part 
forming  the  smaller  segment  of  the  circle.  When  the  stage 
is  taken  past  the  pipe  buntons  the  door  is  raised  up.  Four 
upright  pieces  of  angle  iron  connect  the  upper  frame  and  the 
lower  one,  and  four  plates  of  sheet-iron,  attached  to  the  four 
uprights,  form  the  fence  around  the  central  opening  in  the  stage. 
The  roof  is  10  ft.  6  in.  above  the  stage  proper.  It  is  formed 
similar  to  the  floor,  but  is  of  rather  smaller  diameter,  and  is 
covered  with  sheet-iron.  An  iron  ladder,  w,  provides  a  means  of 
access  from  one  stage  to  the  other.  The  whole  structure  weighs 
about  five  tons,  and  is  suspended  from  the  guide  ropes,  n  n,  which 
are  5  ft.  6  in.  apart  from  centre  to  centre.  In  the  No.  2  shaft 
the  details  have  been  altered  somewhat,  two  openings  being  pro- 
vided, as  two  kibbles  are  employed  for  winding  purposes.  In  this 
instance,  suspension  is  made  by  two  ropes,  which  serve  the  pur- 
pose of  four  guides,  by  the  following  attachment :  The  end  of 
each  suspension  rope  is  attached  to  a  strong  screw  in  the  pit-head 
pulley,  and  passes  downwards  to  the  walling  stage,  then  round  a 
small  pulley  fixed  on  it,  proceeds  a  short  distance  across  the  stage, 
round  another  pulley  similar  to  the  first,  then  vertically  up  the 
shaft,  and  over  another  pulley  on  the  pit-head  frame,  finally 
going  to  the  drum    of   the 
FIG.  108.  capstan  engine. 
A  model  of  a  similar  appli- 
ance was  exhibited  by  the 
Roche  la  Moliere  Company 
at  the  Paris  Exhibition.  It 
consisted  of  an  iron  ring  from 
25  to  39  in.  deep  (a,  Fig.  108) of  the  exact  diameter  of  the 
finished  shaft,  suspendedfrom 
bridle  chains.  A  similar  ring 
was  hung  about  10  ft.  below, 
and  the  two  connected  to- 
gether by  a  series  of  iron 
rods.  These  two  rings  sup- 
port two  scaffolds,  on  the 
upper  one  of  which  the  men stand  to  do  the  bricking. 
The  bricks,  &c.,  are  placed round  in  contact  with  the 
upper  ring,  the  platform 
slowly  raised,  and  another  tier  of  masonry  placed  in  position. 
w         % 'A  V/ /"77~rr7r7T77T7777rr/ 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING 
109 
In  this  way,  the  time  usually  spent  in  measuring  the  diameter 
and  ascertaining  the  verticality  of  the  shaft  is  saved,  the  top 
ring  being  kept  a  few  courses  above  the  brickwork  to  give  a 
guide  to  the  masons,  the  object  of  the  two  rings  evidently  being  to 
keep  the  scaffold  in  a  vertical  line.  Where  the  spaces  between  the 
masonry  and  the  sides  of  the  shaft  are  to  be  filled  in  with  cement, 
&c.,  deeper  rings  are  employed,  so  that  more  of  their  height 
might  be  left  below  as  a  support  until  the  cement  sets. 
Supporting  Curbs.— It  often  happens  that  when  the  sinking is  passing  through  rotten  ground,  lengths  of  walling  are  required 
to  be  put  in  to  secure  the  sides,  but  suitable  places  cannot  be 
found  on  which  to  seat  the  curbs.  In  such  cases  the  difficulty 
is  got  over  by  one  of  two  methods,  either  by  putting  in  what  are 
called  "  square  frames/'  or  by  supporting  the  curb  on  a  series of  iron  plugs  driven  in  all  round  the  circumference  of  the  shaft. 
A  square  frame,  with  its  sides  equal  to  the  diameter  of  the 
shaft,  is  placed  at  the  point  where  the  walling  is  to  commence, 
and  as  the  corners  of  this  frame  project  a  considerable  distance 
beyond  the  circumference  of  the  pit  (Fig.  109),  sufficient  support  is 
FIGS.  109,  no,  AND  in. 
afforded  to  the  curb.  In  large  shafts  the  amount  of  ground  to  be 
excavated  for  a  square,  having  its  sides  equal  to  the  diameter  of 
the  pit,  would  be  so  great  that  the  cost  would  be  a  serious  matter, 
so  to  remove  the  difficulty,  and  yet  obtain  some  support,  the 
square  is  replaced  by  an  octagon  (Fig.  1 10). 
The  better  method  is  to  bore  a  series  of  holes,  2  in.  diam.  and  3 
to  4  ft.  apart,  around  the  circumference  of  the  pit,  to  a  depth  of 
3  to  4  ft.,  depending  on  the  strength  of  the  ground.  These  must 
be  on  a  truly  horizontal  plane,  and  wrought-iron  or  steel  plugs 
are  firmly  driven  into  them,  leaving  a  projecting  portion  upon 
which  the  curb  is  bedded  (Fig  in). 
Ventilation. — This  is  usually  done  by  laying  a  line  of  sheet- 
iron  pipes  from  15  to  20  in.  diam.  down  the  side  of  the  shaft,  and 
connecting  them  with  a  small  blowing  fan  at  the  surface.  These 
pipes  are  held  in  position  by  dog-hooks  driven  firmly  into  the masonry. 
Lighting. — In  districts  liable  to  sudden  outbursts  of  gas,  the 
same  precautions  have  to  be  adopted  in  sinking  as  in  ordinary  work- 
ing, and  safety  lamps  are  employed,  but  these  give  a  very'imper- 

--- Page Break ---
I  TO TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FiGS.    112  AND   113. 
feet  light  in  a  downwards  direction,  where  the  sinker  wants  it  most 
particularly.  Of  later  years  the  electric  light  has  been  employed, 
with  most  satisfactory  results,  as,  owing  to  the  clear  light  given, 
the  men  do  a  great  deal  more  work.  A  cluster  of  incandescent 
lamps,  protected  by  a  glass  globe,  is  generally  employed,  this 
being  suspended  from  a  cable,  which  is  wound  on  a  drum  at  the 
surface,  and  which  gives  a  ready  means  of  raising  or  lowering  the 
lamps,  either  to  give  more  light,  or  to  remove  them  out  of  danger 
when  shots  are  being  fired. 
Dealing  with  Water. — The  presence  of  a  small  amount  of 
water  largely  increases  the  cost  of  sinking.  A  small  quantity  is 
got  rid  of  by  baling  with  a  bucket  into  a  tipping  barrel,  similar  to 
the  tipping  kibble,  and  then  winding  it  to  the  surface.  This  is  a 
very  slow  and  costly  procedure,  and  where  the  quantity  is  at  all 
large,  one  of  the  different  classes  of  pumps  will  have  to  be  employed. 
These  are  described  in  the  chapter  on  pumping. 
To  save  the  time  and  cost  of  baling, 
Mr.  Galloway  has  designed  a  pneumatic 
water  tank,  which  consists  of  a  cylin- 
drical barrel,  4  ft.  2  in.  diam.  and  8  ft. 
high,  closed  at  the  top  in  which  there 
is  a  door  (a,  Fig.  112)  bolted  to  the  cover, 
this  giving  access  to  the  interior  when 
necessary;  the  bottom,  c  d,  is  5  in.  above 
the  base  of  the  cylinder,  and  has  a  central 
opening  18  in.  diam.  for  the  valve  seat  which 
is  turned  in  a  lathe.  The  valve  b  consists 
of  a  block  of  cast  iron,  e  (Fig.  113),  having 
its  lower  face  turned  true,  and  over  which  a 
sheet  of  leather  is  tightly  capped.  A  cir- 
cular plate  of  iron,  16  in.  diam.,  is  bolted  to 
this  valve,  by  bolts  having  countersunk 
heads,  as  shown  in  Fig.  113.  A  spindle, 
h,  working  through  two  guides,  having  a 
turned  ball  in  its  lower  end,  is  held  loosely 
in  a  socket  in  the  valve,  as  shown,  by 
which  means  the  vertical  movement  of  the 
valve  is  secured,  while  the  ball-and-socket 
joint  enables  it  to  readily  accommodate 
itself  to  the  seat  in  any  position  in  which 
it  may  be  turned. 
At  k  is  one  half  of  an  instantaneous  coupling,  supplied  by  the 
Vacuum  Brake  Co.,  constituting  the  outer  end  of  the  pipe  Z,  whicli 
passes  through  the  side  of  the  cylinder,  and  rises  to  within  i  in. 
of  the  top  of  the  barrel.  A  glass  gauge,  «t,  shows  the  height 
of  water  in  the  tank,  this  being  protected  from  chance  blows  by 
strong  ribs  of  angle  iron. 
Vacuum  is  created  by  air  pumps  at  the  surface,  and  is  equiva- 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  in 
lent  to  20-22  in.  of  mercury;  3  in.  pipes  are  carried  down  the  pit 
and  connected  to  30  ft.  of  flexible  hose,  having  a  stop-cock  and  a 
corresponding  half  of  an  instantaneous  coupling.  The  barrel  is 
filled  in  30  seconds.  It  was  possible  with  this  arrangement  to 
sink  in  Pennant  sandstone,  with  5000  galls,  per  hour,  at  the  rate 
of  5-5^  yds.  per  week,  or  with  7000  galls,  rather  under  4  yds., the  rock  being  very  hard  and  compact.  The  highest  rate  of 
progress  in  the  same  ground  with  only  500  galls,  per  hour  had 
previously  been  6  J  yds.* 
KEEPING  OUT  WATER  BY  TUBBING.— Ordinary 
masonry  is  of  little  use  for  stopping  back  water,  if  the  measures 
contain  large  quantities,  and  it  is  desired  that  this  should  not 
have  to  be  continually  dealt  with.  As  a  rule,  it  happens  that 
water-bearing  beds  are  usually  succeeded  by  others  of  an  imper- 
vious nature,  so  that  if  there  can  be  introduced  at  such  point  some 
water-tight  material,  the  water  is  prevented  from  coming  into  the 
pit.  Such  lining  is  called  tubbing.  The  material  employed  may 
be  either  wood,  cast-iron,  or  masonry ;  the  former,  however,  is 
seldom  employed  at  the  present  time.  Its  up-keep  is  great,  it  is 
scarcely  ever  water-tight,  and  its  only  recommendation  is  cheap- ness in  first  cost,  where  wood  is  plentiful. 
Coffering. — Where  the  pressure  is  not  excessive,  a  special  set- 
ting of  masonry,  technically  called  "  coffering,"  is  largely  employed. It  is  cheaper  than  cast-iron,  and  where  properly  put  in  is  very successful.  The  following  is  a  description  of  what  is  probably  the 
largest  application  of  this  method,  the  shaft  being  20  ft.  diam.  in 
the  clear,  the  coffering  extending  about  55  yds.  (from  a  depth  of 
105  yds.  to  50  yds.  below  the  surface). 
After  passing  through  the  water-bearing  beds,  the  shaft  was sunk  20  yds.  below  the  point  where  the  last  feeder  was  met,  and 
a  cast-iron  curb  put  in,  and  supported  on  iron  plugs.  Upon  this, 
about  26  yds.  of  14  in.  brickwork  was  built,  and  then  the  walling 
was  carried  up  solid  for  12  ft.,  until  the  water-bearing  strata  were met  with.  The  object  of  doing  this  was  to  provide  some  substantial 
support  for  the  coffering,  and  to  prevent  any  risk  of  the  masonry 
settling  and  cracking.  It  was  decided  to  put  in  the  coffering  2  ft. 
3  in.  thick.  Some  means  have  to  be  adopted,  to  carry  off  the 
water  running  from  the  rocks,  and  to  prevent  it  passing  over  the 
brickwork  and  washing  the  mortar  joints  away.  To  do  this,  what 
are  called  "  plug  boxes  "  were  bedded  on  the  solid  work.  Six  of these  were  placed  at  equal  intervals  around  the  circumference,  and 
were  formed  of  wood,  1 2  in.  square  by  2  ft.  9  in.  long,  having  a  hole 
3  in.  diam.  bored  along  their  longer  axis  to  within  2  in.  of  the 
back  (a,  Fig.  114),  and  then  a  vertical  hole,  bt  bored  from  the  top 
to  meet  the  horizontal  one.  In  this  latter,  vertical  wooden  pipes 
having  horizontal  openings  were  carried  up  behind  the  brickwork, 
*  So.  Wales  lust.  xvi.  1 19. 

--- Page Break ---
IT2 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  114. 
and  allowed  the  water  to  pass  away  through  the  openings  in  the 
plug-boxes.  The  holes  in  the  water  troughs  were  bored  at  vertical intervals  of  3  in.  As  the  brickwork  and  puddle  reached  each  hole 
it  was  plugged  up  and  the  water  conveyed  away  through  the  next 
higher  one.  The  solid  walling 
was  then  brought  up  level  with 
the  top  of  the  plug-boxes  and  the coffering  commenced. 
This  consisted  of  five  rings  of 
brickwork,  the  special  feature  of 
this  system  being  that  the  joints 
are  broken  both  vertically  and 
horizontally.  Header  courses  are 
not  employed,  stretchers  only 
being  used.  To  commence  with, 
the  first  ring,  c,  is  of  ordinary  brick 
3  in.  thick,  the  second  ring,  d,  for 
the  first  course  is  laid  with  bricks 
i  J  in.  thick,  the  third  and  fifth 
rings,  e  and  g,  are  similar  to  the 
first  one,  while  the  fourth  ring, 
/,  for  the  first  course  is  also  made 
with  i Jin.  bricks;  afterwards,  ordinary  bricks,  3  in.  thick,  are 
used  in  all  the  rings,  so  that  the  horizontal  joints  of  the  second 
and  fourth  courses  throughout  the  work  are  the  thickness  of 
half  a  brink  below  the  others.  The  method  of  laying  the  bricks 
is  the  usual  one  for  the  first,  third,  and  fifth  courses,  and  when 
these  are  in  position,  the  spaces  between  are  filled  with  thin  liquid 
cement,  and  the  second  and  fourth  rows  are  laid  by  dropping  the 
bricks  into  the  mixture  reposing  in  the  gullet,  these  being  what 
are  called  "  floating  courses." After  getting  up  about  12  or  18  in.  the  space  between  the  back 
of  the  brickwork  and  the  strata  is  filled  in  with  good  loamy  soil, 
which  should  be  free  from  pebbles  and  should  be  well  and  care- 
fully rammed,  no  spaces  being  left.  Instead  of  soil,  well  puddled 
clay  is  sometimes  used,  but  experience  is  more  in  favour  of  the 
former.  With  clay,  no  matter  how  carefully  the  work  is  done, 
there  is  a  tendency  for  "  faces  "  to  be  formed  between  successive layers  and  lumps,  through  which  water  finds  its  way.  The 
mortar  used  for  laying  the  first,  third,  and  fifth  rings  was  a 
mixture  of  lime,  cement,  and  ashes  well  ground  in  a  mortar  mill ; 
for  the  intermediate  rings,  pure  Portland  cement  was  employed. 
Iron  Tubbing. — Where  the  pressure  of  the  water  is  great, 
and  long  lengths  have  to  be  put  in,  masonry  tubbing  is  not  appli- 
cable ;  indeed  every  form  has  given  way  to  that  in  which  cast-iron 
is  employed.  At  one  time  rings  going  completely  round  the 
circumference  of  the  shaft  were  employed,  but  the  difficulty  of 
getting  them  into  position,  and  their  liability  to  break,  together 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  113 
with  the  impossibility  of  repairing  them,  caused  an  early  abandon- 
ment of  this  form,  and  the  use  of  segments  has  now  become  general. 
At  first  the  flanges  were  placed  towards  the  centre  of  the  pit, 
and  the  attachment  of  one  to  the  other  was  made  by  means  of 
bolts,  but  in  consequence  of  the  lowering  of  the  ground,  and  the 
effect  of  side  pressure,  it  was  found  that  bolts  were  not  to  be 
trusted,  and  that  frequent  ruptures  took  place.  In  England  this 
method  has  given  way  to  the  system  in  which  the  flanges  are  placed 
away  from  the  centre  of  the  pit,  it  being  found  that  the  pressure 
of  the  sides  and  the  wedging  which  is  adopted,  is  sufficient  to 
retain  the  segments  in  position,  and  to  keep  the  joints  watertight. 
The  author  was  surprised  to  find  on  a  visit  (in  1 89 1 )  to  the  Continent, 
that  the  old  system  of  placing  the  flanges  towards  the  inside  of 
the  shaft  was  still  in  use  there.  The  engineers  at  the  different 
collieries  visited  contended  that  no  reliance  could  be  placed  on 
wooden  wedging,  as  it  is  always  decaying,  and  that  although  some 
little  difficulty  is  encountered  through  movements  of  the  ground, 
these  are  counterbalanced  by  the  more  perfect  water-tightness  of the  tubbing.  In  this  method  the  flanges,  both  horizontal  and 
vertical,  are  planed  in  a  lathe,  and  two  V  grooves  cut  in  them.  A 
layer  of  sheet-lead  is  then  interposed,  and  the  two  segments 
screwed  tightly  together  by  means  of  turned  bolts,  the  pressure 
forcing  the  lead  into  the  V  grooves  already  alluded  to. 
The  method  of  putting  in  the  work  is  the  same  whatever 
system  is  adopted.  After  getting  through  the  water-bearing 
strata,  and  reaching  some  impervious  beds,  a  bed  is  first  formed 
on  which  the  wedging  curb  can  be  placed.  This  is  dressed  truly 
level  with  the  aid  of  hammer  and  chisels,  blasting  being  strictly 
forbidden,  so  as  to  obviate  any  possibility  of  fracturing  the  rock. 
This  is  the  keystone  of  the  whole  operation,  and  requires  the 
greatest  care.  Formerly  wedging  curbs  were  constructed  of  oak, 
but  this  has  been  abandoned  in  favour  of  cast  iron.  They  are 
built  up  of  segments  which,  in  the  case  of  upcast  shafts  and 
furnace  ventilation,  are  sometimes  of  smaller  diameter  than  the 
tubbing  plates,  the  projecting  portion  being  afterwards  used  as  a 
foundation  on  which  a  lining  of  brickwork  can  be  built.  For  an 
important  undertaking  they  would  be  about  18  in.  wide  by  6  in. 
deep,  and  are  cast  hollow  to  lessen  the  weight.  The  segments  of 
the  curb  are  set  in  position  on  the  bed  prepared,  and  half -inch 
sheeting  of  soft  deal  placed  in  the  joints  in  such  a  manner,  in  this 
and  other  cases,  that  the  end  of  the  grain  of  the  wood  is  presented 
to  the  inner  part  of  the  shaft  where  wedging  takes  place.  The 
important  operation  of  wedging  the  curb  is  then  commenced.  All 
around  the  circumference,  in  the  space  between  it  and  the  sides  of 
the  shaft,  is  placed  well-dried  timber,  free  from  knots,  with  the 
grain  upwards.  As  many  well-dried,  finely-tapered,  pitch-pine 
wedges  as  possible  are  then  driven  in,  care  being  taken  that  this 
operation  proceeds  all  round  the  shaft  at  the  same  time  in  order n 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
to  distribute  the  pressure,  and  prevent  any  chance  of  the  segments 
being  displaced ;  props  are  also  set  from  the  sides  over  each  joint 
to  keep  the  curb  from  lifting.  When  no  more  timber  wedges  can 
be  got  in,  steel  chisels  are  employed,  and,  in  the  spaces  they  make, 
further  wood  is  inserted.  A  second  wedging  curb  is  usually 
placed  above  the  first,  and  sometimes  a  third  one.  The  top  one  of 
these  always  has  a  rebate  or  ledge  placed  on  it,  against  which  the 
segments  of  the  curb  abut. 
Tubbing  plates  (Fig.  115)  are  cast  in  segments  of  such  a  length 
that  the  circumference  is  divided  into  equal  parts,  their  height 
FIG.  115. 
•  a/t      £&oti,0.*r 
L r L 
Di 
varying  from  18  to  36  in.,  according  to  the  pressure  to  be  resisted. 
Flanges,  cross-ribs,  and  brackets  are  cast  on  the  back  to  give 
strength,  and  a  hole  is  provided  in  the  middle  of  each  to  allow 
water  to  pass  through  while  the  operation  of  laying  the  plates  is 
proceeding.  The  top  and  one  of  the  side  flanges  are  provided  on 
the  outside  with  a  projecting  ledge,  which  keeps  the  joint  sheeting 
and  adjoining  segments  in  position. 
When  the  wedging  is  finished,  the  first  layer  of  tubbing  plates 
will  be  laid  on  the  curb,  sheeting  being  placed  between  both 
horizontal  and  vertical  joints,  and  a  wedge  tightly  driven  down 
between  the  back  of  the  plates  and  the  sides  of  the  strata  as  a 
preventive  against  any  of  the  segments  moving.  A  second 
layer  of  segments  is  then  laid  on  the  first  in  a  similar  manner, 
and  the  process  repeated  until  the  top  of  the  water-bearing  strata 
is  reached,  the  vertical  joints  being  broken  in  each  course,  as  in 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
FIGS.  116  AND  117. 
building  masonry  (Figs.  116  and  117).  The  spaces  between  the 
plates  and  the  sides  of  the  excavation  are  filled  in  with  soil  or 
concrete  packing.  A  wedging  curb  will  be  placed  on  the  top  if 
it  is  found  that  the  water  rises  above  the  level  of  the  last  line  of 
plates.  All  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  joints  are  then  care- 
fully wedged,  as  long  as  the 
grain  of  the  wood  between  the 
joints  can  be  opened  with  a 
chisel,  commencing  at  the  bot- 
tom and  proceeding  upwards, 
attacking  each  ring  in  order, 
and  plugging  up  the  hole 
through  the  centre  of  each 
segment  at  the  same  time.  If  JL— 
this  operation  is  carefully  per- formed it  will  be  found  that 
the  length  tubbed  will  be  quite 
dry. 
In  many  instances  much  time 
and  money  is  saved  by  not  wait- 
ing until  the  bottom  of  the 
water-bearing  beds  is  reached, 
but  putting  in  wedging  curbs  at  intermediate  places  and  building 
tubbing  up  from  one  to  the  other,  successive  feeders  of  water  met 
with  being  thus  kept  out  of  the  shaft.  Of  course,  for  the  success 
of  this  operation,  it  is  necessary  that  the  nature  of  the  beds  met 
with  is  such  as  affords  foundation  for  the  curbs,  but  although  each 
wedging  curb  may  not  be  water-tight  during  the  time  of  sinking, 
yet  when  the  pressure  of  the  lower  length  of  tubbing  is  brought  up 
against  it  such  leakage  may  be  altogether  or  nearly  stopped,  and, 
although  each  foundation  may  be  bad  by  itself,  yet  when  they  are 
brought  to  bear  in  support  of  each  other,  the  water  may  be  stopped 
back.  In  the  Seaham  winning*  ten  successive  lengths  of  tubbing were  thus  put  in,  and,  although  the  total  quantity  of  water  which 
the  engineers  had  to  contend  with  at  different  periods  of  the  opera- 
tion was  6240  galls.,  yet  never  more  than  540  galls,  per  minute 
was  actually  in  the  pit  bottom,  this  being  the  maximum 
amount,  the  average  quantity  being  136  galls.  The  total  amount 
of  water  tubbed  back  was  4880  galls,  per  minute,  which  would 
have  been  the  quantity  required  to  have  been  raised  or  pumped 
to  the  surface,  if  intermediate  wedging  curbs  had  not  been  inserted. 
After  reaching  an  excellent  foundation  in  the  coal  measures,  three 
main  wedging  curbs  were  put  in  as  the  base  of  the  iron  tubbing, 
and  the  sinking  through  the  coal  measures  commenced  without  a 
drop  of  water  in  the  bottom. 
*  N  E.  L  v.  117. 

--- Page Break ---
n6  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Messrs.  J.  J.  Atkinson  and  W.  Coulson*  were  the  first  to  point  out the  curious  accidents  which  happen  to  tubbing  fixed  between  an 
upper  and  lower  wedging  curb  through  the  confinement  of  water 
and  gas.  It  has  never  yet  been  satisfactorily  explained,  how  air  and 
gas  confined  behind  tubbing  can  have  a  greater  pressure  than  that 
due  to  the  hydrostatic  head,  but  it  is  a  fact  that  such  is  so, 
and  unless  some  escape  is  provided,  no  matter  how  thick  the 
tubbing  is,  the  inevitable  result  will  be  that  it  becomes  cracked  or 
displaced  from  its  seating.  To  prevent  such  occurrences,  either the  water  behind  each  lift  is  connected  with  the  water  behind  the 
other  lifts,  by  means  of  small  pipes,  and  thus,  in  effect,  rendering 
the  whole  of  the  tubbing  open-topped  through  the  medium  of  the 
uppermost  lift,  or  a  pipe  is  carried  up  from  behind  the  tubbing  to 
the  height  necessary  to  balance  the  pressure  of  water.  As  this 
takes  up  a  large  quantity  of  pipes,  a  short  length  is  sometimes 
inserted  through  the  tubbing  near  the  top  of  the  lift,  and  only 
extended  a  small  distance  up  the  shaft,  but  a  loaded  valve  is  pro- 
vided at  the  top,  where  all  the  pressure  of  the  water  is.  This 
valve  discharges  the  air  and  prevents  the  pressure 
FIG.  1  1  8.  getting  higher  than  is  due  to  the  water  alone. 
The  more  general  practice  is  to  place  a  valve 
a,  Fig.  1  1  8,  in  the  wedging  curb,  and  to  carry  a 
length  of  pipes  b  behind  the  tubbing  to  the  next 
wedging  curb.  After  the  tubbing  has  been  wedged 
and  plugged,  the  water  rises  and  drives  out  all 
the  air.  When  water  has  been  running  through 
the  pipe  for  some  hours  the  valve  a  is  closed. 
Strength  of  Tubbing.  —  The  thickness  of  cast- 
iron  tubbing  varies  directly  with  the  pressure  it 
has  to  support  and  the  diameter  of  the  shaft.  As 
the  pressure  also  varies  as  the  depth,  if  the  diameter 
and  the  depth  are  both  doubled,  the  thickness  of  the  tubbing  will 
have  to  be  increased  four  times.  Mr.  J.  J.  Atkinsonf  gives  a 
complete  reasoning  for  the  following  formula,  from  which  the 
thickness  at  any  depth  can  be  found  : 
p 
where  t  equals  thickness  in  inches,  d  equals  the  diam.  in  ft.,  p 
equals  the  pressure  in  tons  per  sq.  inch  due  to  depth,  ra  equals  the 
working  load  or  resistance  to  crushing  of  the  material  employed. 
Remembering  that  a  cub.  ft.  of  water  weighs  62.5  Ibs.,i2  cub.  in. 
will  weigh  0.434  Ibs.,  so  that  for  every  foot  of  depth  a  pressure 
of  0.434  Ibs.  per  sq.  in.  is  exerted.  To  obtain,  therefore,  the 
*  N.  E.  I.  xi.  9.  1  2bid.ix.  175. 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  117 
pressure  per  sq.  inch  due  to  any  head  of  water,  the  depth  from 
the  surface  in  feet  is  multiplied  by  0.434.  The  resistance  of  cast- 
iron  to  crushing  (average  of  various  qualities)  is  about  90,000  Ibs. 
per  sq.  in.,  but  to  be  on  the  safe  side,  Jth  of  this  amount 
(15,000  Ibs.)  is  taken  as  the  working  load,  and  should  be  sub- 
stituted as  the  value  of  m  in  the  formula  given  above.  To  the 
thickness  so  found,  J  inch  should  be  added  to  allow  for  corrosion of  metal  and  wear  and  tear. 
In  shafts  of  large  diameters  the  thickness  of  the  upper  segments 
should  never  be  less  than  f  inch,  or  they  are  liable  to  be  fractured 
by  blows.  In  the  above  formula  notice  is  not  taken  of  the 
strength  imparted  by  flanges  and  ribs,  which  will  give  additional 
security.  Theoretically  each  segment  should  be  different  in 
thickness  to  the  others,  but  as  this  would  involve  consider- 
able expense  in  casting,  the  thickness  is  varied  about  every  8  or 
10  yards. 
Corrosion. — :Certain  substances  contained  in  solution  in  water 
have  a  very  injurious  effect  on  iron,  saline  matters  and  chlorides 
being  especially  destructive.  No  satisfactory  means  have  yet  been 
devised  for  stopping  such  action,  the  best  preventive,  probably, 
being  a  coating  of  a  hard  varnish  applied  before  the  tubbing  is 
seated.  The  front  of  the  segments  in  upcast  pits,  where  furnace 
ventilation  is  employed,  is  also  attacked  by  the  gases  generated 
by  the  combustion  of  the  coal.  Sulphurous  acid  is  produced, 
and  mixing  with  water  forms  sulphuric  acid,  which  rapidly  eats 
away  the  iron  to  such  an  extent  that  in  a  few  years  its  nature  is 
completely  destroyed,  and  it  gets  so  soft  that  it  can  be  cut  with 
a  knife.  The  best  and  generally  used  preservative  is  a  lining  of 
fire-brick,  a  seating  for  it  being  made  by  fixing  one  of  the  wedging curbs  so  that  it  projects  from  3  to  6  inches  into  the  shaft.  The 
great  objection  to  this  procedure  is,  that  by  covering  up  the  face 
of  the  tubbing,  the  detection  of  leaks  is  made  difficult,  but  of  the two  evils  the  lesser  is  chosen. 
Cost  of  Tubbing. — Mr.  G.  C.  Greenwell*  gives  the  following 
statement  of  the  actual  cost  of  putting  in  metal  tubbing  in  a  shaft 
14  ft.  9  in.  diameter: 
Cost  of  wedging  curb : — 
Dressing  and  preparing  bed  for  curb,  and  laying  same         £    s.  d. ready  for  wedging  .         .   34    9    o Wedging  (stone  very  hard)        .         .         .         .         .         .         10411 
Wedges  (5435  used)  and  sheeting  (material  and  manu- 
facture) .         .         .         .         .    *  | ..  -      .         .         .  532 Wedging  curb  (10  segments,  each  7  cwt.  i  qr.  17  lbs.= 
74  cwt.  2  Ibs.,  @  6/9  per  cwt.)        .         .        .         .         24  19 
Mine  Engineer  ing,  pp.  166-169. 

--- Page Break ---
u8  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
Cost  per  yard  of  tuHbhg : — 
10  segments  to  circle,  each  18"  high  x  £&"  thick,  weighing 4  cwt.  I  qr.  12  Ibs.  =  85  cvvt.  2  qrs.  24  Ibs.,  @  6/9  per cwt   
Painting  tubbing,    sheeting  wedges*    (4428   used)  and backing  with  soil,  marl,  etc.  ..... 
Putting  in  and  wedging  tubbing  : 
Putting  in   
Wedging   (twice  in  going  up  and   once  in  going 
down)   
*  These  wedges  were  4!"  long  by  14"  on  face  by  J"  thick. 
Shireoaks  shafts  have  more  tubbing  in  them  than  any  others  in 
England — viz.,  170  yds.,  put  in,  in  eleven  lengths,  and  weighing about  600  tons  in  each  shaft.  The  internal  diameter  is  12  ft.,  and 
the  pressure  at  the  bottom  is  about  196  Ibs.  per  sq.  inch.  Mr. 
John  Jones,  the  present  underviewer,  who  put  in  the  tubbing, 
states  that  the  cost  per  yard  of  the  lower  and  stronger  part,  which 
has  a  thickness  of  i  f  inch  in  the  body,  was  as  follows : — 
£  s.   d. 126  cwts.  cast  iron,  @  7/-   44    2    o 
Fixing  and  wedging   400 
Wedging  curbs  and  laying  (each  about  10  yds.  apart)         10    o    o 
2    o 
SINKING    BY   BORING.— Kind-Chaudron  Method.— 
Looking  at  the  ease  with  which  bore-holes  are  put  down  through 
water-bearing  rocks,  the  idea  occurred  to  engineers,  that  supposing 
the  tools  and  implements  employed  were  made  large  enough,  it  might 
be  possible  to  bore  shafts.  Little  difficulty  was  encountered  with 
the  actual  boring  operations,  but,  for  a  long  time  it  was  found  im- 
possible, to  successfully  dam  back  the  feeders  of  water,  as  no  means 
were  at  hand  to  put  in  a  water-tight  lining.  Cylinders  of  tubbing 
were  lowered  into  the  pit,  but  it  was  found  impossible  to  make  a 
joint  at  the  bottom  impervious  to  water.  After  many  failures, 
the  difficulty  was  surmounted  by  Mr.  Chaudron  by  the  introduc- 
tion at  the  base  of  the  tubbing  of  what  is  known  as  the  moss-box, 
and  he,  in  conjunction  with  the  celebrated  bore-master  Kind, devised  a  scheme  by  means  of  which  numerous  pits  have  been 
successfully  sunk  through  beds  containing  a  very  large  amount  of water. 
The  boring  tools  are  similar  to  those  ordinarily  employed, 
modified  to  suit  the  changed  conditions.  First  of  all  a  smaller 
shaft,  4  to  5  ft.  diameter  is  bored,  which  is  kept  50  or  60  ft.  ahead, 
and  then  the  main  shaft  is  taken  out  to  the  size  required.  The 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
119 
cutter  for  the  smaller  shaft  consists  of  an  iron  framework  (Fig. 
1 1 9)  in  the  base  of  which  are  fixed,  in  sockets,  a  number  of  steel 
cutting  teeth  «,  which  can  be  easily  replaced  if  anything  goes 
wrong.  This  tool  is  fitted  with  two  guides,  b  and  c,  which  are  also 
furnished  with  cutting  teeth.  When  the  shaft  has  been  bored 
sufficiently  deep  with  this  tool,  a  larger  one  (Fig.  120)  is  inserted, 
this  differing  from  the  first,  not  only  in  its  size,  but  in  the  fact 
that  the  teeth  in  it  are  set  on  an  inclined  plane,  and  that  the  cen- 
tral part  is  furnished  with  a  loop  or  guide  a,  which  fits  into  the 
smaller  hole  already  bored.  Owing  to  the  shape  of  the  teeth  the 
strata  is  cut  in  the  form  of  an  inverted  cone,  and  all  the  debris 
FIG.  119. FIG.  1 20. FIG.  121. 
produced,  falls  down  the  inclined  slope  into  the  smaller  shaft,  in 
which,  at  the  bottom,  is  placed  an  ordinary  kibble,  which  collects 
the  material  and  renders  the  use  of  a  sludger  unnecessary. 
These  tools  are  moved  up  and  down  by  an  oscillating  lever  at 
the  surface,  just  the  same  as  in  an  ordinary  boring  apparatus.  A 
winding  engine,  drums,  and  ropes  are  provided  for  the  rapid  re- 
moval (during  changing)  and  lowering  of  the  tools.  Sinking  thus 
proceeds  until  the  solid  foundation  is  reached,  where  the  seating 
for  the  base  of  tubbing  is  found. 
While  the  shaft  is  still  full  of  water,  a  water-tight  joint  is 
made  by  the  moss-box.  This  consists  of  two  rings  of  tubbing 
(a  and  5,  Fig.  121),  which  can  slide  over  each  other,  and  each 

--- Page Break ---
120  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
of  which  has  a  bottom  flange  turned  outwards  and  an  upper 
flange  turned  inwards.  These  two  are  strung  together  by  iron 
tie-rods  c,  and  the  space  between  them  completely  filled  with moss,  so  that  when  the  upper  one  slides  down,  this  moss  is 
compressed.  Other  segments  are  connected  above  these  two 
rings,  all  of  which  have  the  flanges  pointing  inwards.  The 
tubbing  consists  of  cylindrical  rings,  about  4  ft.  6  in.  high,  cast  in 
an  entire  piece.  There  are  no  vertical  joints.  A  strengthening 
rib  is  cast  inside  each  ring,  and  the  top  and  bottom  flanges 
are  turned  in  a  lathe,  and  bolt  holes  bored  in  them.  Before 
being  used,  each  ring  is  tested  by  hydraulic  pressure,  in  a  specially 
constructed  box,  with  from  two  to  five  times  the  pressure  it  has  to 
support.  These  rings  are  put  together  at  the  surface  with  |th 
of  an  inch  of  sheet  lead  between  the  joints,  and  the  whole  structure 
lowered  bit  by  bit,  by  screws  and  strong  iron  rods. 
The  chief  point  upon  which  successful  lowering  depends,  is  the 
means  adopted  to  balance  the  enormous  weight  of  the  long  length 
of  tubbing.  Near  the  bottom  a  diaphragm  (d,  Fig.  1 2 1)  is  fastened 
to  the  flange  of  one  of  the  segments,  and  in  the  centre  of  this  is 
a  tube.  When  lowering  is  being  carried  on,  the  weight  of  the 
tubbing  forces  the  water  up  the  central  aperture ;  the  amount 
displaced  by  the  diaphragm  and  the  resistance  it  meets  with 
during  its  passage  through  the  water  are  so  great,  that  a  large 
portion  of  the  weight  of  the  tubbing  is  supported;  indeed,  in  some 
instances,  it  is  more  than  counterbalanced,  and  where  such  happens, 
water  is  introduced  at  the  top  of  the  diaphragm,  to  be  pumped  out 
again  if  necessary.  This  regulation  is  operated  so  successfully, 
that  in  one  case  where  the  entire  weight  of  the  tubbing  was  800 
tons,  it  was  so  counterbalanced  that  not  more  than  40  tons  was 
ever  on  the  lowering  rods  at  one  time. 
Lippmann's  Method. — To  the  foregoing  method  several  ob- jections may  be  taken.  It  has  been  found  that  nearly  as  much 
time  is  taken  to  enlarge  the  small  shaft  as  to  bore  it,  and  attempts 
were  therefore  made  to  carry  out  the  whole  opera- 
FIG.  122.  tion  at  the  same  time.  With  a  straight  chisel 
turned  round  a  centre,  blows  are  struck  more 
closely  near  the  centre  of  the  shaft  than  at  the 
circumference,  and  considerable  labour  is  wasted. 
Messrs.  Lippmann  have  got  over  this  difficulty  by 
making  a  drilling  tool  in  the  shape  of  a  double  Y 
(Fig.  122),  in  which  two  teeth  are  placed  in  that 
portion  cutting  round  the  circumference  of  the 
shaft,  and  only  one  towards  the  middle;  more  blows 
are  thus  given  at  the  periphery  than  at  the  centre. 
Another  improvement  is  that  the  engine  is  not 
connected  directly  to  the  boring  lever,  but  motio  n 
is  communicated  by  means  of  an  endless  chain  and  eccentric,  whi<  h 
prevents  all  shock.  The  debris  is  extracted  by  an  iron  box, 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  121 
divided  into  three  compartments,  each  of  which  has  nine  holes, 
closed  by  valves  opening  outwards.  This  box  is  lowered  to  the 
pit  bottom,  and  alternately  raised  and  dropped  for  about  15  minutes, 
being  at  the  time  gradually  turned  round.  The  sludger  has 
usually  to  be  filled  twice  before  recommencing  to  bore.  For 
securing  the  sides,  similar  tubbing  to  that  of  the  Kind-Chaudron 
method  is  adopted. 
SINKING  THROUGH  QUICKSANDS.  —  Triger's 
Method. — In  this  system,  sheet  iron  cylinders,  divided  into  three 
air-tight  compartments,  are  sunk  into  the  ground,  and  compressed 
air  forced  into  the  lower  one.  The  workmen  are  thus  placed  in  a 
sort  of  diving-bell,  and  if  the  pressure  of  air  is  greater  than  that 
of  the  water  in  the  sand,  the  latter  is  forced  back,  and  prevented 
from  entering  the  lower  compartment.  The  rubbish  excavated  is 
removed  in  a  small  kibble.  Trap-doors  allow  communication 
from  one  chamber  to  the  other,  the  joints  of  these  being  made 
carefully  air-tight.  The  doors  of  the  second  and  third  chambers  are 
never  allowed  to  be  opened  at  the  same  time,  so  that  little  loss  of 
compressed  air  takes  place.  Sinking  proceeds  until  solid  ground  is 
reached.  The  depth  which  can  be  attained  by  this  method  is  limited, 
for  as  the  pressure  of  water  outside  the  cylinder  increases  with  the 
depth,  a  higher  pressure  of  air  has  to  be  used  in  the  lower  com- 
partment to  stop  the  influx  of  water,  and  a  point  is  soon  reached 
above  which  the  men  cannot  work.  At  Aix-la-Chapelle,  121  ft. 
of  quicksand  was  passed  through  by  this  method,  the  greatest 
pressure  of  the  air  employed  being  2.8  atmospheres. 
Poetsch's  Method. — The  most  recent  improvement  for  sinking 
through  water-bearing  strata,  is  that  introduced  by  Mr.  Poetsch, 
which  consists  in  freezing  the  running  ground,  and  transforming 
it  into  a  solid  mass  of  ice,  through  which  sinking  proceeds  by 
ordinary  methods,  just  as  if  the  ground  was  of  a  tenacious  and 
solid  character.  A  well-known  principle  is  that,  when  any  liquid 
is  rapidly  converted  into  vapour,  it  absorbs  a  considerable  quantity 
of  heat,  and  that  the  absorption  is  more  rapid  the  more  volatile 
the  liquid.  In  the  machine  employed  for  producing  the  freezing 
mixture,  liquid  ammonia  is  placed  in  connection  with  the  receiver 
of  an  air-pump,  and  rapid  exhaustion  set  up.  The  ammonia  at 
once  commences  to  boil,  and  the  vapour  produced  is  absorbed  1  y 
suitable  means,  with  the  result  that  a  still  more  rapid  evaporation 
is  produced,  which  communicates  intense  cold  to  the  mixture 
employed  for  the  freezing  operation.  The  liquid  used  for  this 
purpose  is  a  solution  of  chloride  of  calcium,  adopted  because  it 
does  not  freeze  until  the  temperature  reaches  —  34°  C. 
The  actual  procedure  is  as  follows : — A  series  of  bore-holes  are 
sunk  through  the  water-bearing  strata  until  the  solid  measures 
are  reached,  and  are  lined  with  tubes  (a,  Fig.  123)  as  they  go 
down.  After  penetrating  through  the  quicksand,  the  lower  ends 
of  these  tubes  are  made  water-tight  by  means  of  lead  stoppers  b, 

--- Page Break ---
,22  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
and  several  layers  of  cement  c  are  poured  into  the  interior.  The 
greatest  care  is  exercised  in  getting  the  joints  of  the  outside  pipe 
water-tight,  as  if  they  are  not,  the  solution  of  chloride  of  calcium 
escapes  into  the  ground,  and  renders  freezing  very 
difficult.  Into  the  centre  of  each  of  these  larger  pipes 
I<IG.  123.  a  smaiier  one  d^  of  about  one-third  the  diameter  is introduced,  having  its  lower  end  open.  These  latter 
pipes  are  provided  with  stop-cocks,  and  joined  to  a 
central  distributing  pipe,  suspended  above  the  top  of 
the  shaft.  The  freezing  mixture,  prepared  as  above, 
is  then  forced  by  a  pump  down  the  small  tube,  and  on 
reaching  the  bottom  circulates  in  the  annular  space 
between  the  two  pipes,  rises  to  the  surface  of  the 
ground,  and  is  collected  in  another  series  of  pipes  e, 
from  whence  it  is  again  returned  to  the  freezing 
machine,  and  used  over  again.  By  this  means  the 
ground  between  each  pipe  within  the  shaft  itself,  and 
also  the  ground  outside  the  limit  of  the  shaft,  is  frozen 
hard  enough  to  give  solidity.  The  most  intense  cold 
is  at  the  bottom  of  the  pipes,  and  as  a  result  small 
cones  of  frozen  ground,  with  their  bases  downwards, 
are  first  formed,  the  dimensions  of  which  increase 
progressively. 
The  method  of  sinking  after  the  ground  is  frozen,  is  to  excavate 
a  space  with  the  aid  of  picks  and  wedges,  blasting  being  expressly 
forbidden,  and  then  to  secure  the  sides  by  means  of  ordinary  curbs, 
and  laggings.  Second  and  further  lengths  will  be  sunk,  and 
timbered,  in  a  similar  manner,  until  the  quicksand  is  passed  through 
and  solid  ground  reached,  when  a  wedging  curb  will  be  put  in,  and 
cast-iron  tubbing  brought  upwards. 
At  Emilia  Pit,  Germany,*  the  apparatus  was  charged  with  950 
quarts  of  solution  of  ammonia,  the  daily  consumption  of  which 
was  about  3  qrts.  Freezing  occupied  53  days,  when  sinking  was 
commenced  and  done  without  any  difficulty,  at  the  rate  of  about 
2  ft.  per  day.  Sinkers  were  paid  555.  per  running  yard.  The 
circulating  tubes  were  removed  very  easily,  the  solution  of  chloride 
of  calcium  being  passed  through  ihemheated,  insteadof  cooled.  Total 
cost  of  plant  was  ^3000  ;  expense  of  erection,  ^960.  Total  cost 
for  shaft,  completed  and  walled,  allowing  25  per  cent,  of  first  cost 
of  plant,  for  depreciation  and  expenses  of  erection  and  removal, 
was  about  £26  per  running  foot. 
Deepening  Pits  already  Sunk. — The  common  way  of  doing 
this,  without  stopping  the  pits  drawing  coal,  is  with  the  aid  of 
a  tail-rope  fastened  below  the  cages.  If  any  depth  is  to  be  carried 
out,  the  rope  employed  will  be  made  in  two  lengths  with  a  view  of 
saving  time.  The  preparation  is  rather  a  simple  one.  First  of 
*  For.  Abs.  N.  E.  I.  xxxiv.  72. 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
123 
all,  means  are  provided  at  the  inset  level,  for  receiving  the  debris 
out  of  the  sinking  kibbles.  Then  an  ordinary  rope  is  provided 
with  a  capping  at  each  end,  and  the  upper  one  passed  through  the 
bottom  of  the  cage,  and  made  fast  by  driving  an  iron  pin  through 
the  eye  of  the  capping,  and  usually  further  secured  by  glands  to 
the  bottom  of  the  cage.  The  kibble  is  attached  to  the  other  end 
of  the  tail-rope,  and  when  the  cage  is  raised  by  the  winding  engine at  the  surface,  the  kibble  is  lifted  also.  The  method  of  procedure 
is  to  fill  a  kibble  at  the  bottom  where  sinking  is  going  on,  lift  it  to 
the  inset,  empty  the  contents  into  tubs  standing  there,  and  then 
lower  down  again.  Sufficient  tubs  are  provided  to  contain  all  the 
dirt  produced  in  the  night-time,  and  the  tail-rope  is  then  taken 
off  the  cage  (an  operation  done  in  five  minutes),  the  cage  lowered to  the  inset  level,  and  the  debris  wound  to  the  surface. 
The  above  system  can  only  be  applied  when  the  pit  is  not  wind- 
ing coal.  In  many  cases  this  difficulty  is  surmounted  by  com- 
mencing at  the  inset  level,  a  short  distance  away  from  the  shaft,  and 
sinking  an  inclined  pit  until  its  axis  meets  that  of  the  drawing 
shaft,  when  it  is  continued  vertically  downwards.  At  St. 
Adolphe  Pit,  Haine  St.  Pierre  Colliery,*  with  such  procedure,  the shaft  was  deepened  from  984  to  1246  ft.  without  stopping 
winding.  The  debris  was  drawn  by  an  engine  at  the  surface,  a 
rope  from  this  passing  down 
the  side  of  the  winding  pit, 
and  then  deflected  by  pulleys 
along  the  line  of  the  incline, 
finally  passing  into  the  verti- 
cal position  required  for  sink- 
ing, by  being  conducted  over 
a  pulley  supported  on  a  car- 
riage, the  rope  passing  through 
a  hole  in  this  (Fig.  1 24).  When the  kibble  is  at  the  bottom 
of  the  sinking,  the  carriage  is 
at  its  lowest  point,  and  the 
rope  hangs  vertically  in  the 
pit,  but  as  the  kibble  is  lifted 
the  carriage  is  pushed  up 
the  incline,  the  kibble  hang- 
ing in  a  vertical  direction 
until  the  inset  level  is  reached, 
when  it  is  removed,  and  an 
empty  one  put  on.  On  the  return  journey  the  carriage  follows 
the  kibble  as  it  is  lowered,  until  it  comes  to  the  end  of  the  guide. 
The  rope  then  descends  vertically  downwards.  A  spring  is  placed 
just  above  the  capping  on  the  rope  to  prevent  any  shock  when  the 
kibble  strikes  the  carriage. 
*  For.  Abs.  N.  E.  I.  xxxvii.  58. 

--- Page Break ---
124 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  125  AND  126. 
FIG.  127. 
At  Alexandra  Pit,  Wigan,  a  shaft  19  ft.  diam.  was  deepened 
from  260  to  772  yds.  in  two  years  by  the  following  method,  coal 
being  wound  all  the  time.     One  cage  was  taken  out,  and  a  balance 
weight,  equal  to  a  cage  and  four  empty  tubs,  put  in  its  place,  this 
working  down  the  side  of  the  pit  on  two  guides,  the  winding  rope 
being  diverted  from  its  ordinary  position  by  means  of  a  pulley  on 
the  head-gear  (Figs.  125  and  126).     Three  scaffolds  were  put  in at   the   Pemberton  4  ft.   inset,  to  prevent  anything  falling  on 
the  sinkers,  and  a  hole   left  through   for   the   passage   of   the 
kibble.     A  platform  on  wheels  was  pro- vided on  a  level  6  ft.  higher  than  that 
employed  for  caging  the  coal,  which  could 
be  run  over  the  hole  left  in  the  scaffold- 
ing.    A  small  winding  engine  at  the  sur- face drew  the  sinking  debris  from  the 
bottom  of  the  shaft  up  to  the  level  of  this 
platform,   which   was   pushed   over   the 
shaft,  the  kibble  removed,  and  the  dirt 
tipped  into  ordinary  tubs  standing  at  the level   of    the   inset.     These    were    then 
placed  on   the  cage,  and  drawn  to  the 
surface.    A  capstan  rope, 
worked  by  a  special  engine 
at    the    surface,    passed 
down   the  centre  of   the 
shaft  and  formed  a  guide 
for   the    sinking   kibble, 
d  uring  such  times  as  brick- 
ing was  not   being   pro- ceeded with.     When  this 
rope  was  not  in  use  it  was 
kept   in  position   at   the 
bottom  of   the   pit  by  a 
heavy  circular  elongated 
block  of  iron.     Fig.  127 
gives  an  enlarged  view  of 
the  guide  employed ;  a  is 
the  capping  of  the  wind- ing   rope,   to    which    is 
attached  the  detaching  hook  b.     Below  this  comes  the  guide  c. 
and  weight  d,  the  latter  being  of  cast  iron  with  a  hole  bored  out 
to  receive  the  vertical  bar  e,  which  fits  into  d  loosely,  so  as  to 
be  readily  withdrawn   for    examination.     Above   the   weight   a 
horizontal  bar  c  projects,  clasping  the  bar  e  above  the  weight, 
and  projecting  to  the  capstan  rope  on  which  it  runs  freely  with 
plenty  of  "play."     Below  the  weight  comes  the  kibble  and  bridle- chains.     The  capstan  rope  g  is  placed  absolutely  central  in  the 
pit.     When  about  to  fire  shots  the  men  were  signalled  away  first, 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING.  125 
and  directly  they  had  gone,  the  capstan  rope  and  weight  attached 
was  raised  a  few  yards  so  as  to  be  out  of  the  way  of  the  debris. 
The  bricking  scaffold  was  made  of  timber,  and  suspended  from 
bridle  chains,  and  consisted  of  three  parts,  a  centre  one  and  two 
side  pieces  working  on  hinges.  During  bricking  operations  the 
winding  rope  was  drawn  up  clear,  the  weight  on  the  capstan  rope 
taken  off,  and  the  latter  connected  to  the  bridle-chains  of  the 
scaffold,  which,  when  not  in  use,  was  suspended  in  the  shaft  from 
cross  baulks  placed  there  on  purpose. 
For  short  distances,  shafts  are  sometimes  sunk  upwards.  A 
dividing  brattice  is  usually  placed  across  the  shaft,  and  the  debris 
allowed  to  accumulate  over  one-half  of  its  area,  this  forming  a  sort of  natural  platform  on  which  the  men  stand  to  work.  For  the 
purpose  of  ventilation,  wooden  boxes,  or  troughs,  are  built  in  the debris. 
Widening  Shafts. — This  is  a  very  awkward  and  costly  opera- tion, if  winding  is  to  be  carried  on  at  the  same  time.  In  such 
cases,  it  is  usual  to  place  a  series  of  byatts,  or  buntons,  below  each 
other,  in  such  a  position  that  the  cage  misses  them.  At  night- 
time these  buntons  are  covered  over  with  planks,  and  scaffolds 
formed,  on  which  the  men  work,  and  take  out  the  ground. 
If  the  shaft  is  not  required  for  winding  purposes,  the  best  pro- 
cedure is  to  fill  it  up  to  the  surface  with  some  loose  non-coherent 
material,  which  is  removed  again  as  the  old  lining  and  sides  are 
taken  out  to  the  required  size.  This  saves  all  the  labour  and  time 
of  changing  scaffolds.  In  a  deep  shaft,  portions  only  of  its  length 
would  be  filled  up  at  a  time. 
Cost  of  Sinking. — The  cost  depends  on  the  hardness  and 
inclination  of  the  strata,  and  especially  on  the  quantity  of  water. 
If  the  beds  are  highly  inclined,  the  cost  is  greater,  as  the  rocks 
do  not  blow  well.  The  general  rule  is  to  obtain  tenders  for 
sinking  and  walling  the  whole  depth,  and  to  deal  with  a  certain 
quantity  of  water.  If  this  quantity  is  exceeded,  either  allowances 
are  given  or  the  contract  broken.  Such  contracts  act  very  well, 
if  the  nature  of  the  ground  is  well  known,  and  no  difficulties  are 
encountered,  but  master-sinkers,  as  a  rule,  are  persons  of  small 
capital.  So  long,  therefore,  as  they  are  making  money,  every- 
thing proceeds  smoothly,  the  manager  is  relieved  of  anxiety,  his 
only  care  being  to  see  that  the  work  is  carried  out  properly  and 
with  safety.  But  if  the  work  is  proceeding  at  a  loss,  the  con- 
tractor's means  are  soon  exhausted ;  although  sureties  are  generally bound  by  agreement,  yet  concessions  have  to  be  made.  In  view 
of  this,  the  system  of  carrying  on  by  men  at  day  wages  is  gaining 
favour,  superintendence  being  given  by  competent  chargen.en, 
who,  in  addition  to  a  stipulated  wage,  receive  a  bonus  for  every 
yard  done  during  the  week,  in  excess  of  a  stated  distance. 
At  Ramrod  Hall  Pit,  Staffordshire,  through  the  different 
varieties  of  the  rocks  of  the  coal  measures,  the  cost  of  sinking 
C/d  /  ir/-\nMl  A 

--- Page Break ---
126  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
was  11.12  shillings  per  cub.  yd.,  which  sum  included  the  labour 
of  putting  in  the  walling  9  inches  thick  and  backing  the  same 
with  soil,  all  wages  above  and  below  ground  (except  winding 
engineman  and  stoker),  blacksmithing,  powder,  &c.  ;  value  of 
materials  used  for  lining  not  included.  Colliers'  wages  at  this date  were  10  per  cent,  above  minimum  of  sliding  scale.  The 
amount  of  water  was  small,  and  could  be  dealt  with  by 
baling.  An  allowance  of  255.  was  made  for  each  water  ring 
put  in. At  Sandwell  Park  Colliery,  the  contract  price  for  sinking  and 
walling  the  No.  3  shaft,  15  ft.  diam.  in  the  clear,  was  ^8  125.  6d. 
per  running  yard,  equal  to  6.82  shillings  per  cub.  yard  of  ex- 
cavation. The  above  price  rose  at  the  same  percentage  as  colliers' wages,  which  at  that  time  were  35.  ^d.  per  day,  the  minimum  of 
the  sliding  scale.  The  contractors  found  all  labour  in  pit,  banks- 
men, tools,  blasting  agents,  lights,  &c.,  fixed  all  scaffolds,  ventilat- 
ing pipes,  &c.,  and  deposited  the  spoil  at  such  places  as  required, 
up  to  40  yards  from  pit  top  The  company  found  engine  power, 
enginemen,  sinking  kibbles,  lining  material,  and  sharpened  all 
tools.  No  allowance  was  to  be  made  for  water  until  the  quantity 
exceeded  such  as  could  be  raised  by  tipping  barrels.  The  total 
sum  paid  under  this  head  for  the  entire  sinking,  amounted  to 
;£6  1  6s.  gd.  For  each  water  ring  put  in  £2  was  paid,  and  for 
each  square  curb  ^£3  155.  The  average  rate  of  sinking  and 
walling  (working  continually  from  Monday  morning  to  Saturday 
night)  was  8.04  yds.  per  week. 
Messrs.  Forster-Brown  &  Adams  give  detailed  statements  of 
the  cost  of  sinking  and  walling  two  shafts,  each  17  ft.  diam.,  at 
Harris  Navigation  Colliery,*  including  all  labour,  coal  at  boilers, 
smith  work,  explosives,  stores,  &c.  From  their  paper  the  following 
figures  are  extracted  :— 
Average  cost  per  yd.  for  sinking  50  yds.  in  shale  near  bottom  of  shaft. 
Without  Pumps.  With  Pumps. 
s.    d.  £    s.    d. 
Labour       ...982  10    2    4 
Materials  (stores,  )  <>  u     A*  i    o    AQ 
explores,  &0.)|  !1!_44,II9    6.8       -L^-±%    *    8-9 
Average  cost  per  yd.  of  sinking  50  yds.  in  hard  Pennant  grit  rock, with  pumps. 
By  Hand.  Usinsr  three  Machine  Dril's. £  s.    d.  £   s.    d. Labour      ...        32  17     i  22  19    8 
Materials  (stores,)                     , 
explosives,  &«,)}•                    _L?          ,  „          _J_J^34    3    o 
In^t.  C.E.  Ixiv.  23. 

--- Page Break ---
SINKING. 
127 
Average  cost  per  yd.,  in  depth  of  50  yds.,  of  18  inch  walling  with  two iron  curbs  in  such  distance. 
£  s.   d. Labour  (sinkers,  masons,  smiths,  enginemen,  &c.)  .  4  7  11.4 
Stores  (candles,  oil  and  grease,  sinkers'  suits,  &c.)  o  17  10.7 Material  (bricks,  lime,  and  coal)  .  .  .  .620 
7  10.1 
Equal  to  £i  3$.  lod.  per  cub.  yd.  of  masonry. 
Where  82  J  per  cent,  of  the  strata  passed  through  was  hard 
rock,  and  17^  per  cent,  shale,  the  average  depth  sunk  and 
walled  per  week,  exclusive  of  stoppages,  was,  in  a  length  of 
69  yds.,  2.19  yds. ;  while,  where  38!  per  cent,  was  hard  rock,  and 
6iJ  shale,  the  speed  averaged  4.08  yds.  per  week  over  a  length  of 
421  yds.  Towards  the  bottom,  the  ground  only  contained  6 
per  cent,  of  hard  rock,  and  the  speed  of  sinking  and  walling 
reached  6.77  yds.  per  week. 
The  following  table  shows  the  comparative  cost  of  various  modes 
of  sinking  through  water  bearing  strata  :  * — 
Cost  per 
II 
•*£ 
System. Colliery. foot  of 
G% 
Strata  passed  through. 
«9 
I  s 
Sinking. 
"aoa 
0s* 
ii 
H  ° 
£     •• 
Ft. 
Triger     . La  Louvierie 98     3 
42 
Quicksand  . 2 
;> Havre    .    .     . 
-/           O 
888  19 
124 
f  Eunning   sand    and     ) 
1    water  bearing  chalk   j 
48 
Chaudron 
» 
L'Escarpelle Saint-Waast 
20    17 
37    8 
331 
321 
Sand  and  chalk  .     .     . 
Chalk,  marl,  and  sand  . 
II 
29 
» Saint-Barbe 33    3 180 Clays,  marls,  and  sand 
18 
Saint-Marie 
12    9 
344 
)'                         »                        )> 
13 
• Kothhausen 
38  ii 
338 
White  marls    .... 
25 
Poetsch  . Archibald  . 17    l6 
131 Quicksand    Emilia  . 
*  / 
2C    l6 
25 
1  40 Sands  &c  . 8 
-    i Koenigs 
Wasterhausen 
1  30    o 
ItfW 
98 
(Sands  -with  large  boul-  ) 
{     ders        j 6 
Detailed  statements  of  the  cost  of  sinking  several  shafts  by  the 
Kind-Chaudron  process  will  be  found  in  the  Colliery  Guardian  of 
Jan.  23,  1880,  p.  129. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject  matter  of  this  chapter : — 
IKST.  C.E.  :  Deep  Winning  of  Coal  in  South  Wales,  T.  Forster-Brown  and 
G.  F.  Adams,  Ixiv.  23  ;  The  Sinking  of  two  Shafts  at  JMarsden,for  the 
Whitlurn  Coal  Company,  John  Daglish,  Ixxi.  178  ;  Sinking  of  Tuco 
Pits  near  Dortmund,  H.  Tomson,  xc.  330. 
*  For  Abs.  N.E.I,  xxxv.  33. 

--- Page Break ---
i28  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
AMEE.  INST.  M.B. :  A  New  Method  of  Sinking  Shafts,  E.  B.  Coxe,  i.  261  ; 
Shaft  Sinking  at  Goderich,  Ontario,  J.  H.  Harden,  v.  506. 
FED.  INST.  :  Notes  on  the  Sinking  at  Lens  Collieries  by  tlie  Poetsch  /System, 
N.  E.  Griffith,  ii.  441. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC. :  Boring  Shafts  in  Westphalia,  A.  Demmler,  xiv.  374 ;  Sinking 
with  a  Tail  Hope,  G.  Wild,  xviii.  380. 
BEIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Details  of  Sinking  Upwards,  H.  Jepson,  i.  134 ; 
Sinking  at  Aldwarke  Main  Colliery,  A.  Mirfin,  i.  186  and  222  ;  Sinking 
through  Quicksands,  Marls,  and  Gravel  Beds,  R.  Clough,  xiv.  106. 
SO.  WALES.  INST. :  On  the  Tabbing  of  Shafts,  E.  Hedley,  iv.  104  ;  Personal 
Experiences  in  Tubbing  Shafts,  Geo.  Wilkinson,  x.  191  ;  Excavating 
below  Water  Level  by  means  of  Compressed  Air,  Wm.  Galloway,  x.  252  ; 
An  Account  of  the  Sinking  and  Tubbing  of  a  Pumping  Shaft  at 
Hadstock  Collieries,  J.  McMurtrie,  xi.  66  ;  Poetsch's  Freezing  System  of 
Sinking  through  Quicksands,  R.  de  Soldenhof,  xv.  143  and  349'; Sinking  Appliances  at  Llanbradach,  Wm.  Galloway,  xvi.  107  and 268. 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Notes  on  the  Sinking  of  Shafts  and  the  way  they  are  fitted 
up  for  Winding  and  Pumping,  Robt.  Beith,  viii.  234. 
N.  E.  I.  :  On  Murton  Winning,  Ed.  Potter,  v.  43 ;  On  Sinking  through  the 
Magnesian  Limestone  at  Seaton  and  Seaham  Winning,  N.  Wood, 
v.  117  ;  On  the  Strength  of  Tubbing  in  Shafts  and  the  pressure  it  has 
to  resist,  J.  J.  Atkinson,  ix.  175  ;  On  the  proper  Precautions  to  be 
adopted  in  order  to  prevent  the  Displacement  of  Tubbing  in  Shafts, 
J.  J.  Atkinson,  and  Wm.  Coulson,  Sen.,  xi.  9  ;  On  tlie  Sinking  of 
Shafts  by  Boring  under  water  as  practised  by  Messrs.  Kind  &  Chaudron, 
Warington  W.  Smyth,  xx.  187  ;  On  the  Coffering  of  Shafts  to  keep 
back  Water,  N.  R.  Griffith,  xxvi.  3  ;  Sinking  Set  fitted  with  a  new  Wind- bore  Protector  and  Suction  Regulator,  H.  Richardson,  xxx.  49; 
Points  of  interest  at  the  Skelton  Park  and  Lumpsey  Mines,  A.  L. 
Steavenson,  xxxi.  105  ;  A  Chronological  JSeview  of  a  number  of  Shaft 
Borings  (in  For.  Abs.)  xxxii.  76. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Notice  sur  un  nouveau  mode  d'approfondisement  des  puits 
d 'extraction,  M.  Delcomnmne  (2e  Serie),  vii.  819;  Procede  Poetsch pour  les  travaux  a  faire  dans  les  terrains  aquiferes  par  la  congelation, 
A.  Levy  (2e  Serie),  xiii.  583  ;  Emploi  de  cercles  enfer  et  de  plateaux  en 
chene  pour  vivetement  du  puits  Nord-Ouest  de  la  Cie  des  Mines  de 
Montieux  d  St.  Etienne,  M.  Male  (2e  Serie),  xiv.  555. 
MID.  INST.  :  On  Iron  and  /Stone  Tubbing,  T.  W.  Embleton,  vii.  165  ;  Arti- 
ficial Foundations  and  Method  of  linking  through  Quicksand,  W.  E. 
Garforth,  xi.  407. 
CHES.  INST. :  Sinking  at  Clifton  Colliery,  J.  Brown,  viii.  345. 
N.  STAFF.  INST.  :  Sinking  through  Quicksand  at  Podmore  Hall  Colliery,  W.  R. 
Wilson,  vii.  113. 
EEV.  UNIV.  :  Notice  sur  quelques  faits  relatifs  auxfoncages  de  puits  a  niveau 
plein  (Systeme  Lippmann),  Ed.  Bautier  et  H.  Mativa  (2°  Serie),  v.  96  ; Note  sur  la  reparation  du  cuvelagedu  puits  No.  3,  Ste  Barbe,  A.  Sohier 
(2e  Serie),  vii.  528  ;  Note  sur  la  reparation  de  deux  cuvelages  en  hois  et 
sur  I' installation  d'un  chassis  d  moieties  en  fer  au  charbotinages  du 
Viernoy,  A.  Ledent  (2e  Serie),  xii.  352. 
ANN.  DBS  MINES  :  Memoire  sur  la  methode  de  congelation  de  M.  Poetsch  pour 
le  foncage  des  puits  de  minzs  et  terrains  aquiferes,  F.  Lebreton 
(8e  Serie),  viii.  1 1 1  ;  Note  sur  des  experiences  de  congelation  des  terrains, 
M.  Alby  (8e  Serie),  xi.  56, 
The  Freezing  Process  as  applied  at  Iron  Mountain,  Michigan,  in  Sinking  a 
Shaft  through  Quicksand,  D.  E.  Morgan,  School  of  Mines  Quarterly, 
New  York,  vol.  xi.  p.  237. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER    VI. 
PRELIMINARY    OPERATIONS. 
Underground  Roads. — Having  reached  the  seam  from  which mineral  is  to  be  extracted,  the  first  operation  consists  in  driving 
a  series  of  passages  called  levels  or  roads.  Their  direction  is 
governed  by  the  relative  position  of  the  shafts  and  the  area  to 
be  won,  by  the  system  of  working  adopted,  and  by  the  inclination 
of  the  seam.  Their  size  is  governed  by  the  dimensions  of  the 
tubs  employed  and  by  the  proposed  system  of  haulage,  as,  if  a 
double  line  of  rails  has  to  be  used,  the  dimensions  of  the  roads 
will  necessarily  be  larger  than  where  only  a  single  line  is  in  opera- 
tion. The  direction  is  also  influenced  by  the  question  of  haulage, 
for  if  mechanical  means  are  not  employed,  the  gradients  of  the 
roads  will  have  to  be  such  that  a  horse  can  readily  draw  material 
along  them,  and  as  the  dip  of  the  mine  and  the  position  of  the 
shafts  are  fixed  points,  the  roads  in  this  case  will  have  to  be 
driven  in  such  direction  that  the  necessary  gradient  is  given. 
Another  point  is  the  question  of  dealing  with  water.  Wherever 
possible,  the  gradients  should  be  such  that  all  water  gravitates 
towards  the  shaft.  Perhaps,  in  all  seams  of  moderate  and  regular 
inclinations,  the  best  plan  is  to  drive  the  main  road  practically 
along  the  strike  of  the  seam,  only  deviating  from  that  line  to  such 
an  extent  as  will  give  a  slight  fall  towards  the  shaft.  Where 
seams  have  undulating  gradients,  roads  carried  along  the  strike 
necessarily  vary  in  direction  with  each  change  in  the  dip.  For 
any  system  of  mechanical  haulage,  the  best  results  are  obtained 
where  the  roads  are  driven  straight,  so  that  when  the  dip  varies 
we  usually  find  that  the  straightness  of  roads  is  more  looked  to 
than  any  actual  question  as  to  whether  they  are  following  the 
strike  of  the  seam  or  not,  as  it  only  requires  a  little  more  engine 
power  to  haul  along  the  material. 
Means  of  Keeping  Direction. — Having  decided  upon  the position  of  the  roads,  they  are  kept  in  the  proper  direction  by 
very  simple  means.  At  the  commencement  two  or  three  points  are 
determined,  and  marked  on  the  roof,  with  the  aid  of  a  compass  or 
theodolite,  and  plumb-bobs  suspended  from  them  in  such  a. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
position  that  the  straight  line  made  by  these  three  shall  be  in  the 
direction  in  which  the  level  is  to  be  driven.  Three  points  are 
much  to  be  preferred  to  two,  as  in  case  any  movement  takes  place 
in  any  of  them,  it  is  usually  found  out,  such  not  being  the  case 
where  only  two  are  adopted;  as  an  additional  precaution,  it  is better  that  these  lines  should  not  be  attached  to  timber  frames  or 
settings,  or  the  pressure  of  the  ground  is  liable  to  move  them  out 
of  position.  To  determine  whether  the  road  is  proceeding  in  the 
proper  direction,  an  observer  stations  himself  behind  the  plumb- bob  farthest  from  the  face,  and  lights  are  held  against  the  other 
two  lines.  Another  workman  is  stationed  at  the  face  with  a  light, 
which  is  moved  about  until  its  position  coincides  with  the  line 
given  by  the  three  fixed  suspended  plumb-bobs. In  some  instances  the  points  are  fixed  in  the  axis  or  centre  line 
of  the  excavation,  while  in  others  they  are  placed  nearer  to  one 
side  of  the  road,  of  course  preserving  the  same  line  of  direction. 
In  the  latter  case,  the  point  obtained  on  the  working  face  will  not 
be  the  middle  of  the  road,  but  somewhere  about  a  foot  from  the 
side.  This  latter  arrangement  is  preferable,  because  if  the  road 
does   get    slightly   out    of 
FIGS.  128  AND  129.  line  when  the  determining 
points  are  fixed  in  the  mid- dle, the  straight  line  given 
by  these  points  will  pass 
down  th'e  road  (Fig.  128), but  if  such  points  are 
only  one  foot  from  the 
side  it  would  be  impossible 
to  get  the  line  through  (Fig.  129). 
Means  of  Keeping  Gradient. — For  haulage  planes  uniform 
gradients  are  preferable,  as  the  cost  of  cutting  through  small 
irregularities  of  the  floor  or  roof,  and  indeed,  dislocations  caused 
by  faults,  is  soon  repaid  by  the  ease  and  smoothness  with  which 
the  plane  is  afterwards  worked.  In  the  case  of  large  faults, 
modifications  of  the  gradients  have  to  be  introduced,  but  even  in 
such  cases  it  is  usual  to  make  the  inclination  approach  as  near 
to  the  regular  one  as  possible.  The  instruments  employed  for 
keeping  the  gradient  uniform  are  also  of  a  simple  character. 
Often  an  ordinary  T-bob  (a  wooden  frame  shaped  like  an 
inverted  T)  and  plumb-line  are  used,  the  vertical  piece  being 
placed  on  such  an  inclina- 
FIG.  130.  ti°n  *hat   **   corresponds with  that  to  be  given  to 
the  floor.     This  is  rather 
a  clumsy  instrument.     A 
(  ^       ^      more  convenient  form  is that  of   a   straight   edge 
(a,  Fig.  130)  about  6  ft.  long,  in  the  upper  side  of  which  a  level,  b, 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS.  131 
is  bedded  in  a  small  secondary  triangular  block  of  wood  c,  the 
angle  that  this  latter  piece  makes  with  the  former  being  such 
that,  when  the  bottom  side  of  the  straight  edge  is  parallel  with 
the  line  of  inclination  of  the  road,  the  level  is  truly  horizontal. 
Operation  of  Driving. — Having  determined  the  direction  and 
gradient,  the  work  is,  as  a  rule,  carried  out  in  the  following 
manner : — The  first  operation  consists  in  holing  or  undercutting 
the  seam  ;  that  is  to  say,  either  the  lower  part  of  the  coal  is  cut 
away  with  a  pick,  or,  if  a  soft  layer  exists  beneath  the  seam, 
undercutting  is  performed  in  it  with  the  object  of  reducing  waste, 
because  holing  the  coal  makes  nothing  but  "  small,"  which  is comparatively  worthless.  The  width  of  the  undercutting  is  equal 
to  the  width  of  the  road,  but  its  depth  depends  entirely  on  the 
nature  of  the  seam.  Strong  coals  require  deeper  holing  than 
tender  ones.  In  performing  undercutting,  the  miner  lies  on  his 
side,  and  naturally  removes  more  height  at  the  face  than  at  the 
back,  because  at  the  former  place  his  arms  and  the  helve  of  the 
pick  have  to  be  inserted,  while  at  the  immediate  back  only  a  space 
equal  to  the  width  of  the  tool  is  necessary.  If  the  undercutting  is 
deep,  part  of  the  man's  body  is  also  introduced,  and  consequently more  of  the  coal  has  to  be  cut  away.  For  this  reason,  except 
where  the  nature  of  the  coal  absolutely  requires  it,  holing  should 
not  proceed  any  further  under  than  a  man  can  conveniently  reach 
without  inserting  his  body.  The  coal  undergone  is  got  down  by 
cutting  a  vertical  groove  along  one  side,  and  then  breaking  down 
the  remainder  either  by  blasting  or  by  wedging. 
In  some  collieries  gas  exists  in  the  coal  under  such  pressures 
that  it  assists  the  workman  in  hewing  the  coal,  and  roads  can  best 
be  driven  by  attacking  the  whole  height  of  the  seam  at  one  time. 
If  holing  were  resorted  to,  it  would  drain  the  gas,  and  render  the 
operation  of  getting  down  the  coal  above,  a  more  difficult  and 
expensive  one. 
Ventilation. — Except  under  exceptional  circumstances,  one  road is  never  driven  alone,  two 
parallel  ones  (a  and  b,  Fig.  FIG.  131. 
131)  being  carried  forward              ^          ., 
at  the  same  time,  these  being  ^~^^   l •connected  at  intervals  by 
other  roads,  called  "  thurl-  n 
ings,"  or  cross  cuts  (c,  cf), the  object  of  which  is  to  provide  a  way  for  air  to  pass  to  the  face  and 
ventilate  it.  When  the  second  thurling  is  driven,  the  first  one  is 
blocked  up  by  building  a  wall  in  it.  Such  obstruction  is  called  a 
"  stopping,"  its  object  being  to  force  the  air  further  inbye,  and prevent  it  going  back  to  the  shaft  until  it  has  ventilated  the 
workings.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  the  current  of  air  will 
naturally  pass  through  the  last  thurling,  and  when  the  road  goes 
•on  further,  the  face  will  remain  unventilated,  unless  some  means 

--- Page Break ---
132  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
are  adopted  for  carrying  air  to  it.  This  is  done  by  one  of  two 
methods  :  either  by  carrying  bratticing,  or  by  iron,  canvas  or 
wooden  pipes  called  air  troughs  or  "  trows." Bratticing  is  generally  fixed  by  putting  props  along  the  line  of 
reading,  but  instead  of  using  ordinary  short  lids  to  such  props,  a 
long  strip  of  wood  about  3  in.  broad  is  employed,  and  firmly  se- 
cured against  the  roof  by  driving  the  prop  beneath  it.  The  brat- 
tice cloth  is  attached  to  these  laths  by  nails,  and  temporarily 
divides  the  roadway  into  two,  as  shown  by  dotted  lines  in  Fig.  131. 
The  pure  air  passes  up  one  side  and  down  the  other,  as  indicated 
by  the  arrows. 
This  system  is  largely  employed,  and  is  unsurpassed  where  the 
roof  is  regular,  as  the  laths  rest  evenly  against  it,  and  form  an 
air-tight  joint.  With  irregular  roofs  bratticing  is  impracticable, 
and  air  troughs  have  to  be  used.  These  consist  of  sheet-iron  pipes, 
with  a  socket  and  spigot  end.  A  temporary  stopping  is  built  across 
the  road,  immediately  before  the  last  thurling,  and  one  of  these 
pipes  put  through  it.  As  the  heading  proceeds,  other  pipes  are 
added.  The  air  passes  through  them,  and  back  again  along  the road. 
Supporting  Hoof. — In  every  mine  the  roof  has  to  be  supported, 
this  usually  being  done  by  timber,  owing  to  the  facility  with  which 
it  can  be  introduced  into  the  workings,  and  replaced  from  time  to 
time  when  necessary.  The  roof  is  tested  by  knocking  on  it  with 
a  pick,  or  other  instrument,  when,  if  insecure,  a  hollow  sound  is 
given  out.  It  is  not  always  possible  to  be  sure  by  this  test,  as 
the  occurrence  of  a  number  of  small  faults,  or  slips,  makes  the 
roof  disjointed,  and  less  tenacious  than  if  none  were  present. 
Slips  are  unaccompanied  by  dislocation,  and  are  very  difficult  to 
detect,  even  by  careful  observation.  Where  a  seam  is  known 
to  contain  them,  minute  examination  must  be  resorted  to,  as  a 
place  might  look  safe  on  inspection,  and  immediately  afterwards come  in. 
It  does  not  appear  that  the  depth  of  the  mine  has  any  effect  on 
the  strength  of  the  roof.  The  order  of  working  successive  seams 
has  an  influence  on  the  roof  of  the  contiguous  beds,  owing  to  the 
release  of  gas ;  but  from  observations  made  by  Mr.  A.  K.  Sawyer* 
in  North  Staffordshire,  no  definite  results  can  be  fore -shadowed. 
Two  systems  are  in  use  for  the  operation  of  setting  timber ;  in 
one  it  is  performed  by  the  workmen  themselves,  while  in  the  other 
a  special  set  of  men  are  employed  for  the  purpose.  Both  systems 
have  advantages.  In  the  former,  the  miner  immediately  detects 
any  change  in  the  ground,  and  can  at  once  set  the  required  sup- 
port, without  running  any  risk  while  waiting  for  a  deputy  to  come  ; 
in  the  latter,  deputies  are  continually  going  round  (oftener  than 
in  the  other  system),  and  as  they  have  been  brought  up  to  this. 
*  Accidents  in  Mines  (Falls  of  Roof  and  Sides],  p.  34. 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS.  133 
kind  of  work,  are  very  skilful.  In  Yorkshire,  certain  special  men  go 
round  to  set  timber,  and  prepare  the  working  places  for  the  men, 
leaving  a  sufficient  quantity  of  timber  cut  into  proper  lengths,  the 
workmen  having  instructions,  in  case  the  roof  becomes  dangerous, 
to  set  any  extra  timber  necessary,  or  to  leave  the  place  and  send 
for  the  deputy.  In  Lancashire,  most  of  the  colliers  set  their  own 
timber  in  the  face  (not  in  the  roads),  and  the  props  are  drawn  by 
officials.  The  colliers  are  subjected  to  the  orders  of  the  officials, 
who,  if  sufficient  timber  is  nob  set,  order  more  to  be  put  up. 
The  general  experience  seems  to  be  that  if  a  workman  has  to 
look  after  his  own  safety,  and  set  his  timber,  he  generally  does  it 
better  than  if  it  was  entrusted  to  a  deputy ;  while,  on  the  other 
hand,  an  opinion  is  held  that  the  miner,  not  being  paid  for  setting 
timber,  is  apt  to  be  negligent,  to  consider  it  time  lost,  and  only  put 
up  props  where  absolutely  necessary. 
Timbering. — Of  all  the  varieties  of  wood,  fir  and  pine  furnish 
the  greatest  proportion  of  that  used  in  mining ;  larch  may  be 
FIGS.  132,  133  AND  134. 
V«cro£?'/£W 
considered  the  miners  timber  par  excellence.  It  can  be  obtained 
in  good  straight  lengths,  makes  little  waste  in  cutting,  resists 
great  pressure,  and  bends  to  a  considerable  amount  before  break- 
ing, and  its  life  is  a  long  one,  whether  the  place  be  wet  or  dry. 
For  props,  Norway  fir  is  largely  employed,  and  for  such  purposes 
is  perhaps  as  good  as  larch,  as  it  resists  great  pressure  if  such  is 
applied  along  its  length  in  the  direction  of  the  fibres,  and  is  very 
straight,  easily  cut  and  fashioned;  but  it  breaks  rather  easily  when 
the  pressure  is  applied  transversely,  and  is  therefore  not  trustworthy 
for  bars.  Oak  for  positions  of  reliability  is  universally  employed, 
but  is  not  used  so  much  in  roadways  and  workings,  on  account  of 
its  cost,  and  the  fact  that,  excepting  in  large  pieces,  it  grows  very 
crooked,  and  is  not  easily  shaped. 
The  simplest  form  of  support  employed  is  that  known  as  the 
prop,  or  tree,  which  consists  of  a  piece  of  timber  fixed  in  a  verti- 
cal position  between  the  roof  and  the  floor  (b,  Fig.  132).  These 
are  employed  mainly  in  the  working  places,  and  almost  invariably 
at  the  top  of  them  is  placed  a  small  head-piece,  for  spreading  the 
surface  over  which  resistance  takes  place.  This  is  called  a  *'  lid," and  is  generally  a  piece  of  wood  12  to  18  in.  long  and  3  to  4  in* 
thick,  often  made  by  splitting  a  piece  of  round  timber  through 

--- Page Break ---
'34 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  middle.  In  the  working  place,  two  or  three  rows  of  these 
props  are  employed,  those  of  two  consecutive  rows  alternating  with each  other. 
Small  single  props,  called  "  sprags,"  are  used  for  securing  the coal  during  the  process  of  holing  (a,  Fig.  132).  An  elaboration  of 
this,  employed  where  the  coal  is  liable  to  break  away  from  the  face, 
is  the  special  timbering  to  which  the  name  of  "  cocker  sprags  "  is applied,  which  consists  of  a  longitudinal  piece  (a,  Fig.  133)  strutted 
against  the  face,  and  kept  in  position  by  the  small  sprag,  6,  going 
to  the  floor,  and  a  second  one,  c,  binding  it  from  the  roof.  In 
other  instances,  a  similar  result  is  obtained  by  driving  in  a  hori- 
zontal strut  between  the  nearest  row  of  props  and  the  face 
(Kg.  134)- Where  the  roof  is  filled  with  faces  which  cross  and  recross  each 
other,  dividing  it  into  a  series  of  blocks,  vertical  props  are  not 
sufficient  support,  as  they  only  keep  up  that  part  over  or  near  the 
FIGS.  135,  136  AND  137. 
'*7&*£N*S6  '/*#$£££& 
lid.  In  such  cases,  transverse  pieces  of  timber,  called  "  bars  "  or 
"  struts,"  are  employed.  If  the  sides  are  firm,  these  bars  may  be supported  on  them  by  cutting  a  recess  (a,  Fig.  135)  on  one  side  of 
the  road,  and  a  groove,  6,  on  the  other,  then  inserting  one  end  of 
the  bar  into  a,  and  driving  it  tightly  into  the  position  shown.  If 
one  side  of  the  road  and  the  roof  require  support,  often  one  bar 
and  one  prop  are  employed  (Fig.  136).  For  the  purpose  of  distri- 
buting the  pressure,  and  increasing  the  surface  of  resistance,  the 
timber  is  lined  with  boards,  or  laggings,  placed  longitudinally.  If 
the  roof  only,  requires  support,  laggings  will  be  laid  across  from 
one  transverse  bar  to  the  other ;  but  if  the  sides  are  also  bad,  lag- 
gings will  be  placed  all  round  the  setting. 
For  main  roads  and  other  positions,  where  the  nature  of  the 
ground  requires  it,  entire  sets  of  timber  are  employed,  these  con- 
sisting of  two  upright  props,  and  one  bar  on  the  top  of  them 
(Fig.  137),  with  laggings  around.  The  chief  point  to  be  observed 
here  is  that  no  hollow  spaces  should  be  left  between  the  laggings 
and  the  roof.  If  any  exist,  they  must  be  filled  up ;  if  not,  should 
the  roof  break  away,  it  descends  on  the  timber  with  a  blow  like 
that  of  a  hammer,  and  often  displaces  it  from  position. 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
135 
Joints. — The  several  pieces  constituting  a  set  are  held  together 
by  different  forms  of  "  notching,"  each  of  which  resists  pressure coming  from  a  certain  direction.  Where  it  is  entirely  from  the 
roof,  the  common  practice  is  to  simply  flatten  the  bar  slightly  at 
the  point  where  it  rests  on  the  tree,  and  the  weight  soon  tightens 
the  pieces  together.  With  a  view  of  obtaining  a  larger  bearing 
on  the  props,  they  are  sometimes  hollowed  out  at  the  top  end 
FIGS. 139  AND    140. 
(Fig.  138),  the  bar  resting  in  the  space  so  formed.  It  is,  however, 
very  difficult  to  shape  this  groove,  so  that  an  equable  bearing  is 
obtained,  and  if  this  is  not  done,  the  prop  soon  splits.  To  resist 
side  pressure  as  well  as  pressure  from  above,  the  joint  shown  in 
Fig.  139  is  largely  employed.  It  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that 
this  should  be  nicely  made,  and  that  the  end  of  the  prop  should 
fit  evenly  against  the  shaped  portion  of  the  bar.  The  great  mis- 
take is  to  shape  the  piece  as  shown  in  Fig.  140.  If  this  be  done 
the  bar  soon  splits  along  the  dotted  line  a. 
Where  the  side  pressure  is  great,  the  power  of  resistance   is 
FIGS.  141  AND  142. 
'JJ^ii'-V;y9*E- 
much  increased  by  placing  a  second  horizontal  piece  (a,  Fig.  141) between  the  two  vertical  props. 
"  Chocks,"  or  "  Cogs."— For  resisting  heavy  pressure,  either in  the  working  places  or  along  the  main  roads,  chocks,  or  cogs,  are 
largely  employed.  These  consist  of  pieces  of  timber  laid  horizon- 
tally, the  alternate  layers  of  which  cross  each  other  at  right  angles 
(Fig.  142).  They  may  be  composed  either  of  broken  timber  from 
the  workings,  or  refuse  material,  such  as  old  railway  sleepers, waggons,  or  wreckages.  If  applied  in  the  face,  these  chocks  are 

--- Page Break ---
136 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
built  on  a  small  heap  of  loose  material,  which  allows  them  to  be 
easily  removed.  If  required  to  stand  for  any  length  of  time,  the 
space  in  the  interior  is  filled  in  with  loose  dirt.  Their  size  is  an 
exceedingly  variable  one ;  perhaps  the  largest  are  employed  in 
South  Staffordshire,  where  they  run  from  9  to  12  ft.  square,  and 
10  ft.  high.  They  are  capable  of  resisting  enormous  weights,  as 
the  more  pressure  applied  the  more  they  resist. 
Double  Timbering. — On  the  Continent,  a  system  of  double 
timbering  is  used  to  resist  heavy  pressure.  The  weakest  part  of 
a  bar  being  its  centre,  it  is  strengthened  there  by  a  longitudinal 
piece  (a,  Fig.  143)  kept  in  position  by  two  struts,  b,  b,  which  rest  on 
two  other  horizontal  pieces  of  timber,  c,  c,  these  latter  being  finally 
fixed  by  two  short  sprags,  d,  d,  resting  on  the  floor.  In  such 
manner  not  only  is  the  top  bar  strengthened,  but  the  two  side 
props  as  well. 
So  much  of  the  useful  space  is  taken  out  by  the  two  angle 
struts  (b,  b,  Fig.  143),  that  this  style  of  timbering  could  not  be 
FIGS.  143  AND  144. 
employed  if  the  road  were  a  wide  one  containing  a  double  way. 
The  various  parts  are  therefore  arranged  in  a  somewhat  different 
manner.  Two  longitudinal  timbers  are  placed  beneath  the  bar, 
in  such  position  that  the  distance  between  the  props  is  divided 
into  equal  spaces.  A  transverse  strut  (b,  Fig.  144)  is  put  between 
the  two  pieces  a,  a,  and  the  latter  are  kept  in  position  by  a  series 
of  cross-struts,  &c.,  c,  d,  as  before,  as  will  be  readily  seen  from  the sketch. 
In  fixing  this  interior  frame,  all  the  longitudinal  pieces  are  first 
placed  in  position,  and  held  there  by  a  wire  lashing,  until  the 
uprights  and  cross-struts  are  firmly  wedged  in  their  -proper positions. 
Driving  through.  Loose  Ground. — In  driving  through 
watery  and  loose  ground,  special  timbering  has  to  be  adopted,  and 
put  in  with  a  view  of  removing  as  little  material  as  possible.  The 
general  name  of  "  spilling  "  is  applied  to  such  operations.  First of  all,  the  frames  (a  and  6,  Fig.  145)  will  be  fixed  in  position,  and 
probably  a  sole  piece,  e,  will  be  added,  as  well  as  the  two  uprights 
and  the  cap ;  then  laggings  or  planks,  c,  c,  are  driven  forward  behind 
b,  these  being  inclined  slightly  outwards,  at  an  angle  of  about  15° 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
FIG.  145. 
the  pressure  of  the  sides  gradually  bringing  them  close  up  against 
the  sets.     Other  laggings  are  driven  forward,  inclined  as  shown 
at  dy  and  a  small  quantity  of 
ground  excavated  in  front  of  5, until    room     is     obtained    for 
another  set,  shown  in  position 
at  /.     When  this  has  been  in- 
serted, laggings  will  be  driven, 
inclined  outwards  as  before,  for 
a  similar  length,  and  the  process 
repeated   until   the   ground   is 
passed  through. 
If  the  material  is  very  loose, 
these  laggings  will  have  to  be 
driven  near  together,  and  the 
joints  between  them  made  as  close  as  possible,  and  occasionally, 
in  some  cases,  the  ground  at  the  back  of  the  road  will  have  to 
be  supported  by  planks,  strutted  against  the  first  set. 
The  objection  to  this  system  is,  that  in  spite  of  every  care,  a 
quantity  of  material  oozes  through  the  joints  in  very  loose  ground, 
leaving  large  empty  spaces  behind.     To  prevent  this,  the  system on  the  Continent  is  to  fill  the  face  and  the  floor  with  a  series  of 
conical  wedges,  driving  these  forward,  and  so  making  progress. 
The  sides  and  the  roof  are  supported  by  laggings  and  sets,  the 
former  driven  in,  in  the  same  manner  as  in  spilling. 
Iron  and  Steel  Supports. — So  far  as  props  are  concerned,  no 
great  success  has  yet  been  obtained,  although  in  some  instances 
they  are   largely  used.     The   first   cost   of 
either  iron  or  steel  is  always  so  much  larger      ^IGS-  J46  AND  H7- 
than  that  of  wood,  that  if  metal  props  are 
employed  it  is  absolutely  essential  that  none 
should  be  lost.  If  they  are,  the  economy 
resulting  from  the  decreased  breakage  is more  than  counterbalanced. 
Cast-iron  props  have  been  tried,  but  have 
not  met  with  much  favour.  They  are  some- 
what easily  broken,  very  heavy,  and  conse- 
quently dear. 
Ordinary  steel  girders  of  the  H  form,  if 
used  as  props,  present  a  sharp  and  uneven 
surface  to  the  roof,  or  floor,  or  to  timber  lids. 
Pirth's  arrangement  removes  this  difficulty. A  piece  is  cut  out  of  the  web  at  each  end 
(Pig.  146),  and  a  flat  top  and  bottom  formed, 
by  turning  over  the  top  and  bottom  flanges 
until  they  meet  (Fig.  147).  In  addition, 
holes,  a,  a,  are  punched  in  the  web  about  a 
foot  from  each  end,  into  which  a  hook  may  be  inserted  for  the 
withdrawal  of  the  prop. 

--- Page Break ---
138  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  greatest  application  of  steel  girders  in  English  mines  is  to 
replace  the  timber  bars  used  on  ordinary  sets,  retaining,  how- 
ever, the  two  vertical  wooden  props.  It  is  obvious  that,  as  the 
lower  flange  of  the  girder  is  smooth,  and  cannot  be  notched  like  a 
timber  bar,  if  there  is  any  side  pressure,  means  have  to  be 
adopted  to  keep  the  props  in  their  correct  position,  and  prevent 
them  from  being  pushed  inwards.  This  is  done  in  a  very  simple 
manner.  About  4  to  6  in.  from  each  end  an  ordinary  chair  is 
fixed  on  by  the  blacksmith,  this  consisting  of  a  short  piece  of  bar 
iron  about  i  in.  by  f  in.,  crossing  the 
FIGS.  148  AND  149.  bottom  flange,  and,  turned  round  at 
i(X/  each   end,  gripping  the  upper  side. 
The  enlarged  sketch  (Fig.  148)  is  a 
transverse  section  on  line  a  b,  Fig.  149. 
Any  common  scrap  iron  can  be  used 
for  this  purpose.  The  chairs  are  placed 
in  position  before  the  bar  goes  down 
the  pit,  and  the  labour  cost  for  each 
girder  for  such  adddition  is  $d. 
The  author  has  had  considerable  experience  of  the  utility  of 
these  steel  supports.  For  bars  up  to  7  ft.  long  a  section 
measuring  5  in.  by  4  in.  by  J  in.,  weighing  66  Ibs.  per  yd.,  is 
employed,  these  costing  9.28,9.  They  replaced  oak  bars,  measuring 
6J  in.  quarter-girth,  costing  2.66s.  The  price  of  steel  was, 
therefore,  3.49  times  that  of  wood.  As  an  experiment,  lengths 
of  reading  were  timbered  alternately  with  wood  and  steel  (bars 
only,  timber  being  used  as  props),  but  before  any  definite  results 
could  be  observed,  the  district  fired,  was  dammed  off  and 
abandoned.  After  a  lapse  of  nine  months  the  roads  were 
reopened,  and  it  was  then  found  that  the  steel  bars  had  scarcely 
suffered  at  all,  only  a  few  being  displaced  through  their  timber 
supports  breaking.  Owing  to  the  fallen  roof  at  places  where 
timber  bars  had  been  set,  over  ,£100  in  wages  was  spent  in 
repairs,  which  would  have  been  unnecessary  had  steel  bars  been 
employed  throughout,  and,  in  addition,  the  first  cost  of  the 
timber  was  entirely  lost.  On  a  main  haulage  road,  1 2  ft.  girders, 
of  a  section  6  in.  by  4^  in.  by  J  in.,  weighing  78  Ibs.  to  the  yd., 
and  costing  20.955.  each,  have  been  employed,  replacing  timber 
bars  9  in.  quarter  girth,  costing  95.  each.  The  first  cost  of  steel 
was  here  2.33  times  that  of  wood.  The  date  of  fixing  each  girder 
was  noted,  and  numerous  instances  could  be  given  of  their  lasting 
out  from  three  to  four  sets  of  timber  before  removal.  Two 
especially  may  be  instanced ;  they  were  fixed  at  a  junction,  where 
the  pressure  was  very  heavy,  and  actually  stood  for  13  weeks 
before  removal,  while  the  longest  time  an  oak  bar  lasted  in 
the  same  place  was  a  fortnight;  many  failed  in  a  week,  and 
it  was  quite  useless  putting  in  Norway  timber,  as  it  broke  in 
two  days. 
If  the  steel  bars  were  worthless  on  removal,  the  actual  cost  in 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
FIGS.  150  AND  151. 
the  above  instances  would  be  less  than  timber,  but  all  that  has 
to  be  done  is  to  take  them  out  and  straighten  them,  and  then  they 
are  practically  new.  Their  advantages  are  not  so  apparent  where 
timber  lasts  a  long  while,  but  with  heavy  pressures,  and  in  return 
air-ways,  they  are  far  superior.  They  must  be  set  very  care- fully, with  an  equal  level  bearing,  both  on  props  and  to  roof ;  if 
not,  they  turn  over  and  present  their  weakest  side  to  the 
pressure.  When  they  take  a  permanent  bending  set,  the  best 
thing  to  do  is  to  either  turn  them  over,  or,  if  the  bending  is  large, 
remove  and  straighten.  With  these  precautions,  the  author  has 
never  had  one  break  yet. 
On  the  Continent,  complete  frames  of  steel  are  largely  used. 
In  some  cases  they  are  composed  of  two  pieces,  the  top  portion 
bent  into  the  shape  of  an  arch  r\,  and  connected  at  the  summit  by 
fish-plates  and  bolts,  the  lower  end  resting  on  an  iron  shoe  fitted 
to  a  wooden  baulk,  timber  lags  being  driven  behind  the  frames 
against  the  sides  of  the  excavation.  Elliptical  shaped  sets  are 
also  employed,  but  the  common  form 
is  composed  of  two  pieces  of  circular 
shape  Q.  Instead,  however,  of  making 
the  joints  with  fish-plates,  the  frames 
are  connected  together  by  a  sliding 
iron  collar,  which  is  secured  in  its 
place  by  driving  between  it  and  the 
frame  two  pieces  of  wood  like  rail  keys. 
Figs.  150  and  151  show  the  application 
of  such  a  joint  at  Firminy,  where  old 
pit  rails  are  used. 
At  Lens  timber  lags  have  been  done 
away  with,  and  small  strips  of  channel 
steel,  about  2  in.  by  J  in.,  used  in  their 
place.     Another  advantage  of  steel  is  that  it  does  not  occupy  so 
much  space  either  as  timber  or  masonry,  and  either  a  greater effective  area  of  roadway 
for  the  same  amount  of 
excavation  is  secured,  or 
the  cost  of  driving  the 
road  is  reduced,  because 
less  excavation  is  required 
to  get  the  same  effective area. 
For  permanent  situa- tions, where  girders 
placed  on  masonry 
walls,  considerable  economy 
results.  The  worst  f eature 
about  an  arch  is  the  large 
amount  of  space  which  is  lost  through  the  semicircular  form  at 
the  top.  Taking  an  ordinary  roadway  (Fig.  152),  occupied  by 
FIG. 
are 

--- Page Break ---
1 40  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
two  tubs,  an  arch  has  to  be  so  made  that  the  curve  of  its 
upper  portion  allows  the  tubs  to  pass  through  without  catching, 
and  as  a  result,  a  high  space  exists  in  the  centre,  which 
not  only  costs  a  lot  of  money  to  excavate,  but  serves  no  useful 
purpose.  If  a  girder,  a  6,  be  placed  on  the  top  of  the  walls, 
the  excavation  of  the  area,  a  b  c,  which  contains  4.28  cub.  yds., 
becomes  unnecessary,  and,  in  addition,  the  cost  of  the  brick- work will  be  saved.  In  the  illustration  under  notice  this  will 
amount  to  2.08  cub.  yds.  per  lineal  yd.,  which  will  cost  for 
labour,  material,  and  mortar  quite  29.325.  Against  this  has  to 
be  put  the  price  of  the  girder,  amounting  to  20.955.  One  of 
these  will  be  required  for  each  lineal  yard.  The  girder  and  side 
walls,  therefore,  effect  a  saving  in  first  cost  of  8.375.  per  yd.  run 
in  material,  to  which  has  to  be  added  the  reduced  cost  of  the 
excavation,  in  this  case  at  least  14.985. 
Side  walls  and  girders  are  not  so  capable  of  resisting  side 
pressure  as  an  arch,  but  this  difficulty  can  be  overcome  by 
turning  small  brickwork  arches  in  between  each  girder  (Fig.  153) 
in  the  same  way  as  is  done  with  fireproof  floors  of  buildings. 
There  is  a  certain  amount  of  spring 
FIG.  153.  jn  steei  girders,  and,  when  weight comes  on  to  these  small  arches,  there 
is  a  risk  that  the  girders  will  bulge  in 
the  middle,  and  allow  the  arch  to 
***  flatten.  To  prevent  this  happening, 
tie-rods  (a,  Fig.  153)  are  placed  across  from  girder  to  girder. 
Masonry. — For  all  permanent  situations,  securing  the  sides 
with  masonry  still  finds  greatest  favour.  It  is,  perhaps,  more 
expensive  to  put  in  for  reasons  already  stated— viz.,  the  greater excavation  required,  both  for  the  masonry  itself,  and  to  obtain  the 
same  effective  area,  but  when  required  to  stand  for  many  years  it 
cannot  be  surpassed.  It  is,  however,  necessary  to  make  the  lining 
continuous  all  round  the  road.  The  practice  of  building  arches 
without  an  invert  is  not  to  be  recommended  ;  if  an  arch  is  worth 
putting  in  at  all,  it  should  be  put  in  well,  and,  in  addition,  some 
soft  packing  material,  such  as  sand,  must  be  introduced  between 
the  lining  and  the  strata.  No  vacant  places  should  be  left  behind 
the  brickwork,  and  all  timber  used  for  the  temporary  support  of 
the  excavation,  while  the  work  is  being  put  in,  should  be  removed. The  introduction  of  a  soft  material  between  the  brickwork  and 
the  strata  not  only  distributes  the  pressure  over  a  considerable 
area  of  brickwork  and  prevents  local  weight,  but,  as  it  gradually 
gets  compressed,  acts  as  a  resisting  medium  itself.  This  packing 
should  not  be  too  much  nor  again  too  little;  from  6  to  12  in. 
gives  the  best  results.  To  show  how  important  it  is,  the  result  of 
an  experiment,  made  by  the  author  in  1888,  may  be  cited.  Two 
successive  lengths  of  7  ft.  arch  were  built,  one  18  in.  thick, 
packed  with  a  foot  of  sand,  and  the  other,  not  less  than  18  in., 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 141 
but  made  solid.  The  latter  was  crushed  to  pieces  and  had  to  be 
taken  out  in  a  year ;  the  former  is  still  in  and  does  not  show  a crack. 
The  shapes  of  arches  are  many.  The  circular  form  is  the 
strongest,  but  requires  so  much  excavation  that  it  is  seldom 
employed.  An  ellipse  is  perhaps  the  next  strongest,  but  this  again 
requires  a  large  space.  The  form  generally  adopted  is  a  combina- tion of  the  two.  The  side  walls  and  top  usually  form  part  of  one 
curve,  struck  with  a  radius  equal  to  half  the  width  of  the  road, 
while  the  invert,  or  bottom,  is  a  portion  of  another  circle  having 
a  larger  radius.  This  ties  the  whole  structure  together,  and  pre- vents either  the  bottom  lifting  up  or  the  sides  heaving  in.  Two 
forms  adopted  by  the  author  for  a  single  and  double  way  are 
FIGS.  154  AND  155. 
shown  in  Figs.  154  and  155.  They  do  not  contain  any  straight 
lines.  In  the  1 2  ft.  arch,  all  the  portion  above  the  invert  is  part 
of  a  circle  to  radius  6  ft.,  while  the  7  ft.  arch  contains  portions 
of  four  circles — i.e.,  the  two  side  walls  and  invert  to  radius  7  ft., 
and  the  semi-circular  upper  part  to  radius  3  ft.  6  in. 
These  arches  are  put  in  in  lengths,  which  vary  with  the  nature 
of  ground ;  6  to  9  ft.,  with  a  bad  roof,  up  to  5  to  7  yds.,  with  a 
strong  one. 
The  first  procedure  in  putting  in  arches  is  to  remove  the  ground  ; 
to  do  so,  two  methods  are  in  vogue.  In  one — the  general  English 
custom — a  small  road  is  driven  right  at  the  top  of  the  arch,  and 
the  ground  excavated  on  each  side  and  downwards,  while  in  the 
other,  the  first  road  is  driven  at  the  base  of  the  arch  arid  the 
ground  removed  upwards. 
In  timbering  the  ground,  the  peculiar  point  is  that  all  the  main 
pieces  are  set  parallel  with  the  axis  of  the  road,  and  not  trans- versely, the  reason  for  such  departure  from  the  usual  practice  being, 
that  as  the  masonry  is  brought  upwards  all  the  timber  has  to  be 

--- Page Break ---
142 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
removed,  and  this  could  not  be  done,  especially  in  the  upper 
portion,  where  the  two  walls  are  approaching  each  other,  unless 
it  lay  in  the  same  line  as  the  brickwork.  Another  point  is,  that 
if  trees  have  to  be  set,  as  they  frequently  have,  in  the  middle  of 
the  excavation,  the  smaller  end  should  be  placed  downwards,  the 
reason  of  this  being  that  when  the  masonry  in  the  invert  is  built 
round  them,  other  props  are  set  on  the  brickwork  to  the  point 
they  are  holding  up,  and  then  those  going  through  the  masonry 
are  drawn  out,  and  if  the  larger  end  were  downwards  it  would  be 
FIGS.  156,  157,  158  AND  159. 
.1 .1. 
impossible  to  do  so.  The  method  of  timbering  will  be  understood 
by  examining  Figs.  156-9,  which  illustrate  the  position  of  affairs 
at  two  stages  of  the  operations.  Supposing  in  Figs.  156  and  157 
the  top  head  has  been  driven,  and  an  amount  of  ground,  shown  by 
the  dotted  lines,  has  to  be  excavated,  the  first  procedure  is  to  set 
two  long  bars,  a  a,  one  end  of  which  rests  on  the  arch  already  put 
in,  g,  and  the  other  on  a  timber  set.  /,  placed  in  the  head.  These 
two  will  probably  be  connected  by  a  strut,  b.  The  ground  will 
then  be  excavated,  first  on  the  sides,  and  other  longitudinal  bars, 
c  c,  put  in,  connected  to  the  other  two  by  struts,  d  d,  and  behind 
these,  lags  will  be  placed  if  the  ground  requires  it.  At  this  stage 
J?igs.  156  and  157  represent  the  position  of  affairs,  the  two  longi- 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
143 
tudinal  pieces,  c  c,  being  supported  by  small  temporary  props,  e  e, set  on  the  floor. 
As  the  excavation  proceeds  downwards,  the  props  e  e  are  removed, 
as  soon  as  space  is  obtained  for  other  longitudinal  pieces.  This 
process  will  be  repeated  until  a  complete  lining,  consisting  of  longi- 
tudinal bars  and  cross-struts  between  them,  exists  all  round  the 
excavation.  In  heavy  ground  the  longitudinal  pieces  are  often 
connected  by  transverse  bars  (a  a,  Fig.  158)  and  in  addition  vertical 
props,  b  5,  are  set  between,  until  at  the  completion  the  work 
presents  the  appearance  shown  in  Figs.  158  and  159. 
The  masonry  is  now  commenced.  First  of  all  a  lining  of  sand 
is  spread  in  the  bottom,  and  shaped  to  the  curve  of  brickwork,  of 
course  at  the  proper  gradient.  A  wooden  frame  or  "  template," made  of  the  exact  shape  of  the  finished  inside  dimensions  of 
the  invert  and  side  walls,  is  fixed  at  such  a  height  above  this 
sand  as  will  allow  the  thickness  of  the  brickwork  which  is  going 
FIGS.  160  AND  161. 
to  be  used  to  be  placed  between  it  and  the  sand.  The  first  ring 
of  masonry  is  generally  laid  dry.  Operations  commence  at  the 
centre  line,  placing  the  longer  length  of  the  brick  parallel  with  it, 
and  adding  successive  rows  on  each  side  until  a  point  (5,  Fig.  160) 
is  reached.  This  distance  is  such  that  the  ends  of  each  ring  when 
joined  form  a  straight  line,  pointing  towards  the  centre  of  the 
circle,  of  which  the  invert  is  part  (b  a,  Fig.  160).  The  succeed- 
ing rings  are  put  on  by  spreading  a  good  bed  of  mortar  over  the 
one  first  laid,  dropping  the  bricks  down  a  few  inches  away  from 
the  position  they  will  eventually  occupy,  and  then  slipping  them 
along  until  they  get  into  their  proper  places.  By  doing  this,  not 
only  is  the  excess  of  mortar  in  the  bottom  pushed  away,  but  a 
quantity  is  gathered  up  into  the  end  and  side  joints,  and,  in  addition, 
close  contact  between  the  mortar  and  brick  is  made.  This  pro- 
cedure is  repeated  with  each  layer  until  all  the  invert  is  put  in. 
The  building  of  the  side  wall  now  commences.  The  point  a  b  (Fig. 
161)  is  the  weakest  in  the  arch,  so,  as  a  compensation,  the  brick- 

--- Page Break ---
i44 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  162  AND  163. 
work  is  increased  in  strength  there  (see  also  Figs.  154  and  155). 
With  the  exception  of  the  small  portion  of  masonry  cross-shaded 
on  the  left-hand  side  of  Fig.  161,  all  the  brickwork  in  arches  is  laid 
in  stretcher  courses,  but  for  this  small  piece  English  bond  is  used, 
and  the  bricks  in  each  course  are  alternately  at  right  angles  to 
those  of  the  invert,  and,  as  they  are  laid  horizontally,  have  to  be 
cut  into  the  shape  shown  enlarged  at  A.  When  the  point  a  o 
(Fig.  161)  is  reached,  the  bricks  are  laid  longitudinally  again,  but 
to  obtain  the  proper  curve,  culvert  or  arch  bricks  are  employed  for 
the  first  course.  Each  ring  is  kept  perfectly  separate  from  the 
others,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  not  bonded  together. 
When  the  side  walls  have  reached  their  proper  height,  the 
centres  will  be  set,  laggings  put  on,  one  by  one,  and  the  brick- 
work gradually  brought  round  until  the  two  sides  nearly  meet. 
To  close  up  the  top  properly,  the  mason  should  be  outside  the 
arch,  but  as  this  is  impossible  in  mines,  the  difficulty  is  got  over 
as  illustrated  in  Figs.  162  and  163.  When  the  space  between  the two  sides  diminishes  to  about 
2  ft.,  or  such  width  as  a  man 
can  conveniently  work  in,  two 
grooved  laggings,  a  a,  are  put 
on.  Up  to  this  time,  the  masons 
have  laid  the  courses  parallel 
with  the  direction  of  the  arch, 
they  now  put  the  remainder  in 
transversely,  but  still  keep  the 
longer  axis  of  the  bricks  in  the 
same  direction.  Commencing 
near  the  length  already  in,  the 
man  lays  a  strip  of  iron  (b,  Fig. 
162  and  No.  i,  Fig.  163)  in  the 
groove  of  the  laggings.  He  then 
makes  up  the  small  portion, 
supporting  it  on  No.  i  iron, 
retires  backwards,  puts  on  another  iron  No.  2,  and  keys  in  the 
part  between  No.  i  and  No.  2,  goes  back  again,  puts  on  No.  3, 
and  repeats  the  process,  until  the  length  under  consideration  is secured. 
Instead  of  using  timber  centres,  which  block  up  the  upper 
portion  of  the  road,  the  author  has  invariably  employed  iron  ones, 
which  possess  the  great  advantage  not  only  of  being  light  and 
easily  fixed,  but  also  of  leaving  the  centre  of  the  road  free.  In  some 
instances,  they  have  been  made  from  old  railway  rails,  dropped  into 
a  wrought-iron  shoe,  or  in  others  of  angle  iron,  at  the  base  of  which 
a  return  plate  about  6  in.  sq.  is  placed  (c,  Fig.  162)  and  secured  to 
the  angle  iron  by  a  small  gusset  stay,  d.  The  laggings  employed 
are  usually  about  3  in.  thick,  and  it  must  be  remembered  that twice  the  thickness  of  these  has  to  be  deducted  from  the  diameter 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY  OPERATIONS. 
145 
FIG.  164. 
of  the  arch  to  find  the  size  of  centres  required,  therefore,  with  a 
12  ft.  arch,  the  centre  should  measure  n  ft.  6  in.  With  iron 
centres  the  author  has  put  in  over  100  yds.  of  12  ft.  arching  in 
the  main  road  of  a  colliery,  and  never  stopped  drawing  through 
it  a  single  day. 
Arrangement  of  Inset. — In  the  great  majority  of  cases,  the 
empty  tubs,  after  being  removed  from  the  cage,  have  to  be  brought 
back  by  the  side  of  the  pit 
shaft,  and  for  such  reason  the 
hanging-on  place  is  made wider  than  the  diameter  of 
the  shaft,  indeed,  it  is  usual 
to  provide  a  passage  on  both sides.  The  shaft  brickwork 
and  the  arching  are  best 
connected  by  "  belling  "  out the  former,  as  shown  in  Fig. 
164,  this  being  by  far  the 
strongest  construction,  and, 
in  addition,  room  is  provided 
for  bearers,  to  which  either 
guide  pulleys  for  haulage 
ropes  or  main  supports  for 
water  or  steam  pipes  can  be 
attached.  A  sump  frame,  a  b, 
will  be  provided  to  receive 
and  keep  the  cage  steady 
while  changing  is  going  on, and  if  two  or  more  decks  are 
used,  another  frame  of  cross- bearers,  c  d,  will  be  put  in. 
On  the  latter  the  cage  rests 
during  changing,  and  as  it 
drops  therewith  considerable 
force,  Mr.  Emerson  Bainbridge  has  employed  spiral  springs  at 
Nunnery  Colliery,  Sheffield,  which  are  simply  let  into  the  bearers 
and  receive  the  cage  (Fig.  165).  ^  There  are 
six  springs  to  each  cage,  each  9  in.  long  by 
5f  in.  diam.,  made  with  9^  coils  of  f  in. 
steel.  All  jar  and  shock  is  avoided. 
The  arrangement  of  the  tramways  at  the 
pit  bottom  should  always  be  such  that 
from  the  point  where  the  full  tubs  are 
removed  from  the  haulage  ropes,  to  that  where  the  empty  ones 
are  again  attached,  the  motion  should  be  due  to  gravity  alone. 
To  a  certain  extent,  where  engine  power  is  available,  it  is,  com- 
paratively speaking,  an  easy  task  to  haul  the  tubs  to  such  a  height 
above  the  hanging-on  place  that  a  regular  fall  is  obtained  towards 
FIG.  165. 

--- Page Break ---
146  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
the  shaft  for  the  full  tubs,  and  a  fall  in  an  opposite  direction  for 
the  empty  ones.  The  landings  are  technically  called  "  kips,"  and it  is  advisable  that  they  should  be  as  long  as  possible,  so  as  to  get 
standing  room  for  a  large  quantity  of  tubs  ;  winding  may  then  go 
on,  up  to  a  certain  limit,  even  while  the  haulage  machinery  is 
standing. 
The  question  of  caging  the  several  decks  simultaneously  is 
treated  of  in  Chap.  IX.,  and  all  that  will  be  done  here  is  to 
describe  the  operation  of  getting  the  tubs  (waggons)  to  the  appa- ratus used  for  this  purpose.  The  best  plan  is  to  arrange  the 
shaft  at  one  extremity  of  the  main  haulage  road,  and  haul 
the  tubs  by  mechanical  means  to  the  point  a  (Figs.  166  and 
167)  ;  the  full  road  is  then  laid  at  a  slight  inclination  (about 
J  in.  to  the  yd.)  towards  the  shaft,  the  tubs  gravitate  there, 
and  are  placed  on  the  cage  by  an  onsetter.  The  empty  ones 
gravitate  away  from  the  shaft  down  the  slope,  b  c,  having  a 
grade  of  3^  in.  to  the  yd.  to  give  the  required  speed,  along  a 
slight  flat,  c  d,  and  then  up  the  incline,  d  e.  The  tubs  will  not 
FIGS.  166  AND  167. 
proceed  far  up  d  e,  but  do  so  for  some  distance,  owing  to  the 
momentum  they  have  gained  coming  down  b  c,  and  travel  just 
far  enough  to  clear  the  points  at  d.  As  the  slope  is  against  the 
tubs,  their  direction  of  motion  is  changed,  and  on  their  return 
down  e  d,  they  are  switched  off  into  a  road  to  the  left,  having  a 
down-hill  grade,  pass  by  the  side  of  the  shaft  to  the  point  g, 
where  they  are  again  attached  to  the  haulage  rope,  and  proceed 
into  the  workings.  From  the  time  the  tubs  leave  the  rope  at  a 
to  the  time  they  are  again  attached  at  g,  no  labour  is  necessary, 
the  movement  being  quite  automatic. 
Mr.  M.  H.  Douglas*  has  described,  in  an  excellent  paper, 
several  systems  of  laying  out  shaft  kips,  all  of  which  are  worthy 
of  study.  One,  however,  needs  special  mention,  where,  owing  to 
the  inclination  of  the  seam,  caging  takes  place  a,t  two  decks  simul- taneously, without  the  use  of  any  balance  arrangement  (Fig. 
1 68).  There  are  two  shafts,  about  40  ft.  apart,  each  sunk  to  the 
same  seam,  and  two  engine  planes,  each  fitted  up  with  a  double 
line  of  rails.  The  coals  hauled  out  of  the  No.  i  engine  plane  are 
drawn  above  the  switches,  8,  and  lowered  down  into  the  road,  x  x', as  required,  and  are  hung  on  exclusively  at  the  high  level,  the  road 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  i.  443. 

--- Page Break ---
PRELIMINARY   OPERATIONS.  147 
-x  being  used  for  No.  i,  and  x  for  No.  2  pit.  In  arranging  the roads  for  the  removal  of  the  empties,  advantage  was  taken  of  the 
natural  dip  of  the  seam,  the  road  y  being  used  exclusively  for 
1 68. 
No.  i,  and  y'  for  No.  2  pit.  The  same  method  is  pursued  with the  coals  hauled  out  of  the  No.  2  engine  plane,  with  the  exception 
that  these  tubs  are  used  entirely  at  the  low  levels,  the  gradient 
FIGS.  169  AND  170. 
being  formed  by  driving  stone  drifts  for  the  full  and  empty  road-* 
The  high  and  low  levels  differ  in  height  exactly  8  ft.  The  sketch 
explains  itself,  if  it  is  remembered  that  the  tubs  from  No.  i 
engine  plane  feed  the  top  decks  of  both  pits,  while  those  froja 

--- Page Break ---
i48  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
No.  2  engine  plane  feed  the  bottom  decks.  The  only  objection- 
to  such  a  system  is,  that  equal  quantities  of  material  must  be 
drawn  by  each  engine  plane. 
The  inset  at  No.  5  pit,  Bascoup,  Belgium,  affords  a  fine  example of  the  automatic  and  continuous  movements  of  the  tubs  in  one 
direction.  The  landing  is  laid  with  a  double  line  of  rails,  and 
passes  through  the  centre  of  the  shaft,  parallel  with  the  longer 
axis  of  the  cage  (Figs.  169  and  170).  From  each  end  of  it  branch 
off  two  side  roads,  each  laid  with  a  single  line  of  rails ;  one  set 
proceeds  towards  the  north,  and  the  other  towards  the  south. 
The  two  roads  to  the  north,  and  the  two  roads  to  the  south,  rise 
from  the  shaft,  and  each  pair  unite  at  a  point  about  100  yds. 
above  the  level  of  the  pit  bottom,  where  the  motive  pulleys  of  the 
haulage  are  fixed.  Roads  branch  off  level  to  the  east,  and  further 
junctions  are  arranged,  as  shown  in  plan  (Fig.  170),  each  having- separate  wheels  on  vertical  shafts.  Two  endless  chains  exist  in 
the  roads  driven  to  the  rise,  one  on  each,  and  these  pass  round  the 
motive  pulleys.  The  full  tubs  descend  towards  the  shaft  in  one 
road,  and  the  empty  tubs  return  from  it  in  the  other.  The  same 
chain  passes  upon  pulleys  on  the  upright  shaft,  a  a',  and  also 
round  the  return  pulleys,  b  b',  c  c',  situated  at  the  two  extremities- of  the  inset,  and  passes  through  the  shafts  without  interfering 
with  the  cages,  or  even  with  the  movement  of  the  tubs  in  the 
hanging-on  place,  as  the  tubs  gravitate  from  b  to  c.  The  appli- cation is  remarkably  simple  and  efficient,  a  noteworthy  point 
being  that  the  direction  of  motion  of  the  tubs  is  never  changed, 
except  at  the  working  face.  The  plan  explains  this;  the  pit 
bottom  occupies  the  lowest  point,  the  dotted  lines  represent  the 
chains,  and  the  arrows  the  direction  of  motion. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs,  dealing  with  the  subject  matter  of  this  chapter : — 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Keport  of  Deputation  On  tJie  Method  of  Securing  Roof 
and  Sides,  iii.  51  ;  Propping  at  Straiton  and  Pentland,  Kobt.  Martin, xii.  58. 
N.  B.  I.  :  The  use  of  Iron  Supports  in  the  main  roads  of  mines  instead  of 
Masonry  or  Timbering,  G.  Meyer  and  W.  J.  Bird,  xxxvii.  135  ;  On 
the  Introduction  of  Steel  Supports  for  tJte  maintenance  of  main  roads  in 
the  mines  of  Cleveland,  A.  L.  Steavenson,  xxxvii.  221. 
BRIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD. :  "  Kips "  or  Landings  at  Shafts,  M.  H.  Douglas, i.  443  ;  Timbering  in  Mines,  H.  St.  J.  Durnford,  iii.  207,  and  W.  JS. 
Gresley,  iii.  229  ;  Preservation  of  Timber,  ix.  76. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Application  dufer  au  soutenement  des  galeries  ci  la  houil'ere 
du  Creuzot,  M.  de  Biauzat  (2°  Serie),  iii.  563  ;  Nouveaux  systemes  de 
boisage,  H.  Daburon  (2e  Serie),  ix  .  873  ;  Blindage  des  galeries  aux 
Jtouilleres  de  Bochebelle,  M.  Gerrard  (2e  Serie),  xv.  391  ;  Effets  de diverses preparations  sur  la  duree  des  bois  (Comptes  Eendus  Mensuels), 
1890,  p.  223. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Mine  Timbering,  J.  Clark  Jefferson,  vii.  270 ;  Shaft 
Timbering,  J.  Clark  Jefferson,  viii.  209. 
MID.  INST.  :  The  use  of  fiolled  Steel  Girders  for  supporting  the  Hoof  in  Mines,. 
T.  R.  Smith,  x .  222. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER    VII. 
METHODS    OF    WORKING. 
The  Two  Main  Systems. — Broadly  speaking,  there  are  two 
systems  of  mining  coal,  called  "  bord  and  pillar,"  and  "  long- 
wall."  Outside  the  North  of  England  and  Scotland  the  former is  but  little  practised  in  this  country,  while  the  latter,  which 
originally  took  its  rise  in  the  Midlands,  is  of  very  extended 
application.  Endless  modifications  of  each  system  are  employed, 
and  the  two  gradually  merge  into  each  other,  until  it  becomes 
impossible  to  say  to  which  system  some  methods  belong.  The 
tendency  of  the  present  day  is  to  employ  longwall  more  and 
more,  and  this  method  is  slowly  but  surely  superseding  every 
other  one.  There  are,  however,  some  seams  which  it  would  be 
impossible  to  work  longwall,  that  is  to  say,  at  any  reasonable  cost. 
Shaft  Pillar  and  Subsidence. — It  is  necessary  that  a  certain area  of  coal  around  the  shafts  should  not  be  worked,  but  should 
remain  to  afford  support,  and  to  prevent  any  risk  of  what  is 
known  as  "  creep."  It  is  impossible  to  give  any  general  rule  by which  the  size  of  shaft  pillars  for  given  depths  may  be  determined. 
Everything  depends  on  the  nature  of  the  beds  overlying  the  seam, 
the  inclination  of  the  strata,  the  nature  of  the  floor  and  roof,  and 
the  question  of  stowing  the  excavation. 
It  is  hard  to  prevent  creep  in  seams  having  a  soft  floor, 
especially  if  water  is  present.  The  pressure  on  the  pillars  of 
coal  forces  up  the  soft  underclay  in  the  roads  between  the  pillars. 
When  once  this  action  commences  it  is  most  difficult  to  stop,  or 
to  keep  the  roads  open ;  everything  seems  to  be  on  the  move. 
Perhaps  the  only  method  of  prevention  in  longwall  work  is 
efficient  and  close  packing ;  leaving  large  pillars  is  not  sufficient,  as 
Mr.  J.  A.  Longden*  mentions  an  instance  of  a  Derbyshire colliery,  520  yds.  deep,  where  the  shaft  pillar  was  260  yds.  broad 
by  800  yds.  long,  the  mine  being  flat,  and  yet  creep  came  on  so 
seriously  that  great  fears  were  entertained  that  the  shaft  would 
be  lost.  The  pit  bottom  arching  had  to  be  put  in  three  times, 
finally  with  layers  of  oak  and  brickwork  alternately. 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xii.  127. 

--- Page Break ---
1 50  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  working  of  beds  of  coal  always  lowers  the  overlying  strata,, 
giving  rise  to  what  is  known  as  "  subsidence."  A  certain  height is  taken  out,  and,  although  the  excavation  may  be  filled  with 
material,  such  packing,  even  at  the  best,  is  loose  compared  with 
the  solid  coal  originally  existing.  The  gob  is  compressed,  and  the 
overlying  strata  and  the  surface  sink  down.  If  the  area  of 
subsidence  was  limited  to  the  strata  immediately  above  the  area 
worked,  the  problem  of  determining  its  direction,  if  not  its 
amount,  would  be  easy,  but  even  in  level  measures  the  disturb- 
ance extends  beyond  the  limit  of  the  excavation. 
With  inclined  seams  the  fracture  of  the  beds  never  takes  place 
in  a  vertical  direction,  but  always  in  a  plane  approaching  the 
perpendicular  to  the  inclination  of  the  strata.  M.  Gallon* 
advocated  the  theory  known  as  the  "  Normal,"  that  subsidence takes  place  at  right  angles  to  the  planes  of  stratification,  and 
extends,  without  sensible  diminution  in  amount,  right  up  to  the 
surface,  whatever  may  be  the  depth  of  the  beds.  M.  Dumont,f 
after  an  exhaustive  examination  of  the  district  around  Liege, 
expressed  a  similar  opinion,  but  the  Colliery  Owners'  Association! 
afterwards  drew  up  a  reply,  advocating  that  "  the  law  of  the 
Normal "  does  not  hold  good  where  the  strata  are  highly  inclined. The  whole  subject  was  reviewed  by  M.  Fayol,§  who,  in  addition 
conducted  numerous  experiments.  He  points  out  that  the 
theory  of  the  Normal  is  based  on  the  erroneous  supposition  that 
beds  break  at  right  angles  to  the  planes  of  stratification,  and  at  the 
perimeter  of  the  excavation ;  but,  from  actual  experiment,  he 
found  that  the  plane  of  fracture  is  a  more  or  less  inclined  one. 
After  describing  numerous  experiments  made  on  elaborate  models, 
and  instances  of  the  result  of  mining  operations,  M.  Fayol||  states 
that  in  stratified  deposits  the  zone  of  subsidence  is  generally 
limited  by  a  sort  of  dome,  which  has  for  its  base  the  area  of  the excavation. 
If  the  beds  are  horizontal,  the  dome  is  arranged  symmetrically 
round  its  axis,  which  is  vertical.  Each  of  the  beds  included  in  the 
dome  sinks  in  the  form  of  a  basin ;  the  extent  of  the  movement 
diminishes  in  proportion  as  it  is  further  from  the  centre  of 
excavation.  If  the  beds  are  inclined,  the  dome  is  no  longer 
symmetrical,  and  its  axis  is  inclined. 
*  lectures  on  Mining  (English  translation),  ii.  306. t  Des  ajfaisements  du  solproduits  par  Sexploitation  Jiouillcre,  Liege,  1871. 
J  Des  aff'aiseinents  du  sol  attribute  a  I 'exploitation  houillere,  Liege,  1875. §  Note  sur  les  mouvementsde  terrain provoques par  V exploitation  des  mines, 
Soc.  Ind.  Min.,  2e  Serie,  xiv.  805. ||  This  paper  is  the  most  important  one  which  has  been  published  on 
the  effect  of  coal-working  on  the  surface,  and  throws  considerable  light  on 
what  is  perhaps  the  most  intricate  problem  in  mining,  and  about  which 
few  facts  are  known.  A  careful  extract  from  it,  and  also  of  M.  Dumont's memoir,  by  Mr.  H.  F.  Bulman,  is  given  in  Jour.  Brit.  Soc.  JMiri.  Stud., vol.  xii. 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WOKKING.  ISi 
In  proportion  as  the  seams  become  more  inclined,  the  axis  of 
the  dome  is  inclined  also,  and  tends  towards  the  horizontal ;  at 
the  same  time  the  height  of  the  zone  of  subsidence  tends  towards 
zero.  The  axis  of  the  zone  of  subsidence  is  quite  independent  of 
the  vertical,  and  of  the  normal  to  the  strata.  Vertical,  normal, 
axis  of  figure  of  dome,  and  line  of  maximum  subsidence,  all 
coincide  when  the  beds  are  horizontal ;  they  are  distinct  when  the beds  are  inclined. 
When  the  zone  of  subsidence  crosses  several  groups  of  beds  at 
varying  inclinations,  the  axis  of  the  dome  is  deflected  in  passing 
from  one  group  to  another,  and  approaches  to  the  normal  of  the 
group  in  which  it  is.  Thus,  for  example,  in  beds  disposed  in  the 
shape  of  a  fan,  commencing  with  the  horizontal,  the  axis  of  the 
zone  of  subsidence,  starting  from  the  vertical,  arrives  by  degrees at  the  horizontal.  The  direction  of  the  axis  of  the  zone  of 
subsidence  must  not  be  confused  with  that  of  the  limits  of  this 
zone  (i.e.,  the  circumscribing  lines  of  the  dome).  Sometimes  the 
axis  approaches  in  a  remarkable  manner  the  perpendicular  to  the 
strata,  and  it  is  this  perhaps  which  gave  rise  to  the  theory  of  the 
"  .Normal." 
From  the  above  considerations  it  follows  that,  when  the  seams 
are  inclined,  shaft  pillars  require  to  be  much  larger  on  the  rise 
side  than  on  the  deep.  The  occurrence  of  faults  must  be  carefully 
noted,  as,  where  they  cross  the  area  affected  the  lines  of  fracture 
are  deflected  and  proceed  along  them;  sometimes  they  extend, 
and  at  others  diminish,  the  area  of  surface  affected. 
Where  the  regular  beds  are  covered  with  a  layer  of  soft,  loose, 
sandy  material,  the  area  of  subsidence  maybe  unlimited,  especially 
if  the  deposit  contains  water. 
Mr.  Longden*  recommends  for  level  seams  the  leaving  of  one yard  in  breadth  for  each  yard  in  depth,  that  is,  a  shaft  200  yds. 
deep,  should  have  a  pillar  100  yds.  radius  or  200  yds.  diameter. 
This  seems  a  large  amount,  but  the  error,  if  any,  is  on  the  safe side. 
Arrangement  of  Labour. — Before  describing  the  methods  of 
mining,  some  reference  should  be  made  to  the  two  systems  under 
which  the  labour  is  carried  out.  In  one,  the  miner  not  only  gets 
the  coal,  but  carries  out  odd  work,  such  as  packing,  repairs  to 
roadways,  &c.,  while  in  the  other,  a  skilled  class  of  colliers  are 
employed  simply  as  hewers  at  the  face,  all  dead  work  being  per- formed by  separate  staffs  of  men.  In  the  latter  system,  the  labour 
is  subdivided,  each  class  of  men  carrying  out  special  duties. 
If  the  hewers  are  employed  solely  at  the  face,  a  larger  tonnage 
is  produced  per  man,  and  hence  less  extent  of  workings  is  required, 
with  a  corresponding  reduction  in  the  cost  of  maintaining  a  smaller 
area  under  timber.  The  face  moves  faster,  the  weight  has  less 
*  Ibid.  xii.  1 28. 

--- Page Break ---
i52  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
time  to  break  up  the  coal,  the  roof  is  always  "  green  "  (or  fresh), and  there  is  consequently  less  liability  to  accident.*  Except  under special  circumstances,  coal  is  invariably  mined  cheapest  where  the 
face  travels  fastest ;  the  exception  is,  a  seam  having  a  very  strong 
roof  and  floor,  as  here  it  is  possible  to  move  too  fast. 
The  division  of  labour  does  not  actually  produce  more  coal  with 
fewer  men,  for  other  colliers  have  to  be  employed  to  perform  the 
work  the  hewers  originally  did.  The  old  out-put  is,  however, 
produced  from  a  smaller  extent  of  workings ;  and,  on  an  average, 
about  one-half  of  colliery  cost  accounts  are  capable  of  reduction 
in  proportion  as  the  output  is  increased,  and  the  area  from  which 
it  is  produced  is  reduced.  So  far  as  maintaining  roads  is  con- 
cerned, the  chief  point  is  to  see  that  the  gob  is  carefully  packed, 
and  that  all  props  are  removed,  so  that  the  roof  can  settle,  and not  break  down. 
The  above  observations  do  not  apply  so  strongly  except  in  such 
places  where,  from  the  nature  of  the  roof,  and  the  seam  itself, 
the  amount  of  repairs  is  large,  and  keeps  the  miner  away  from 
the  actual  coal-getting  for  a  considerable  part  of  his  time. 
Timber  drawing  is,  certainly,  best  performed  by  a  separate  staff  of 
men,  who  should,  preferably,  be  set  the  work  by  contract. 
Bord  and  Pillar  Working. f — After  driving  out  the  main 
roads  the  first  operation  is  to  divide  the  coal  into  a  series  of  rect- 
angular blocks  (Fig.  171),  by  means  of  drivages,  called  "  bords  " 
and  "  walls,"  the  line  of  the  latter  being  generally  spoken  of  as 
*'  headways  course."  The  bords  are  driven  from  4  to  5  yds.  wide, and  always  in  a  direction  at  right  angles  to  the  cleat  of  the  coal, 
or,  as  it  is  generally  termed,  *'  on  the  face."  Headways  course  is at  right  angles  to  these,  or,  in  other  words,  parallel  with  the  cleat, 
and  as  this  runs  approximately  north  and  south  in  the  North  of 
England  coal-field,  headways  course  is  generally  taken  to  mean north  and  south,  and  bordways  east  and  west.  As  a  rule,  walls 
are  driven  about  2  yds.  wide,  but  sometimes  both  bords  and  walls 
are  driven  5  yds.  wide,  and  the  roof  allowed  to  fall. 
The  first  procedure  is  to  drive  out  the  main  roads.  At  large 
collieries  there  are  usually  four  proceeding  at  once,  two  intakes 
and  two  returns.  Before  these  roads  have  gone  far,  bords  and 
walls  can  be  commenced  on  either  side  of  them,  leaving,  however, 
sufficient  coal  on  both  sides  to  prevent  any  risk  of  creep.  At  one 
time,  the  pillars  which  were  cut  off  by  the  bords  and  walls  were 
made  only  just  large  enough  to  keep  the  roof  up,  and  were  left. 
This  has  been  quite  abandoned,  and  the  pillars  are  now  made  very 
large,  quite  a  common  size  being  two,  arid  often  three,  chains 
square.  In  addition,  as  soon  as  these  pillars  have  been  formed, 
their  removal  is  commenced,  while  the  driving  of  bords  still  pro- 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xv.  1 14. 
f  Also  known  as  "post  and  stall,"  and  in  Scotland  as  "stoop  and 
room." 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING. 
153 
•ceeds  only  a  short  distance  away.     In  this  manner  the  percentage 
of  large  coal  has  been  materially  increased,  and  the  pillars  are 
•scarcely  crushed  at  all,  which  is  especially  noticeable  where  both 4he  coal  and  roof  are  tender. 

--- Page Break ---
'54 TEXT-BOOK  OF   COALMINING. 
Another  practice,  which  was  introduced  by  the  celebrated  viewer 
Buddie,  about  the  beginning  of  the  century,  is  the  method  of 
dividing  the  colliery  up  into  what  are  known  as  "  panels,"  or 
"  districts"  (Fig.  171),  these  consisting  of  an  area  of  from  30  to 
40  acres,  surrounded  on  all  sides  by  a  rib  of  coal,  called  a  "  barrier,'' these  barriers  being  holed  through  at  points  where  roads  are 
necessary.  This  system  of  panels  is  particularly  advantageous 
with  a  tender  roof  and  soft  floor ;  only  a  small  area  of  the  seam  is 
opened  at  once,  the  roof  does  not  weight  so  badly,  nor  require  so 
much  timber,  and  more  round  coal  is  produced.  In  addition,  the 
risk  of  creep  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  prevented,  or  it  may  be  con- fined to  the  panel  in  which  it  arises.  The  risk  of  explosion  is 
decreased,  as  each  district  has  its  own  current  of  air,  and  should 
anything  happen  in  one,  there  is  little  probability  of  it  extending to  the  others. 
The  preliminary  work  of  driving  the  bords  and  walls  is  called 
"  working  in  the  whole,"  the  removal  of  the  pillars,  which  follows 
FIG.  172. 
•AfQ^l^ "  ^i^'-w-i  ^.^'^t^^ . Su-^fr  <c^;-7J$i;?ri^>A*r^v  #$• s3«©H«iit ma 
afterwards,  "  working  in  the  broken."  In  the  latter  a  proper line  of  operations,  usually  a  diagonal  one,  should  be  adhered  to,  as 
if  portions  of  a  pillar  lag  behind,  or  become  surrounded  by  broken 
workings,  the  coal  is  very  much  crushed,  and  quantities  are  very often  lost. 
The  removal  of  the  pillars  is  carried  out  by  a  series  of  drivages, 
technically  called  "  Jenkins  "  and  "  skirtings  "  ;  the  former  is  a  place driven  in  a  pillar  in  a  bordvvays  direction,  while  the  latter  is  a 
similar  place  driven  headways  way,  although,  as  a  rule,  any  place 
driven  alongside  the  fallen  roof  is  called  a  skirting.  At  Eppleton 
Colliery  the  pillars,  which  are  44  yds.  by  33  yds.,  are  worked  by 
driving  a  fast  skirting  out  of  the  waggon-way,  the  length  of  four 
pillars,  as  shown  in  Fig.  172,  leaving  6  ft. of  coal  against  the  fallen 
roof  in  the  headways.  A  jenkin  is  then  carried  up  the  pillar 
alongside  the  old  bords,  and  then  lifts  or  "  juds  "  are  driven  right across,  these  being  5  yds.  wide.  As  soon  as  one  of  these  reaches 
the  fallen  roof  on  the  west  side  of  the  pillar,  a  second  is  com- 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF   WORKING. 
155 
menced  out  of  the  jenkin.  Several  pillars  are  attacked  at  the 
same  time,  the  lifts  in  each  lying  back  in  step  fashion,  as  shown. 
The  roof  is  kept  up  in  the  juds  by  a  series  of  chocks  or  cogs, 
formed  of  timber  22  in.  long  by  4  in.  square,  placed  4^  ft.  apart, 
and,  say,  6  ft.  from  the  coal  side.  The  space  between  the  loose 
side  and  the  chocks  is  secured  by  ordinary  props  and  laggings, 
these,  except  three  rows  at  the  face,  being  drawn  every  night  and the  roof  allowed  to  fall  behind. 
At  the   same  colliery,  with  large  pillars  66  yds.  square,   the 
process   of   removal   is  carried   out  by  driving  a  jenkin  up  the 
middle,  splitting  the  pillar  into  two  halves,  and  then  taking  5  yd. 
lifts  right  and  left.  This  is  the  system  recommended  by  Mr.  G.  C. 
Green  well.  If  the  pillars  have  in  the  first  instance  been  made 
large  enough,  he  says  the  whole  of  the  wings  on  each  side  may  be 
brouoht  back  simultaneously,  chocks  being  used  in  double  rows 
for  the  support  of  the  roof,  the  back  row,  or  that  next  to  the  gob, 
being  shifted  between  the  front  row  and  the  coal  as  the  face 
advances.*  The  system  of  working,  and  the  method  of  removing the  pillars,  have  been  described  by  Messrs.  R.  A.  S.  Jledmayne  and 
H.  F.  Bulman  in  two  excellent  papers,  to  which  the  student  i& 
referred  for  further  particulars.t 
*  Mine  Engineering,  p.  200. t  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  ix.  101  and  174. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  objections  to  the  bord  and  pillar  system  are  the  difficulty  of 
ventilating  the  workings,  the  amount  of  coal  which  is  lost  (a  thin 
piece  has  always  to  be  left  on  the  sides  of  the  bords  and  walls 
which  are  fallen),  the  smaller  percentage  of  round  coal  produced, 
and  the  large  charge  for  narrow  work ;  not  only  are  the  bords  and 
winning  headways  in  the  whole  paid  for,  but  the  skirtings  and 
Jenkins  in  the  broken  are  also  subjected  to  a  yardage  rate. 
Lancashire  Method. — In  the  Lancashire  coalfield,  with  steep 
seams  dipping  i  in  3  to  6,  a  system  is  employed  resembling  both 
bord  and  pillar  and  longwall.  A  pair  of  roads  are  generally 
driven  from  the  shaft  direct  to  the  deep,  and  out  of  these,  levels, 
30  yds.  apart,  are  driven  to  the  boundary  (Fig.  173).  Each  pair 
of  levels  are  somewhere  about  200  yds.  apart,  and  the  coal  is  left 
solid  between.  On  reaching  the  boundary,  two  sets  of  levels  are 
connected  by  a  road,  and  the  coal  between  is  divided  up  into  pillars 
by  a  series  of  drivages  crossing  each  other  at  right  angles.  All 
the  pillars  are  not  cut  off  before  commencing  to  remove  the  coal, 
but  are  gradually  formed,  leading  the  face  as  shown  by  the illustration. 
The  pillars  are  removed  by  lifts  taken  uphill.     These  lifts  vary 
from  12  to  15  yds.  wide,  and 
FIG.  174.  are  taken  forward  like  a  long- , ,.  wall  face.     A  line  of  rails  is 
carried  by  the  side  of  the 
solid  coal,  and  a  pack-wall built  on  the  other  side  (Fig. 
174).  Two  rows  of  chocks, about  2  yds.  apart,  are  always 
kept  parallel  with  the  face, and  at  the  same  time  a  third 
row,  6  ft.  further  back,  is 
being  withdrawn,  trees  or 
props  being  set  all  round them  while  such  is  being 
done. 
In  some  instances  the 
pillars  are  cut  off  much 
larger,  and  are  removed  by 
lifts  as  before,  but  here  several  proceed  at  the  same  time,  one 
leading  the  other,  the  face  having  a  stepped  appearance  similar  to 
Fig.  179. 
Longwall  Method. — In  this  system  the  coal  is  extracted  in  a 
long  face,  which  is  gradually  moved  forwards.  The  space  behind 
the  working  is  filled  in  with  packing,  and  what  are  called  "  stall roads  "  are  made  into  the  face  at  intervals.  These  stall  roads  are 
cut  off  at  regular  distances  by  levels,  generally  branching 
obliquely  out  of  the  main  roads ;  by  such  means  the  length  of  gob 
reading  to  maintain  in  repair  is  kept  within  reasonable  limits, 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WOKKING. 
157 
and,  in  addition,  the  distance  which  the  coal  has  to  be  hauled  is- 
reduced.  This  is  the  ideal  longwall,  and  its  carrying  out  in 
practice  is  well  represented  by  Fig.  175,  which  is  a  reduction  of  a 
portion  of  the  working  plan  of  a  colliery.  The  working  roads- 
FIG.  175. 
through  which  coal  is  drawn  are  shown  in  full  lines,  while  those 
which  have  been  cut  off  and  abandoned  are  represented  by  dotted 
ones. 
The  system  of  working  is  very  easy,  the  miner  undercuts  the 
coal  all  along  the  face,  supporting  it  in  the  meanwhile  on  sprags. 
Fie.  176. 
The  roof  at  the  rear  of  the  workmen,  where  the  coal  has  been  got 
down,  is  generally  kept  up  by  a  double  row  of  props,  those  in  one 
row  alternating  with  those  in  the  other.  Behind  these  comes  the 
goaf  pack.  When  the  sprags  are  taken  out,  the  coal  is  either 
shot  down  or  falls  on  its  own  account.  It  is  loaded  up  into  tubs, 
a  line  of  rails  being  laid  along  the  face  ;  the  rails  have  to  be  taken 

--- Page Break ---
i58  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
up  and  relaid  with  each  advance.  The  details  between  two  stall 
roads  are  shown  in  Fig.  176. 
Perhaps  a  more  vivid  impression  is  given  by  the  two  photographs 
(frontispiece)  taken  in  the  mine  by  Mr.  A.  Sopwith,  who  has 
kindly  allowed  their  reproduction  here.  The  upper  one  shows 
the  miner  holing  the  face,  with  a  cocker  sprag  on  his  right  hand. 
The  other  is  a  view  up  the  face,  which  is  holed  and  ready  to  be 
got  down,  the  miner  in  the  foreground  being  engaged  in  drilling  a 
shot-hole.  The  line  of  rails  and  cogging  are  clearly  shown. 
The  weight  naturally  comes  on  along  the  line  of  face,  and  when 
this  is  continuous,  as  in  Fig.  175,  it  is  sometimes  very  expensive 
to  maintain.  In  such  cases,  the  stalls  are  often  arranged  to  lead 
each  other  a  short  distance  (Fig.  179).  If  the  mine  is  level,  the 
stall  roads  will  be  brought  into  the  middle  of  each  wall,  but  with 
inclined  seams,  they  will  be  carried  nearer  the  deep  side,  as  this 
facilitates  the  removal  of  the  coal.  When  the  stalls  are  so  arranged 
the  weight  is  localised,  and  prevented  from  spreading  all  along  the 
face.  Several  disadvantages  are,  however,  introduced :  super- vision is  rendered  difficult,  undercutting  is  not  so  convenient,  one 
cutting  side  is  introduced,  and  machines  cannot  be  employed.  In 
addition,  the  pressure  on  the  sharp  corners  is  great  and  breaks  up 
the  coal  there,  producing  a  large  quantity  of  small. 
As  a  rule,  the  seam  itself  does  not  supply  sufficient  material  to 
fill  up  the  whole  width  across  the  face,  and  in  such  cases,  the  packs 
are  built  leaving  what  are  called  "  wastes  "  between.  In  seams liable  to  gob  fires,  the  packs  are  best  set  draught-board  style — i.e., first  a  waste  and  then  a  pack,  each  waste  being  successively  closed 
by  having  a  pack  built  in  front  of  it,  wastes  then  being  formed 
opposite  the  back  row  of  packs.  In  this  way,  although  the  gob  is 
not  stowed  solid,  yet  a  continuous  stopping  of  pack  material  is built  across  the  face. 
The  stowing  material  is  obtained,  not  only  from  the  stall  roads, 
but  also  from  the  main  roads.  As  the  gob  gets  compressed,  the 
roof  sinks  down,  and  the  roads  become  too  low  to  allow  the  pas- 
sage of  men  and  horses.  Recourse  has  to  be  made  to  what  is 
known  as  "  ripping,"  which  consists  in  shooting  down  the  roof stone  until  sufficient  height  is  obtained.  Part  of  this  is  always 
built  on  each  side  of  the  roads,  while  the  remainder  is  carried 
into  the  face,  and  used  there. 
The  direction  of  the  face  is  determined  by  several  conditions. 
In  some  districts,  divisional  planes  or  "cleat,"  exist  in  the  coal; they  usually  cross  each  other  at  right  angles,  but  one  set  is  always 
much  better  developed  than  the  other.  If  the  working  face  is 
parallel  to  the  main  cleat,  the  coal  is  said  to  be  "  on  the  face,"  if 
it  is  perpendicular  to  the  cleat  it  is  called  "on  the  end,"  while  if another  direction  is  followed,  and  the  face  advances  obliquely  at 
an  angle  of  45°,  it  is  said  to  be  "  half  on." The  main  object  of  working  coal  is  to  produce  the  greatest 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING.  159 
quantity  of  large  coal  in  the  best  condition,  and  this  quantity  and 
condition  are  materially  influenced  by  the  direction  of  the  face 
respecting  the  cleat.  In  a  longwall  face,  owing  to  the  compres- sion of  the  gob,  there  is  always  a  considerable  amount  of  weight 
on  the  coal  at  the  face ;  such  pressure,  indeed,  in  many  instances, 
gets  down  the  coal  without  the  aid  of  explosives. 
If  the  coal  is  worked  "  on  the  face,"  the  lines  of  fracture  pro- duced by  the  above-mentioned  force  coincide  with  the  lines  of 
cleat,  and  consequently  the  coal  readily  breaks.  If  the  coal  is  a 
good  strong  hard  variety,  the  labour  of  getting  it  is  reduced,  and 
the  quantity  of  large  coal  is  satisfactory ;  but  if,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  is  soft,  a  large  amount  of  small  coal  is  produced.  In  such  cases, 
it  is  far  better  that  the  coal  should  be  got  perpendicular  to  the 
cleat,  or  "  on  the  end." The  direction  of  the  face  is,  however,  influenced  by  another 
point,  namely,  that  of  the  inclination  of  the  seam,  which,  in  many 
cases,  determines  the  direction  irrespective  of  other  considerations. 
In  longwall  workings,  where  the  inclination  is  moderate,  the 
direction  of  the  face  is  generally  at  right  angles  to  the  dip,  as  all 
the  weight  is  then  thrown  back  on  to  the  gob,  the  packs  are  easily 
and  readily  made,  and  the  coal  descends  from  the  working  places 
by  the  influence  of  gravity.  Where  the  inclination  is  steep,  the 
face  will  be  carried  half  on,  that  is  to  say,  at  an  angle  of  45  °  with the  inclination. 
The  length  of  the  stalls,  or  the  distance  between  two  roads,  is 
governed  by  a  variety  of  circumstances  : 
(1)  If  the  coal  is  to  produce  its  best  yield  and  be  worked  econom- 
ically, it  is  advisable  that  the  face  should  move  forward  regularly 
every  day,  but  if  such  is  to  be  done,  the  distance  between  two  stall 
roads  must  not  be  too  long.     In  the  Midlands,  from  30  to  50  yds. 
has,  by  general  consent,  been  found  to  give  the  best  results. 
(2)  On  the  other  hand,  the  distance  between  the  stall  roads 
must  not  be  too  short.     The  more  these  roads  are  multiplied  the 
higher  is  the  expense  of  maintenance,  because  a  greater  length  has 
to  be  kept  open,  and  a  further  charge  for  the  larger  quantity  of 
ripping  required  is  also  incurred. 
(3)  The  coal  has  to  be  got  out  of  the  face  into  the  roads,  and 
unless  the  height  in  the  stalls  is  such  as  will  allow  tubs  to  be 
brought  in  and  loaded  there,  it  is  advisable  that  the  stall  roads 
should  be  as  near  together  as  possible. 
(4)  The  stall  roads  must  not  be  too  far  apart,  as  it  is  only 
possible  to  have  two  tubs  in  the  stall  at  the  same  time — i.e.,  one 
from  each  end.     For  a  large  out-put  it  is,  therefore,  necessary  to either  multiply  stalls  or  decrease  their  length. 
(5)  The  length  of  the  stalls  is  also  influenced  in  a  very  marked 
manner  by  the  custom  of  the  coalfield,  as  to  whether  the  men 
work  singly  or  in  sets.     In  the  Midlands  four  or  five  men  take  a 
stall,  and  consequently  its  length  is  somewhere  about  as  before 

--- Page Break ---
i6o TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
stated.  In  the  North  of  England  every  man  is  for  himself,  which 
necessitates  the  roads  being  close  together,  with  a  multiplicity  of 
working  faces  ;  indeed,  a  common  arrangement  is  that  shown  in 
Fig.  177,  which  can  scarcely  be  called  true  longwall  at  all.* Headways  are  turned  out  of  the  main  roads  at  intervals  of  30  yds., 
and  after  they  have  been  driven  10  yds.,  lifts  8  yds.  wide  are  taken 
right  and  left,  and  carried  15  yds.  up,  or  half  the  distance  between 
the  headways.  A  line  of  rails  is  laid  next  the  coal  side,  and  a  row 
of  chocks  on  the  other  side.  After  the  first  lifts  are  driven  up  a 
few  yards,  the  winning  places  are  widened  out  to  6  yds.,  and 
FIG.  177. 
driven  forward  this  width,  stone  packs  6  ft.  wide  being  built  on 
each  side,  leaving  a  6  ft.  road  between. 
By  general  consent  it  is  now  admitted  that  in  longwall  every 
piece  of  coal,  except  the  shaft  pillars,  should  be  taken  out.  At 
one  time  it  was  pretty  common  to  leave  pillars  of  coal  on  each  side 
of  the  main  roads,  which  were  supposed  to  reduce  the  cost  of 
repairs,  and  no  doubt  did  so  when  the  mines  were  shallow.  As 
they  got  deeper  it  was  found  that  such  pillars  offered  little 
protection,  unless  they  were  made  inordinately  large,  and  that 
better  results  were  obtained  by  taking  out  the  coal  altogether. 
The  method  of  working  that  has  been  considered — viz.,  working 
away  from  home,  and  carrying  the  roads  through  the  gob,  is  the 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  x.  192. 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING.  161 
one  followed  in  the  great  majority  of  cases ;  but  another  method, 
called  "  working  homewards,"  is  rarely  employed,  although  it  is often  recommended  as  a  cure  for  all  evils  relating  to  explosions. 
In  it  roads  are  driven  out  to  the  boundary,  the  coal  first  worked 
there,  and  gradually  brought  back  towards  the  shaft,  leaving  all 
the  gob,  water,  gas,  &c.,  behind.  It  is  scarcely  necessary  to  say 
that,  with  anything  like  a  large  royalty,  such  a  plan  would 
involve  the  outlay  of  an  enormous  sum  of  money,  as  all  the 
yardage  in  narrow  work  would  have  to  be  paid  for  practically 
before  any  coal  was  won.  The  output  of  the  colliery  would  be  a 
low  one  for  many  years,  and  the  interest  on  capital  outlay  would 
more  than  compensate  for  any  saving  resulting  from  the  smaller 
employment  of  timber  and  repairs.  In  small  isolated  cases,  under 
special  conditions  (such  as  an  exceptionally  bad  roof),  the  method 
of  working  homewards  is  applied  with  much  success. 
Double  Stall  Method.— In  the  South  Wales  coalfield  a  system 
FIG.  178. 
largely  employed  for  mining  steam  coal  is  that  known  as  the 
double  stall.  In  the  ordinary  system  of  opening,  the  two  main 
roads  will  be  set  away,  and  out  of  these  side-headings  in  pairs 
will  be  opened  out  to  the  rise,  taking  out  the  coal  between. 
From  these  cross-heads  double  stalls  are  driven  (Fig.  178). 
Two  headings  are  commenced  off  the  roads,  and,  after  pro- 
ceeding from  8  to  10  yds.,  are  joined,  and  continued  on  as  a 
double  stall,  usually  some  20  yds.  wide,  having  a  road  along  each 
side,  and  a  rib  of  coal  from  12  to  15  yds.  between  each  pair  of 
stalls.  The  stall  from  one  cross-heading  meets  with  the  opposite 
one  from  the  other  cross- heading,  and  as  soon  as  this  happens  the 
two  men,  who  were  working  at  the  face,  separate,  one  going  to  the 
right  and  the  other  to  the  left  hand,  each  working  back  half  the 
width  of  the  rib.  The  other  half  is  taken  out  by  the  adjoining 
stalls,  and  consequently  the  ground  is  quite  cleared. 
It  is  a  system  which  is  being  replaced  by  longwall  in  the  South 
Wales  district,  but  at  the  same  time,  one  which  is  replacing  pillar 
and  stall,  in  some  instances,  in  the  Northern  coalfield. 
L 

--- Page Break ---
162 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
Working  Steep  Seams. — Steep  seams  may  be  worked  to  the 
deep,  which  allows  an  easy  stowing  of  rubbish,  and  results  in  a 
saving  of  pit  work.  Sinking  shafts  and  cross-cutting  measures  is 
very  expensive,  and  only  a  small  area  is  won;  but  if  a  main 
engine  plane  is  driven  straight  down,  it  can  be  extended  at  any  time 
with  additional  engine  power.  It  has  been  proved  by  actual 
experience  that  from  8  to  10  per  cent,  more  round  coal  is  produced 
by  working  to  the  deep  than  working  to  the  rise,  which  is 
probably  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  the  weight  is  thrown  off 
the  face  in  working  to  the  deep.  It,  however,  possesses  dis- 
advantages if  water  be  present,  and  an  additional  one  in  that  the 
gradient  is  always  against  the  load.  In  rise  workings  gravity 
FIG.  179. 
brings  the  coal  down  to  the  levels,  where  it  can  be  collected  into 
sets  and  hauled  along  the  main  engine  plane,  but  additional 
labour  is  necessary  in  self-acting  planes. 
In  some  parts  of  the  Bristol  coalfield,*  where  the  measures  are 
steep,  the  area  is  sub-divided  into  a  series  of  panels,  and  every- 
thing worked  to  the  deep.  Each  bank  has  a  separate  engine  and 
engineman.  The  system  is  costly,  but  under  certain  conditions 
and  no  water,  is  safe  and  produces  coal  in  good  condition. 
Perhaps  the  best  way  is  to  win  the  coal  by  an  engine  plane 
driven  straight  to  the  deep,  and  as  this  is  in  advance  of  the  work- 
ings, all  the  water  is  collected  there  and  pumped  to  the  shaft. 
Levels,  right  and  left,  are  branched  off  at  intervals  at  about 
100  yds.  and  the  coal  worked  to  the  rise  (Fig.  179).  Self-acting 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xii.  363. 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING. 
163 
inclines  bring  the  coal  to  the  level,  which  is  then  taken  to  the 
engine  plane  and  hauled  to  the  pit  bottom. 
On  the  Continent,  where  the  seams  are  not  only  highly  inclined 
but  very  much  distorted  and  broken  up,  the  general  practice  is  to 
sink  a  vertical  shaft,  and  drive  cross  cuts  at  regular  distances 
FIG.  1 80. 
apart.  At  the  points  of  intersecting  the  seams,  levels  are  taken 
right  and  left.  These  are  driven  along  the  strike  of  the  bed,  and 
as  the  inclination  is  anything  but  a  regular  one,  are  usually  very crooked. 
In  the  thin,  very  highly  inclined  seams,  the  coal  between  the 
successive  levels  is  removed  by  the  method  known  as  "  gradins 
renverses,"  or  inverted  steps  (Fig.  180).  The  face  is  divided  into 
Fir?.  181. 
a,  series  of  steps,  and  advances  in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow, 
There  is  one  workman  to  each  step,  and  he  chips  away  the a. 
vertical  face  of  coal  before  him,  having  the  solid  coal  above  his 
head.  Shoots  through  the  gob  convey  the  coal  to  the  lower  level. 
The  method  of  timbering  will  be  understood  from  the  illustration. 

--- Page Break ---
164 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  system  of  working  is  in  every  respect  identical  with  that 
known  to  the  metal  miner  as  overhand  stoping. 
In  the  more  moderately  inclined  seams,  say  up  to  40°,  the 
method  called  "tailles  montantes,"  is  employed  (Fig.  181).  It  is a  system  of  pure  longwall.  A  number  of  stepped  faces,  about 
20  yds.  wide,  are  carried  up  about  4  or  5  yds.  in  advance  of  each 
other.  Each  stall  is  served  by  a  road  kept  through  the  gob,  bub 
these  are  cut  off  every  55  to  65  yds.  by  a  horizontal  cross-level. 
The  more  moderately  inclined  seams  are  worked  by  the 
system  called  "tailles  chassantes"  (Fig.  182).  A  road  is  carried up  from  one  level  to  the  other,  and  branch  roads  put  off  right 
and  left,  about  every  15  to  20  yds.,  measured  along  the  inclination 
of  the  seam,  taking  out  the  coal  for  a  distance  of  from  50  to 
100  yds.  on  each  side  of  the  main  incline,  the  face,  as  before,  pre- 
FIG.  182. 
senting  a  series  of  steps ;  at  intervals,  diagonal  roads  are  put  up 
through  the  gob,  cutting  off  the  level  roads  as  illustrated. 
.The  extra  cost  of  working  steep  seams  is  considerably  larger 
than  moderately  inclined  ones,  probably  as  much  as  one  half  more, 
in  some  instances  frequently  a  third. 
Working  Thick  Seams.— South  Staffordshire.— No  matter 
what  system  of  working  is  adopted,  the  invariable  rule  in  the  Ten- 
Yard  seam  is  to  drive  out  to  the  boundary  and  bring  back  the 
work,  leaving  the  gob  behind.  Two  main  gate-roads  proceed  along the  strike  of  the  seam,  serving  as  haulage  roads,  and  the  distance 
between  them  varies  from  33  to  45  yds.,  being  always  such,  that 
in  the  operation  of  getting  coal,  these  preliminary  drivages  will 
form  a  portion  of  the  chambers,  and,  as  it  is  called,  "  come  in  to 
work."  Where  a  large  area  is  to  be  won,  roads  are  branched  out right  and  left  of  the  main  roads,  and  coal  gotten  at  the  extremity 
of  these,  even  before  the  former  have  proceeded  much  past  them, 
the  only  precaution  to  be  adopted  being,  that  the  coal  so  worked 
should  be  a  sufficient  distance  from  the  shaft  not  to  affect  it  by 
any  subsidence.  While  this  portion  is  being  worked  out,  the  main 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS  OF  WORKING.  165 
roads  proceed  on  their  course,  and  branch  roads  are  again  sent 
out  at  suitable  distances,  and  when  they  reach  the  boundary, 
either  of  the  lease  or  of  the  district,  work  is  opened  as  before. 
The  methods  of  working  commonly  employed  may  be  divided 
into  (a)  square  work,  and  (b)  longwall,  the  whole  thickness  being 
removed  at  once.  True  longwall  is,  however,  unknown  in  the 
thick  seam.  It  might  preferably  be  defined  as  bord  and  pillar, 
the  large  blocks  being  pillars.  If  so,  the  system  of  working  is  the 
same  as  the  one  pursued  under  the  same  title  in  the  Northern 
coalfield ;  the  removal  of  the  pillars  being  similar  with  modifica- 
tions occasioned  by  the  greater  thickness.  The  coal  is  sometimes 
worked  in  two  divisions  by  a  modified  longwall  system,  but 
although  this  possesses  some  advantages,  yet  the  numerous  practi- 
cal drawbacks,  such  as  the  increased  quantity  of  small  coal  pro- 
duced, the  inferior  mineral  obtained  when  working  the  lower  slice, 
and  the  frequency  of  gob  fires,  have  resulted  in  its  general  abandon- 
ment, except  in  a  few  isolated  special  cases. 
(a)  Square  Work. — In  this  system  the  coal  is  worked  out  in  a 
series  of  rectangular  chambers,  separated  from  each  other  by  ribs 
of  coal,  internal  support  for  the  roof  being  afforded  by  a  series 
of  square  pillars  of  solid  coal.  The  old  method  of  opening  a 
side  of  work  was  to  drive  a  series  of  stalls  10  yds.  wide,  leaving 
10  yds.  of  coal  between  each,  and  then  a  second  set  of  10  yd.  stalls 
at  right  angles  to  the  first,  the  result  being  that  pillars  10  yds. 
square  were  formed.  This  operation  would  be  carried  out  in  the 
bottom  coal,  the  top  coal  being  got  by  the  method  described  a 
little  further  on.  Practically,  however,  opening  a  side  of  work  in 
this  way  is  a  thing  of  the  past.  To  do  it  with  any  success  requires 
an  exceedingly  strong  roof,  and  even  then  coal  is  not  got  out  so 
clear  as  it  should  be.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  advisable  to  drive 
the  stalls,  in  the  first  instance,  at  least  5  yds.  wide,  and  so  save the  cost  of  narrow  work. 
With  an  average  roof  a  convenient  size  for  the  openings  is 
10  yds.  wide,  and  for  the  pillars  8  yds.  square,  and  in  such  case 
the  ordinary  gate-roads  opening  out  a  district  will  be  driven, 
leaving  a  piece  of  coal  33  yds.  wide  between  them.  On  reaching 
the  boundary  of  the  district  the  two  gate-roads  will  be  connected 
by  a  cross-drivage  (a,  Fig.  183).  This  will  be  widened  out  by 
"  side-laning,"  which  consists  in  treating  the  side  of  the  road  as  a longwall  face,  and  holing  it  out  to  a  depth  of  10  yds.,  as  shown  at 
6.  While  this  is  being  done  a  second  cross-drivage,  c,  about  5 
yds.  wide,  will  be  carried  between  the  two  gate-roads,  cutting  off 
a  block  of  coal  8  yds.  wide.  The  side  gate-roads  will  then  be  side- 
laned  off  to  10  yds.  wide,  d  d,  and  a  stall,  e,  driven  through  the 
block  of  coal  remaining,  the  position  now  being  that  two  pillars 
8  yds.  square  are  surrounded  on  three  sides  by  openings  10  yds. 
wide,  and  on  the  fourth  side  by  an  opening  5  yds.  wide.  All 
this  has  been  carried  in  the  lower  six  or  seven  feet  of  coal. 

--- Page Break ---
i66 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
In  the  back  opening  the  top  coal  will  now  be  got  down  in 
sections,  slice  after  slice  being  removed  vertically.  The  whole 
distance  across  this  opening  is  not  attacked  at  once,  only  a  certain 
portion  of  its  length  being  worked  at  a  time.  The  top  coal  is 
got  down  by  cutting  vertical  grooves  up  through  the  over- 
lying measure  of  coal,  leaving  between  each  length  of  six  feet 
what  are  called  "spurns."  These  spurns  are  narrow  webs  of 
coal,  holed  through  in  the  upper  part.  "When  the  layer  that  is being  attacked  has  been  cut  through  in  this  manner  on  both 
sides,  the  spurns  are  reduced  by  the  aid  of  a  pick,  and  are 
then  finally  "  jobbed  "  (knocked)  out  with  a  "  pricker,"  which  is  a long  instrument  very  similar  to  a  boat-hook.  A  spurn  is  always  left at  the  face,  and  when  this  is  removed  the  whole  mass  falls,  and  is 
then  in  a  position  to  be  taken  away  by  the  loaders. 
While  this  is  going  on  a  third  cross-cut  will  be  driven  between 
FIGS.  183,  184  AND  185. 
the  two  main  gate-roads  at  a  distance  of  13  yds.  from  the  last  one 
(a,  Fig.  184).  The  opening  c  (Fig.  183)  is  then  widened  out  to 
10  yds.,  as  shown  at  b  (Fig.  184),  the  main  road  side-laned  off  as before,  c  c,  and  a  middle  thurling,  d,  10  yds.  wide,  driven  across, 
forming  two  more  pillars  8  yds.  square.  While  this  is  being  done 
in  the  bottom  coal,  the  top  coal  has  been  got  down  around  the  two 
pillars  shown  in  Fig.  183.  A  fourth  cross-drivage  is  made 
between  the  two  gate-roads  at  a  distance  of  13  yds.  from  the  last 
one,  and  the  pillars  there  cut  off,  as  already  explained,  so  that  at 
this  stage  of  the  operation  the  side  of  work  considered  will  have 
the  appearance  shown  in  Fig.  185 — viz.,  6  pillars  each  8  yds. 
square,  surrounded  by  a  series  of  openings  10  yds.  wide.  The  top 
coal  by  this  time  will  be  removed  all  over  the  side  of  work,  except 
on  the  three  sides  of  the  last  two  pillars,  and  will  gradually  be  got 
down  there  until  nothing  remains.  Fire-dams  will  then  be  put  in 
at  the  points,  a  a,  and  a  new  side  of  work  started,  cutting  off  a 
rib  of  coal  8  yds.  wide. 
(b)  Long  wall  in  One  Division. — Gate-roads  are  first  driven  out 
7 J  ft.  wide,  leaving  40  yds.  of  coal  between.     The  cross-holings  are 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING.  167 
45  yds.  in  the  clear,  so  that  the  commencement  of  each  district  is 
to  sub-divide  it  into  pillars  40  yds.  by  45  yds.,  such  dimensions allowing  of  all  the  roads  coming  into  work.  Upon  reaching  the 
boundary  of  the  district,  the  removal  of  the  coal  is  commenced  by 
widening  the  7^  ft.  gate-road  (a,  Fig. 
186)  to  8  yds.,  this  being  carried  on  all  FIGS.  lg6j  lg7  AND  lg8 across  the  face.     While  such  is  being         
done  a  narrow  stall,  b,  4  yds.  wide,  is 
driven  parallel  with  it,  cutting  off  a  rib 
of  coal  2 1  ft.  in  the  clear,  and  then  this 
rib  is  split  into  pillars  7  yds.  square,  by 
a  series  of  cross-drivages,  c  c  c,  each  4 
yds.  wide.  The  block  of  coal  between 
two  roads  is  thereby  divided  into  four 
pillars  and  three  openings.  This  work  \'<  a  a, 
is  carried  out  in  the  lower  6  ft.  of  coal,      II  JBiHl  rfliB  f 
and  while  it  is  being  done,  the  top  coal     *"  ' 
in  the  8  yds.  back  opening  is  got  down     *"|  ^•www"*1"^"^  JT* 
by  cutting  through  and  dropping  down 
the  successive  layers. 
The  removal  of  the  pillars  is  carried 
out  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  187.  Cogs 
of  timber  and  stone,  a  a,  are  built  in 
the  stalls  next  to  the  gate-road,  and  the 
central  stall  widened  from  4  to  8  yds., 
a  slice  being  taken  off  the  pillars  on  each 
side.  The  top  coal  is  got  down  in  the  opening  so  formed  in  the 
usual  manner.  The  cogs  are  then  removed,  and  placed  in  the 
position  shown  by  the  X.  The  remainder  of  the  pillars  are  then 
got  out,  together  with  a  portion  of  the  two  pillars  on  the  side  of 
the  original  gate-roads.  Fig.  188  now  shows  the  position  of 
affairs.  The  two  pillars  remaining  in  this  block,  together  with 
the  two  half  pillars  of  the  adjoining  blocks,  are  removed  in  a 
similar  manner,  cogs  being  built  at  c  for  this  purpose. 
During  the  whole  of  the  above  operations,  half  the  coal  produced 
goes  down  one  gate-road,  and  half  down  the  other,  as  shown  by 
the  arrows,  the  tubs  being  taken  straight  into  the  face.  While 
this  has  been  going  on,  another  row  of  7  yd.  pillars  and  4  yd. 
openings  have  been  cut  off  in  the  bottom  coal,  and  the  pillars 
removed  in  a  similar  manner.  This  operation  is  repeated,  until 
such  time  as  fire  breaks  out.  A  rib  is  then  cut  off,  dams  put  in, 
and  workings  again  opened  on  the  other  side  of  it. 
For  the  success  of  this  system  it  is  necessary  that  the  coal 
should  have  a  soft  roof,  and  one  that  comes  down  quietly  without 
much  weight.  In  some  parts  of  the  coal-field  there  is  a  very  hard 
roof,  which  will  bear  a  large  amount  of  weight  without  collapsing  ; 
however,in  the  words  of  the  collier, "  when  the  weight  does  comeson" nothing  can  stop  it.  Such  a  roof  is  very  unsuitable  for  this  system. 

--- Page Break ---
1 68  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
The  advantages  claimed  are  :  The  greater  first  yield  and  total clearance  of  coal. 
The  disadvantages  are :  The  large  amount  of  slack  produced 
(this  being  due  to  the  quantity  of  gunpowder  employed),  and  the 
smaller  total  yield  per  acre.  A  greater  quantity  is  obtained  per 
acre  than  by  the  first  clearance  in  the  square- work  system,  but, 
after  the  lapse  of  some  considerable  time,  the  ribs  and  pillars  left 
in  this  latter  method  of  working  are  cleared  out.  In  many  cases, 
the  remnants  of  the  thick  coal  are  worked  a  third  time,  thus 
obtaining  a  further  yield.  The  total  produce  of  winning  the 
broken  is  about  one-third  of  the  quantity  obtained  by  the  first 
working,  of  which  one-third  will  be  coal,  and  two-thirds  slack. 
The  expense  of  winning  the  broken  mine  is  somewhat  greater 
than  that  of  getting  the  solid  coal. 
In  every  system  of  thick  coal  mining,  dip  work  is  advantageous, 
as  the  falling  roof-stone  rolls  away  from  the  workmen. 
Pennsylvania. — The  system  of  working  the  Mammoth  Bed, 
which  sometimes  attains  a  thickness  of  60  ft.,  as  described  by 
Messrs.  H.  M.  Chance*  and  Franklin  Plattf  is  similar  to  the double  stall  method  of  South  Wales.  Either  from  the  bottom  of 
the  shaft  or  out  of  a  slope,  if  no  shaft  is  sunk,  a  main  road,  called 
a  "  gangway,"  is  branched  out  following  the  strike  of  the  seam. A  parallel  road  some  few  (10)  yards  away,  called  a  heading,  is 
driven  for  the  purpose  of  ventilation.  When  the  coal  is  quite  flat, 
the  stalls,  or,  as  they  are  called,  "  breasts,"  are  opened  at  right angles  to  the  gangway.  Where  the  dip  is  too  steep  to  allow  a 
waggon  to  be  used  in  the  breast,  if  so  driven,  it  is  opened  at  an 
angle  to  the  gangway,  thus  decreasing  the  inclination. 
Two  plans  of  opening  such  breasts  are  in  common  use.  In 
one,  the  breast  is  opened  at  the  gangway  to  its  full  width  of  from 
8  to  12  yds. ;  in  the  other,  an  opening  just  wide  enough  for  the 
waggon  is  driven  from  8  to  10  yds.,  and  the  breast  then  opened  to 
its  full  width.  The  inclination  of  the  bed  usually  limits  the 
length  of  the  breast  to  300,  400  or  500  ft.,  and  coal  lying  at  a  greater 
distance  from  the  gangway  is  mined  from  a  second  series  of 
breasts,  opened  from  a  second  gangway  driven  above  the  first  series. 
The  distance  to  which  the  gangway  is  driven  on  each  side  of 
the  slope,  or,  in  other  words,  the  lineal  distance  worked  from  a 
single  opening,  is  limited  by  the  cost  of  keeping  the  gangways 
open  and  the  cost  of  haulage.  If  the  coal  is  hard,  and  the  roof 
good,  it  is  often  cheaper  to  mine  coal  lying  two  or  three  miles 
from  the  slope  than  to  open  a  new  one,  but  when  the  coal  is  soft, 
and  the  roof  bad,  it  may  be  cheaper  to  open  a  new  slope  than  to 
attempt  to  keep  one  mile  or  less  gangway  open. 
*  Second  Geo.  Survey  of  Pennsylvania.     Keport  A.C.     Coal  Mining. t  Ibid.  Report  A  2.  Coal  Waste.  The  chapter  on  Mining  is  by  Mr. 
J  P.  Wetherill,  and  is  an  expansion  of  a  paper  originally  contributed  to 
Amer.  Inst.  M.  E.  v.  402. 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING. 
169 
FIG.  i 
The  breasts  are  not  worked  through  into  the  gangway  above, 
but  are  driven  up  to  within  5,  10,  or  15  yds.  of  it ;  the  pillar  thus 
left  is  called  a  "  chain  pillar."  When  the  breasts  are  worked  out, the  pillars  are  robbed  by  taking  off  from  each  as  thick  a  slice  as 
possible. 
In  very  steep  breasts  it  is  impossible  for  a  miner  to  keep  up  to 
the  working  face,  as  he  has  nothing  to  stand  upon,  and  it  is 
therefore  necessary  either  to leave  the  loose  coal  in  the 
breast  or  to  erect  some  arti- 
ficial support.  A  common 
method  of  opening  out  work in  such  cases  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  189.  The  breasts  are 
opened  by  driving  in  two shoots  for  a  distance  of  8  to 
10  yds.,  connecting  them  by 
a  cross  drivage,  and  then  car- 
rying the  working  forward  its 
full  width.  Four  strong  props, 
a,  are  set  just  above  the  pillar 
so  cut  off,  and  against  these, 
two  log  batteries  are  built, in  each  of  which  is  left  an 
opening,  say  4  ft.  square,  that 
will  permit  large  lumps  to 
pass  through  freely.  Roads 
FIG.  190. are  kept  up  each  side  of  the 
breast  by  the  use  of  inclined 
props,  called  "jugglers,"  which are  notched  into  the  floor  and 
sides,  and  have  2  in.  planking 
nailed  against  them  (Fig.  190). 
Thesurplus  coal  maybe  drawn 
out  at  the  bottom  through  the 
opening  in  the  battery,  but  is 
more  frequently  sent  down  the  man-ways ;  the  loose  coal  is  allowed to  remain  undisturbed  until  the  breast  is  driven  to  the  limit. 
Working  Seams  Lying  near  Together. — In  the  South  Staf- 
fordshire coalfield,  when  the  distance  between  two  seams  does  not 
exceed  6  feet,  the  general  practice  is  to  work  the  lower  one  first 
by  longwall,  carrying  gob  roads  in  the  ordinary  manner.  When  the 
boundary  is  reached  the  roads  are  ripped  down  into  the  upper 
seam,  which  is  then  taken  back  longwork  towards  the  shafts.  In 
many  cases  it  is  found  that  by  such  procedure  the  upper  seam  not 
only  makes  a  greater  percentage  of  large  coal  than  it  would  have 
done  if  it  had  been  cleared  off  first,  but  that  the  cost  of  produc- 
tion is  less,  as  the  undercutting  is  easier. 

--- Page Break ---
1 70  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
In  the  southern  part  of  the  Warwickshire  coalfield  all  the  seams 
come  together,  being  only  separated  by  a  small  thickness  of 
partings,  amounting  to  as  little  as  2  ft.  between  each  seam.  The 
method  of  working  has  been  described  by  Mr.  E.  F.  Melly  *  A 
pair  of  dip  roads  are  driven  in  the  lowest  of  the  seams  to  be 
worked  to  a  distance  of  not  less  than  500  or  600  yds.  A  cross- 
drift  is  then  cut  through  all  the  four  seams  (shown  by  dotted 
lines  in  Fig.  191),  and  they  are  each  opened  out  by  level  headings 
to  a  distance  of  from  150  to  200  yds.  on  each  side,  cross-cuts  at 
each  end,  and  generally  one  in  the  middle,  connecting  the  four 
seams  for  ventilation.  In  this  way,  eight  different  stalls,  or 
working  places,  are  at  once  made,  each  of  which  may  be  partly 
holed  every  day,  so  that  50  to  60  tons  should  be  delivered  to  the 
flat,  A  B,  from  each  one,  and  to  this  point  an  incline  rope, 
which  takes  from  15  to  20  tubs  at  a  time,  delivers  the  empty 
tubs. 
Each  face  follows  behind  the  other,  and  as  only  a  very  short 
FIG.  191. 
parting  exists  between  the  seams,  there  is  considerable  breakage, 
as  the  faces  cannot  possibly  proceed  at  a  greater  speed  than, 
say,  2  yds.  per  week,  and  as  the  distance  at  which  the  face  of 
one  seam  lies  behind  another  is  about  10  yds.,  the  coal  in  each 
case  has  only  five  or  six  weeks  in  which  to  settle  down  or 
deteriorate  before  being  worked. 
The  main  flat,  A  B,  is  made  to  last  a  long  time,  generally 
two  or  three  months,  and  the  faces  adjoining  the  road  are 
allowed  to  hang  back  a  little,  as  making  a  new  flat  is  rather  an 
expensive  business. 
Spontaneous  Combustion. — Some  seams  of  coal  are  particu- 
larly liable  to  spontaneous  combustion,  the  first  signs  of  which 
are  given  by  a  peculiar  smell,  termed  "fire  stink."  This  un- desirable state  of  affairs  is  produced  by  three  agencies  :  (a)  oxida- 
tion of  the  organic  constituents ;  (b)  iron  pyrites ;  (c)  pressure. 
The  first  is  undoubtedly  the  main  one,  but  is  assisted  materially 
by  the  other  two. 
(a)  Oxidation  of  the  Organic  Constituents. — Richter'sf  experi- ments satisfactorily  demonstrated  the  high  importance  of  this 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxxiii.  151;  and  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  x.  104. 
t  Metallurgy  (Fuel,  dec.},  Dr.  Percy,  1875,  p.  299. 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING.  171 
action,  and  it  may  be  looked  upon  as  being  the  most  effective 
of  the  three.  Coal  absorbs  oxygen,  one  part  combining  with  the 
carbon  and  hydrogen,  forming  carbonic  acid  and  water,  while 
the  other  enters  into  combination  with  the  coal,  and  propor- 
tionally increases  its  weight.  This  alone  would  fix  careful 
attention  on  this  action,  as  it  is  found  that,  before  combustion, 
coal  so  inclined  emits  large  quantities  of  carbonic  acid  gas. 
Heating  results  from  the  absorption  of  oxygen,  and  absorption 
is  favoured  by  heating,  moisture,  fine  division,  and  absence  of 
light ;  everything  thus  combines  to  favour  decomposition. 
(b)  Iron  Pyrites. — This  substance  on  decomposing  yields,  first, 
ferrous    sulphate,    and,   secondly,   ferric   sulphate;    the   former 
makes  its  appearance  in  the  form  of  colourless  fibres,  protruding 
here  and  there  from  the  face  of  the  coal,  while  the  latter  is  of  a 
brown  colour,  and  is  more  frequently  observed.     These  products 
may  suffer  further  decomposition,  sulphuric  acid  being  sometimes 
formed,  and  as  their  volume  exceeds  that  of  the  original  pyrites, 
disintegration  of  the  coal  is  effected,  together  with  a  small  heating 
in  close  proximity  to  each  lump  of  pyrites.     The  heat  generated 
is  quite  incapable  of  commencing  a  fire,  but  it  may  help,  in  a 
great   degree,  the   action   of   other   agents.     Ferric   sulphate  is 
reduced  to  ferrous  sulphate  by  contact  with  small  particles  of 
carbon,  and  hence  may  act  as  a  carrier  of  oxygen  to  the   organic constituents  of  the  coal. 
(c)  friction  from  Slipping?. — Pressure  from  the  roof  on  pillars cracks  them,  and   grinds  the  irregular   sides   of   these   fissures 
together,  thus  producing  heat  and  a  considerable  quantity  of  fine 
coal.     Now,  small  coal  does  not  absorb  more  oxygen  than  large 
coal,  but  it  does  so  more  rapidly,  and  the  temperature  rises  very 
quickly.     Really  solid  pillars  never  fire,  it  is  only  when  they  are 
being  crushed  that  combustion  occurs.     The  heat  acting  on  the 
small   coal   produced  by  the   grinding  action,  may  also  subject 
it   to   the   process   of   slow  distillation,  and  produce  a  quantity 
of  bituminous  matter,  which,  on  the  addition  of  further  heat, 
suddenly  bursts  into  flame. 
Development. — The  oxidation  of  iron  pyrites  cannot  be  looked 
upon  as  the  primary  agent  in  producing  combustion.  The  amount 
of  heat  that  would  be  given  out  by  the  oxidation  of  the 
quantity  of  sulphur  in  any  coal  can  be  easily  estimated,  and,  on 
calculation,  it  is  speedily  recognised  that  this  heat  could  not 
produce  the  results  attributed  to  it,  even  if  the  pyrites  existed  in 
isolated  nodules ;  another  argument  in  favour  of  this  is  the  very 
slow  nature  of  the  process;  the  heat  produced  is  consequently 
dissipated,  and  only  a  small  heating  of  the  particles  takes 
place. There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  decomposition  of  iron  pyrites 
is  eminently  favourable  to  spontaneous  combustion ;  owing  to  the 
disintegration  produced,  it  allows  the  coal  to  be  more  readily 

--- Page Break ---
1 72       TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
permeated  by  currents  of  oxygen,  and,  by  the  heating  produced — 
small  though  it  may  be — favours  the  action  of  such  currents. When  the  first  agent  is  considered,  every  circumstance  seems  to 
combine  to  render  the  action  successful.  Heating,  moisture,  and 
absence  of  light  are  all  conducive  to  the  oxidation  of  the  organic 
constituents  of  coal ;  it  is  in  seams  most  free  from  pyrites  that 
spontaneous  combustion  takes  place.  The  constitution  of  the 
coal  seems  to  be  of  great  importance ;  it  is  only  in  bituminous 
varieties  that  this  undesirable  state  of  things  is  found. 
Little  can  be  added  to  what  has  been  already  said  on  the  heat 
produced  by  friction ;  the  principal  argument  in  favour  of  this 
view  is  the  one  already  given — viz.,  if  fire  be  found  anywhere  it 
will  be  in  the  cracks  of  pillars.  No  doubt  this  is  perfectly  true  as 
regards  some  underground  fires,  but  spontaneous  combustion  is 
frequently  found  occurring  in  heaps  of  coal  above  ground,  and 
this  coal  may  contain  a  very  small  percentage  of  pyrites.  To 
account  for  the  fire  under  such  circumstances  is  impossible,  unless 
the  oxidation  theory  is  admitted;  and,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
author,  this  action,  in  the  majority  of  cases,  is  the  primary 
agent,  although  either  of  the  other  two  in  conjunction  may  greatly facilitate  it. 
Prevention. — This  can  only  be  done  by  the  loading  up  and removal  of  all  fine  slack  and  refuse.  A  vigorous  current  of  cool 
air  must  be  circulated  through  the  workings,  cooling  the  surface 
of  coal  over  which  it  sweeps.  The  practice  of  reducing  the 
quantity  of  air  passing  cannot  be  too  strongly  condemned  ;  such 
procedure  increases  the  risk  of  combustion,  because  sufficient  air 
is  always  left  for  oxidation,  and,  owing  to  the  small  volume,  the 
air  gets  heated  higher  than  the  surrounding  strata,  and  conse- 
quently aids,  instead  of  impedes,  the  risk. 
There  is  a  point  at  which  a  vigorous  current  of  air  is  inad- 
visable ;  if  combustion  has  broken  out  the  quantity  of  air  should 
be  reduced,  but  until  that  point  is  reached  a  diminution  in 
quantity  only  acts  detrimentally. 
In  longwall  workings,  close  and  effective  stowing  of  the  gob 
with  roof  stone  is  the  best  preventive ;  if  sufficient  material  is 
not  available  to  completely  fill  the  excavation,  the  packs  should 
take  the  form  of  square  cogs,  and  be  arranged  draught-board fashion.  In  thick  seams,  as  there  is  practically  neither  roof  nor 
sides  to  timber  to  in  the  workings,  the  only  method  of  dealing 
with  a  fire  is  to  isolate  it  by  damming  off  the  affected  area. 
If  a  fire  occurs  in  a  fast  road,  or  in  the  gob  in  a  thin  seam,  an 
attempt  should  always  be  made  to  dig  it  out.  As  an  additional 
safeguard,  lines  of  water  mains  are  often  laid  along  all  the  principal 
roads,  these  pipes  being  connected  to  the  water  behind  the  tubbing 
in  the  shaft.  High  pressure  water  is  invaluable  at  collieries  liable 
to  spontaneous  combustion  ;  if  a  fire  is  attacked  vigorously  at  its 
commencement  it  is  often  mastered,  but  when  it  attains  fair  pro- 

--- Page Break ---
METHODS   OF  WORKING.  173 
portions,  it  may  not  only  occasion  enormous  expense,  but  be  a 
source  of  continual  trouble  and  danger. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : — 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Remarks  on  a  Newcastle  Colliery,  J.  T.  Kobson,  i.  41  ; 
A  Comparison  between  the  Stoop  and  Room  and  LongwaU  Methods  of 
Working,  J.  M.  Ronaldson,  i.  101  ;  Details  of  LongwaU  Workings, 
J.  Hogg,  iii.  328  ;  Some  Notes  on  Subsidence  and  Draw,  J.  S.  Dixon, 
vii.  224  ;  LongwaU  Workings  in  the  Edge  Seams  at  Niddrie  Collieries , 
H.  Johnstone,  x.  204 ;  Working  Thick  Coal  Seam  by  LongwaU  at 
Balgonie,  Fife,  Kobert  McLaren,  xii.  65 ;  Notes  on  Shale  Mining  at 
Oakbank,  Alex.  Faulds,  xii.  130. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Methode  d1  exploitation  et  material  de  transport  des  mines 
des  Besseges,  J.  B.  Marsaut  (2e  Serie),  v.  265  ;  Note  sur  Sexploitation des  couches  de  houille  puissantes  et  ires  inclines  a,  Dombrowa  (Pologne), 
M.  Joukowsky  (2°  Serie),  v.  353  ;  Incendies  dans  les  houilleres: Procedes  employes  pour  les  prevener  et  les  tteindre,  M.  Nesterowki 
(2e  Serie),  vii.  839  ;  Note  sur  la  method e  d" exploitation  employee  a  "  La 
Balance  "  couche  des  Pelonies,  mines  d'Aubin,  M.  Bidache  (2*  Serie), vii.  351  ;  Etudes  sur  V alteration  et  la  combustion  spontanee  de  la 
houille  exposee  a  I'air,  Henri  Fayol  (2°  Serie),  viii.  487  and  621 ;  Note 
sur  les  incendies  dans  les  houilleres,  M.  Durand  (2°  Serie),  xii.  43  ; 
Note  sur  les  mouve'inents  de  terrain  provoques  par  V exploitation  des 
mines,  H.  Fayol  (2°  Serie),  xiv.  805. 
N.  E.  I. :  On  Mines  and  Mining  in  the  North  Staffordshire  Coalfield, 
J.  Hedley,  ii.  242  ;  The  effect  produced  upon  Beds  of  Coal  by  working 
away  the  over  or  underlying  Seams,  George  Elliott,  iv.  141  ;  The 
Working  of  Thin  Seams  of  Coal,  with  Observations  on  LongwaU  and 
Bord  and  Pillar  Work,  G.  C.  Green  well,  iv.  193  ;  On  the  Working 
and  Ventilation  of  Coal  Mines  in  the  counties  of  Northumberland  and 
Durham,  John  Wales,  vii.  9  ;  Observations  on  Pillar  Working  in  the 
Northumberland  and  Durham  Collieries,  S.  C.  Crone,  ix.  17  ;  On  the 
Mode  of  Working  the  Ten  Yard  Coal  of  South  Staffordshire,  H.  John- 
son, x.  183  ;  Oft  the  Method  of  Working  Coal  by  LongwaU,  George 
Fowler,  xix.  27  ;  Working  Coal  by  LongwaU  at  Annesley  Colliery, 
Nottingham,  Henry  Lewis,  xxi.  3  ;  Prevention  of  Spontaneous  Com- bustion of  Coal  at  Sea,  T.  W.  Bunning,  xxv.  107  ;  LongwaU  Workings 
at  East  Hetton  Colliery,  W.  O.  Wood,  xxv.  251  and  xxvi.  64  ;  Mining 
at  Saarbrucken,  A.  K.  Sawyer,  xxviii.  9 ;  Two  Systems  of  Working 
the  Main  Coal  at  Moira,  W.  S.  Gresley,  xxxii.  181  ;  Notes  on  tile 
Warwickshire  Coalfield,  E.  F.  Melly,  xxxiii.  151. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC.  :  The  Method  of  Working  "Hearing  Mines'1  at  Leycett, Staffordshire,  W.  J.  Grimshaw,  xiv.  155;  On  Sinking  of  Surface 
owing  to  the  Working  of  Coal,  Mines,  W.  J.  Grimshaw,  xiv.  455  ; 
LongwaU  System  of  Working  Coal,  W.  J.  Grimshaw  and  H.  Phillips, 
xv.  312,  330  and  341  ;  The  LongwaU  System  at  Sovereign  Pit,  West 
Leigh,  J.  Hilton,  xvi.  270  ;  Working  Coal  by  LongwaU,  W.  E.  Garforth, 
xviii.  302 , 
BRIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Modified  LongwaU  in  Yorkshire,  E.  F.  Melly, 
i.  306  ;  Coal  Mining  in  South  Wales,  Henry  Palmer,  iv.  59  ;  Coal 
Mining  in  the  North  of  France,  E.  F.  Melly,  v.  95  ;  LongwaU  in  South 
Wales,  A.  C.  Chapman,  v.  123  ;  Working  two  Seams  of  Coal  lying 
together,  J.  J.  Jordan,  vi.  53 ;  Cause  and  Prevention  of  Underground 
Fires,  T.  Bertram,  vi.  184 ;  Thick  Coal  of  South  Staffordshire,  H.  W. 
Hughes,  ix.  4  ;  Bord  and  PiUar  Working,  E.  A.  S.  Redmayne, 
ix.  101  ;  LongwaU  at  Seaton  Delaval,  G.  Hurst,  ix  168 ;  Bord  and 

--- Page Break ---
i74  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Pillar  Working  in  tJie  Northern  Coalfield,  H.  F.  Bulraan,  ix.  174  ; 
Double  Stall  Method  of  Working,  R.  A.  S.  Redmayne,  x.  29  ;  Stowing 
of  Goaves  with  Blast  Furnace  Slag,  C.  Z.  Banning,  x.  58  ;  Working 
two  Seams  of  Coal  lying  together,  E.  F.  Melly,  x.  104  ;  Coal  and  Coal 
Mining  in  Belgium,  W.  S.  Gresley,  x.  133  ;  Longwall  at  Celynen 
Colliery,  R.  R.  Lishman,  x.  184 ;  Longwall  Working  with  Special 
Reference  to  the  Arrangement  of  Labour,  H.  F.  Bulman,  x.  189  ;  Effect 
of  Coal  Working  on  tfte  Surface,  R.  W.  Dron,  xi.  122,  H.  F.  Bulman, 
xii.  34  and  130,  and  xiii.  102,  J.  A.  Longden,  xii.  127,  W.  S.  Gresley, 
xiii.  57 ;  A  Month's  Visit  to  the  North  Staffordshire  Coalfield,  A.  W. Grazebrook,  xiii.  127. 
AMEB.  INST.  M.E.  :  Pillars  of  Coal,  S.  H.  Daddow,  i.  170  ;  Longwall  System 
of  Mining,  J.  W.  Harden,  i.  300  ;  What  is  the  lest  System  of  Working 
Thick  Seams  ?  O.  J.  Heinrich,  ii.  105  ;  Fires  in  Mines,  their  Causes 
and  Means  of  Extinguishing  them,  R.  P.  Rothwell,  iv.  54  ;  An  Outline 
of  Anthracite  Mining  in  Schuylkill  County,  Pa.,  J.  P.  Wetherill, 
v.  402  ;  Coal  Mining  in  the  Connellsville  Coke  Region  of  Pennsylvania, 
J.  Fulton,  xiii.  330. 
SO.  WALES.  INST. :  The  Steep  Measures  of  South  Wales,  G.  Robson,  i.  234  ; 
The  Longwork  System,  R.  Bedlington,  ii.  125  ;  The  Working  of  Thin 
Seams  of  Coal,  H.  Cossham,  ii.  255  ;  On  the  large  proportion  of  Coal 
lost  in  Working,  A.  Bassett,  ii.  180  ;  The  Longwall  System,  T.  Hedley, 
iii.  148  ;  The  Pillar  and  Stall,  Double  Stall,  and  Longwall  Systems  of 
Working  Coal  in  South  Wales,  J.  Nay  smith,  iii.  185;  The  Longwall 
System  of  Working  Coal  as  practised  at  Letty  Shenking  Colliery, 
Aberdare,  J.  Williams,  iii.  232  ;  The  Comparative  Systems  of  Mining 
in  the  North  of  England  and  South  Wales,  G.  Brown,  v.  10  ;  The 
different  Methods  of  Working  the  South  Wales  Steam  Coal,  George 
Wilkinson,  xi.  129;  The  Working  of  Steep  Seams,  M.  G.  Johnson, 
xii.  363  ;  Working  Thin  Seams  in  the  Radstock  District,  J.  McMurtrie, xii.  424- 
.MID.  INST.  :  On  various  Methods  of  Working  Coal  in  Yorkshire,  J.  E. 
Mammat,  i.  25 ;  On  results  of  different  Methods  of  Getting  Coal,  R. 
Miller,  i.  37  ;  On  different  Methods  of  Working  Coal,  P.  Cooper,  i.  44  ; 
On  different  Methods  of  Working  Coal,  G.  Fowler,  i.  64 ;  On  Longwall 
and  its  Modifications,  C.  Hodgson,  ii.  124  ;  On  the  Method  of  Working 
the  Silkstone  Seam  at  Normanton,  with  some  remarks  on  the  Winning 
of  Deep  Coal,  W.  E.  Garforth,  viii.  29. 
U.  STAFF.  INST.  :  On  Cleavage  Planes,  and  their  influence  on  the  Economical 
Working  of  Coal,  G.  G.  Andre,  ii.  132  ;  Mining  in  North  Staffordshire, 
J.  Worgan,  vii.  58  and  C.  Gordon,  vii.  80 ;  On  Pit  Fires :  a  Con- 
sideration of  careful  Special  Packing  as  a  Preventive,  S.  Spruce, 
viii.  38  ;  Method  of  Working  Coal  at  Whitfield  Colliery,  H.  Wright, 
viii.  59 ;  The  Erection  of  Stoppings,  with  a  view  to  isolate  part  of  a 
Mine  on  Fire,  A.  R.  Sawyer,  viii.  100  ;  Gob  Fires  and  Pit  Stoppings, 
R.  Oswald,  viii.  198. 
ANN.  DES  MINES  :  Methodes  d*  exploitation  des  couches  de  houille  puissantes F.  Delafonde  (8e  Serie),  xix.  253. 
INST. :  A  General  Description  of  the  South  Staffordshire  Coalfield 
south  of  the  Bentley  Fault,  and  the  Methods  of  Working  the  Ten-yard 
or  Thick  Coal,  W.  F.  Clark  and  H.  W.  Hughes,  iii.  25  ;  The  Long- 
wall  Method  of  Working  as  applied  to  Seams  of  moderate  inclination  in 
North  Staffordshire,  E.  B.  Wain,  iv.  24  ;  The  Opening-out  and  Working 
of  the  Rearer  Coals  of  North  Staffordshire,  E.  Craig,  iv.  48. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER  VIII. 
HAULAGE. 
Primitive  Methods. — During  the  present  century  no  branch  of 
the  various  operations  in  coal  mining  has  improved  more  than  haul- 
age. In  the  olden  times,  carrying  the  mineral  on  the  shoulders  of 
men  or  women  was  the  method  universally  employed,  and  is  still 
carried  out  in  places  where  civilisation  is  imperfect.  The  practice 
is,  however,  adopted  in  one  instance  in  our  own  country,  where 
the  conditions  are  such  that  any  other  system  would  be  impractic- 
able— viz.,  the  ironstone  mines  of  the  Forest  of  Dean.  The 
earliest  improvement  consisted  in  the  introduction  of  sledges, 
which  are  now  employed  to  a  limited  extent,  for  hauling  coal  from 
the  working  places  in  thin  seams  to  the  roadways,  as  it  is 
impracticable  to  lay  a  line  of  tramway  along  the  face.  In  the 
thin  seams  of  the  Somersetshire  coalfield,  where  the  coal  is  14  to 
1 6  in.  thick,  roads  4  to  5  ft.  high  are  carried  up  to  the  face  at 
distances  of  about  40  yds.  apart,  and  along  these  tubs  are  brought. 
In  the  face  the  coal  is  loaded  on  to  an  ordinary  plank  about  1 2  in. 
broad,  and  6  ft.  long,  one  end  of  which  is  fastened  to  a  piece  of 
chain  having  a  hook  at  the  end  farthest  from  the  plank.  The 
chain  is  passed  between  a  boy's  legs  and  the  hook  connected  to  a ring  on  a  leather  belt  fastened  round  his  waist.  The  plank  is 
dragged  to  the  way-end,  and  its  load  placed  in  the  tub  waiting there. 
At  this  point,  it  may  be  stated,  that  it  is  a  great  advantage  to 
have  only  one  loading.  Every  time  coal  is  emptied  from  one  tub 
to  another,  breakage  results,  and,  in  addition,  it  costs  money  and labour. 
Kails. — At  the  present  time,  practically  all  the  rails  used  are 
of  the  flange  pattern  ;  bridge  and  angle  designs  having  been  aban- 
doned. The  sections  employed  have  gradually  got  heavier,  owing 
to  the  more  permanent  nature  of  the  ways,  and  the  desire  to  make 
haulage  work  as  smoothly  and  with  as  few  hindrances  as  possible. 
There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  wear  of  a  rail  is  largely  in- 
fluenced by  its  composition,  but  the  shape  of  the  section  and  dis- 
position of  metal  in  the  different  parts  is  of  greater  moment. 
Using  heavy  rails  does  not  necessarily  ensure  long  wear. 

--- Page Break ---
i76 TEXTBOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  designing  of  rail  sections  has  of  late  received  considerable 
attention,  especially  in  the  United  States,  and  several  papers  on 
the  subject  have  been  contributed  to  the  Amer.  Inst.  M.  E.* 
These  refer  to  the  heavier  sections  employed  on  railways,  but  are 
none  the  less  true,  if  applied  to  the  designs  in  use  in  collieries. 
The  chief  points  brought  out  are,  that  the  head  should  have  as 
broad  a  wearing  surface  as  possible,  and  should  not  be  too  deep. 
If  too  much  metal  is  in  the  head,  the  temperature  at  the  finish  of 
the  rolling  process  must  be  high,  which  produces  a  metal  loose  in 
structure  that  rapidly  wears  away  in  use.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
the  rail  is  finished  by  colder  rolling,  the  compactness  or  physical 
hardness  of  the  metal  is  increased.  It  is  evident  that  the  smaller 
the  section  the  deeper  will  the  effect  of  the  compression  of  the 
rolls  penetrate,  and  the  finer  will  be  the  grain  of  steel. 
The  American  Society  of  Civil  Engineers  appointed  a  Com- 
mittee to  draw  out  some  standard  rail  sections,  and  a  report  of 
the  progress  made,  has  recently  been  published.!  Ten  different 
sets  of  designs  were  prepared,  the  following  dimensions  averaging 
as  nearly  as  may  be  to  the  individual  sections,  if  any  wide  devia- 
tions which  appear  in  one  set  of  sections  only,  be  neglected  : 
Head,  12  in.  radius,  top  corner  in.  lower  corner  -  in.  vertical 
FIG.  192. 
i   *•-- 
n. 
sides,  percentage  of  metal  41.5  ;  Neck,  \  in.  top  and  bottom  fillet 
radii,  sides  either  straight  or  1  2  in.  radius  (there  appears  to  be  a 
diversity  of  opinion  on  this 
point),  percentage  of  metal 21.0  ;  JBase,  37.5  per  cent  of 
metal,  width  same  as  height 
of  rail,  sides  vertical,  with 
^  in.  top  and  bottom  corner radii,  angle  of  head  and  top 
of  base  alike,  13  degrees 
(about  4^  to  i).  The  width of  the  head  is  0.54  and  the 
depth  of  head  0.287  °f  the 
total  height  of  rail.  Fig.  192 
shows  a  section  of  rail  weigh- 
ing 30  Ibs.  to  the  yard,  de- signed on  these  lines,  which the  author  is  employing 
largely  on  main  roads  at  a 
colliery  where  the  total  load 
of  coal  and  tub  is  25  cwt. 
It   replaced   a   rail  weighing   39   Ibs.,   in   which,  however,  the 
arrangement  of  material  was  bad.    The  disposition  of  the  material, 
*  Certain  Conditions  in  Manufacture  of  Steel  Rails,  F.  A.  Delano,  xvi.  594  ; Steel  Bails  and  Specifications  for  Manufacture,  R.  W.  Hunt,  xvii.  226 
and  778  ;  A  System  of  Rail  Sections  in  Series,  P.  H.  Dudley,  xviii.  763. 
•f  Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.  li.  319,  March  14,  1891. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  177 
so  as  to  obtain  the  greatest  wear  with  the  least  weight,  is  of  the 
greatest  importance,  as  the  rail  account  at  large  collieries  is  quite 
enough  without  wasting  more  on  putting  steel  into  parts  where  it is  not  wanted. 
Mr.  P.  H.  Dudley*  prefers  to  place  the  line  of  the  radii  for  the sides  of  the  web  above  the  centre,  so  as  to  make  the  lower  portion 
of  the  web  thicker,  for  the  following  reasons  : — To  more  nearly 
equalise  the  heat  of  the  section  between  the  base  and  the  head, 
permitting  colder  rolling ;  to  lower  the  neutral  axis,  better  equal- ising the  strain  of  the  metal  between  the  base  and  the  head,  and 
checking  the  tendency  to  permanent  set ;  to  check  the  tendency 
of  the  web  to  bend  near  the  base  of  the  rail  under  heavy  traffic. 
The  following  specification  t  is  recommended  when  ordering 
from  manufacturers : — 
The  section  of  rail,  when  rolled,  shall  conform  to  the  template  furnished ; 
with  an  allowance  in  height  of  -£%  inch  under  and  ^V  inch  over  permitted. The  length  of  rail  shall  be   feet  ;  a  variation  in  length  of  one  quarter 
of  an  inch  longer  and  shorter  will  be  allowed. 
The  rails  must  be  free  from  all  mechanical  defects  and  flaws,  shall 
be  sawed  square  at  the  ends,  and  the  burrs  made  by  the  saws  carefully 
chipped  or  filed  off,  particularly  under  the  head  and  on  the  top  of  the flange. 
The  rails  shall  be  smooth  on  the  heads,  straight  in  all  directions,  and 
without  any  twist  or  kinks,  particular  attention  being  given  to  having  the 
ends  without  any  drop. 
The  steel  to  contain  as  high  a  percentage  of  carbon  as  the  makers  are 
willing  to  put  in. 
In  the  working  places  the  lightest  weight  possible  of  rails  should 
be  employed,  just  strong  enough  to  carry  the  loaded  tubs. 
Length  of  Rails. — In  the  workings,  the  usual  length  is  6  ft., or  sometimes  3  ft.  when  a  longer  length  is  inadmissible.  The 
length  should  be  such  that  the  weight  is  small,  in  order  that  the 
workmen  can  easily  move  them  about,  as  it  is  here  that  the 
greater  quantity  of  rails  are  lost  by  falls.  For  laying  the  main 
roads  no  purpose  is  served  by  short  rails,  and  for  such  situations, 
their  length  nearly  approximates  to  those  employed  on  surface 
railways. 
Gauge. — The  most  general  gauge  is  24  in.,  although  it  varies 
from  1 8  in.  to  30  in.  With  narrow  gauges  the  operation  of 
tipping  the  tubs  sideways  is  facilitated  ;  indeed,  the  objection  to 
a  narrow  gauge  is  the  ease  with  which  tubs  are  overturned. 
Methods  of  Laying  Bails. — Two  considerations  have  to  be 
borne  in  mind  here.  In  the  working  places,  especially  where  the 
longwall  system  is  used,  rails  are  being  frequently  taken  up  and 
relaid  in  another  position.  This  happens  every  time  the  face 
advances,  and  as  a  result,  the  way  is  not  put  down  with  much 
regard  to  evenness  of  road. 
*  Amer.  Inst.  M.  B.  xviii.  781.  f  Ibid.  xvii.  238. M 

--- Page Break ---
i78 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  193  AND  194. 
On  the  other  hand,  greater  care  is  taken  in  laying  the  rails  in  the 
main  road,  because  the  line  is  a  permanent  one,  and  must  be  kept  in 
good  condition,  in  order  that  resistances  to  traction  may  be  reduced 
to  a  minimum.  Care  is  taken  to  make  the  gradient  as  regular  as 
possible :  the  rails  are  kept  perfectly  straight,  or,  if  curves  are 
necessary,  they  should  be  bent  by  a  machine  similar  to  those  used 
on  railways.  At  many  large  collieries  an  experienced  platelayer 
is  employed,  who  superintends  the  laying  of  the  main  roads. 
In  laying  curves,  the  gauge  must  be  a  little  wider  than  on 
straight  lines. 
Fish-plating. — To  obtain  a  rigid  and  straight  joint  on  the 
main  lines,  side  strips  of  steel  called  "  fish-plates  "  are  fitted  on each  side  of  the  web  (a  a,  Fig.  193)  where 
the  rails  meet;  holes  are  punched  through 
the  web  and  through  each  fish-plate,  and 
bolts  placed  in  them  and  screwed  up  tight. 
To  allow  for  expansion,  the  holes  through 
the  rails  should  be  oval,  and  to  prevent 
the  bolts  turning  round  when  the  nuts 
are  being  screwed  up,  either  the  holes  in 
one  fish-plate  are  punched  square,  or  the bolts  made  oval  for  a  short  distance  under 
the  head,  and  then  round  afterwards,  or 
one  fish-plate  is  punched  with  holes  of 
a  pear-shaped  section  (Fig.  194),  and  the bolt  made  of  a  similar  form  just  under the  head.  The  remainder  of  the  bolt  is 
made  round,  and,  passing  through  the 
oval  hole  in  the  rail,  permits  the  latter 
to  move  a  short  distance. 
It  is  important   that  the  fish-plates should  be  rolled  to  correspond  with  the 
slope    of  the   head  and  top  of  the  base  of  the   rail   to   ensure 
perfect  fit. 
Sleepers. — To  give  the  road  a  solid  foundation  the  rails  are 
laid  on  transverse  supports  called  "  sleepers,"  which  may  either  be constructed  of  wood,  iron,  or  steel. 
Wood. — The  length,  breadth,  and  thickness  of  wooden  sleepers 
depend  on  the  gauge  of  the  road  and  the  weight  of  the  load ; 
from  3  in.  to  4  in.  deep  by  6  in.  broad  is  a  common  size.  The 
wood  employed  is  generally  Scotch  fir  or  larch ;  the  former  is 
cheapest  in  first  cost,  but  the  latter  has  greater  lasting  capacity. 
To  secure  the  rail  to  the  sleeper,  a  hole  is  generally  punched 
through  the  base,  and  a  flat-headed  nail  driven  through  it  into 
the  wood.  The  objection  to  this  is,  that  the  hole  weakens  the 
rail  to  a  very  great  extent,  and  breakages  often  result  at  the 
point  where  they  are  punched.  For  this  reason  a  hooked  nail 
called  a  "  dog "  is  preferred.  One  of  these  is  driven  on  each 
o o 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
179 
side  of  the  rail.  Here  a  point  must  be  noticed ;  the  hook  on 
the  dog  is  at  right  angles  to  the  other  part,  while  the  base  of 
the  rail  is  sloping.  As  a  result,  the  dog  must  not  be  driven 
vertically  downwards,  but  on  a  slope  (a,  Fig.  195),  in  order  to 
obtain  as  large  a  bearing  surface  as  possible  between  the  hook 
of  the  dog  and  the  base  of  the  rail. 
The  objection  to  dogs  is,  that  they  do  not  prevent  the  rail 
moving  longitudinally  like  a  nail  does  when  put  through  a 
punched  hole.  The  difficulty  is  completely  overcome  by  cutting  a 
small  notch  out  of  the  base  of  the  rail  where  the  sleepers  are  to  be 
fixed,  and  to  prevent  these  being  opposite  each  other  and 
weakening  the  rail,  those  on  one  side  of  the  base  lead  those  on 
the  other  side,  from  i  in.  to  ij  in.  (Fig.  196).  The  notch  is  not 
more  than  a  J  in.  deep,  and  is  taken  out  of  the  thin  edge  of  the 
FIG.  195. FIG.  196. 
FIG.  198. 
FIG.  197. 
(P 
base,  instead  of  through  the  thickest  part,  as  is  done  when  holes 
are  punched  for  nails. 
Iron. — Wrought-iron  sleepers  have  been  largely  employed. 
They  consist  of  a  flat  strip  bent  round  at  each  end,  to  grasp  the 
base  of  the  rail,  and  then  a  block  (a,  Fig.  197)  is  riveted  on  at 
such  a  distance  away  that  it  clutches  the  other  side  of  the  rail. 
Steel. — Of  late  years  the  use  of  light  steel  sleepers  has  become 
general.  In  one  form,  Colquhoun's  patent,  the  rails  are  fastened by  punching  two  holes  in  the  sleeper,  one  on  each  side  of  the  base 
of  the  rail.  A  steel  clasp,  or  chair,  is  passed  through  these  holes  ; 
the  inner  end  firmly  grasps  the  base  of  the  rail  (a,  Fig.  198),  and 
the  whole  is  secured  in  position  by  a  wooden  key,  £.  The  sleepers 
weigh  about  14  Ibs.  each,  and  as  they  are  not  very  thick,  are  made 
of  corrugated  steel  to  give  extra  strength.  Owing  to  the 

--- Page Break ---
i8o  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MININO. 
narrowness  of  the  clasp,  joints  cannot  be  made  on  the  sleepersy 
and  fish-plates  have  to  be  employed. 
Bagnall's  sleeper  is  made  extra  wide,  and  rail  joints  may  be made  on  it.  A  central  concave  corrugation  passes  from  end  to 
end,    and,     although     the 
FIG.  199.  sleeper  is  narrowed  in  the middle  to  reduce  weight, 
room  is  found  for  two  con- 
vex corrugations,  one  on each  side  of  the  central 
concave  corrugation  (Fig. 
199).  The  jaws,  or  chairs,  four  in  number,  thrown  up  for  the 
purpose  of  securing  the  rails,  are  strengthened  by  corrugations 
at  the  back ;  the  sides  and  end  of  the  sleeper  are  turned  down, 
thereby  preventing  lateral  displacement,  especially  on  curved lines. 
In  Hipkins's  sleeper,  the  edges  are  also  turned  down  all  the  way round,  but  the  top  is  flat.  Instead  of  providing  four  small  chairs 
at  each  end,  only  two  are  thrown  up,  but  they  are  large  ones, 
and  each  is  strengthened  by  corrugations. 
The  author  has  employed  both  Bagnall's  and  Hipkins's,  with satisfactory  results.  Being  made  of  steel,  they  are  very  light, 
weighing  only  about  12  Ibs.,  and  are  cheaper  and  stronger  than 
wrought-iron  ones. 
Switches. — At  junctions  of  roads,  switches  or  turn-outs  have 
to  be  employed.  For  permanent  situations  these  are  best  con- 
structed by  the  blacksmith  and  platelayer,  copying  those 
adopted  on  railways,  employing  guard  or  check  rails  on  all 
curved  portions  (see  Figs.  254-256). 
In  the  working  places,  and  for  temporary  purposes,  where  turn- 
outs are  moved  from  time  to  time,  a  more  rough  and  ready  arrange- 
ment is  required.  An  ordinary  form  consists  of  a  movable  rail about  6  ft.  long  (a  b,  Fig. 
FIG.  200.  200)  pi  voted  on  the  centre, b.  This  rail  can  either 
occupy  the  position,  a  b,  or 
that  shown  by  the  dotted 
line,  a'  b.  Where  the curve  is  not  a  sharp  one 
this  device  acts  admirably, 
but  in  quick  turns  it  is 
not  so  successful,  as  it 
throws  a  certain  length  of  straight  rail  where  there  should  be a  curve. 
The  more  general  practice  is  to  employ  castings  for  a  portion  of 
the  switches.  Middle  beds  and  wing  pieces  can  be  bought  of  any 
radius  and  to  any  gauge.  This  construction  is  very  handy,  easily 
laid  and  removed,  and  generally  applicable  under  any  conditions. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 181 
Plates. — To  readily  turn  tubs  about  at  junctions  where  the 
space  is  limited,  the  rails  are  made  to  terminate,  and  a  plate  of 
wrought  or  cast-iron  about  3  or  4  ft.  square  placed  in  the  gap. The  tub  can  readily  be  turned  about  in  any  direction,  but  to  guide 
it  into  its  proper  way,  with  a  minimum  of  trouble,  an  angle-iron 
guard  is  usually  secured  to  the  plate  by  means  of  set  pins,  and  the 
rails  leading  from  it  are  opened  out  for  a  short  distance  (Figs. 
201  and  202). 
The  continual  passage  of  the  flange  of  the  wheel  over  one  spot 
on  these  plates  gradually  wears  a  groove  in  them,  especially 
where  there  is  a  lot  of  traffic,  as  at  pit  bottoms,  where  they  are 
FIGS.   201   AND  202. FIGS.  203  AND  204. 
A- 
-B 
Section/  ens  A  B 
usually  employed.  To  remove  an  entire  plate  takes  considerable 
time,  and  when  removed,  the  iron  is  good  for  nothing  but  scrap. 
To  obviate  this,  loose  wearing  pieces  should  be  introduced. 
These  consist  of  two  wedge-shaped  plates  (a  a,  Figs.  203  and 
204),  level  with  the  top  of  the  plate,  which  is  recessed  to  receive 
them.  The  sides  of  the  recess  are  inclined  towards  each  other, 
so  that  the  wearing  pieces  are  in  a  manner  dove-tailed,  and  when 
slid  into  position  in  the  front  end,  are  secured  there  by  nails,  b  6, 
passing  through  them  and  the  main  plate.  When  worn  out  they 
can  be  replaced  in  two  minutes. 
Turn  Tables. — As  the  labour  of  turning  a  tub  on  plates  is 
considerable  owing  to  the  friction,  revolving  tables  are  substituted. 
These  consist  of  a  circular  frame  and  top  plate,  which,  in  its 
commonest  form,  runs  on  four  wheel  rollers. 
The  movement  with  the  above  is  comparatively  easy,  but  has 
been  rendered  still  more  so  by  the  employment  of  ball  bearings. 
In  Hudson's  turn-table,  a series  of  balls,  about  3  in.  FIG.  205. 
diam.,  are  arranged  in  an 
annular  groove  (6,  Fig.  205) 
and  on  this  the  top  plate,  c, 
rests,  being  pivoted  on  a 
pin,  a,  in  the  centre.  A 
very  simple  automatic  catch  locks  the  table  in  any  desired 

--- Page Break ---
182  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
position.  At  Lye  Cross  Pit,  South  Staffordshire,  the  line  of  rails 
riveted  on  the  table  top  are  packed  up  i  J  in.  at  the  end  to  receive 
the  waggons,  and  a  stop  is  attached  to  prevent  the  tubs  running 
over  it,  but  so  arranged  that  by  slight  pressure  on  a  foot  lever 
the  waggons  are  released.  A  standpost  and  lever  are  also  attached 
to  the  outer  edge  of  the  table,  the  lever  being  arranged  to  work 
the  catch  and  also  to  pull  the  table  round.  The  advantages  are, 
ease  of  turning,  the  automatic  catch,  and  the  fact  that  no  lubrica- 
tion is  required ;  unless  turntables  of  the  ordinary  wheel  roller 
type  are  well  greased,  the  labour  of  turning  the  tubs  on  them  is considerable. 
TUBS. — The  general  English  practice  is  to  make  the  body  rect- 
angular, and  construct  it  either  of  wood,  wrought-iron,  or  steel. 
This  body  rests  on  a  framework,  generally  of  wood — almost 
invariably  oak — or  sometimes  of  iron.  To  this  frame  are  attached 
the  pedestals  forming  the  bearings  for  the  axles  of  the  wheels. 
Bodies. — If  wood  is  employed  in  the  body  it  may  be  elm,  larch 
or  poplar.  The  latter  is  the  cheapest  and  considered  most  econo- 
mical, but  elm  seems  preferable,  as  its  wearing  capacity  is  great.  The 
advantages  of  wooden  tubs  are  their  low  first  cost  and  the  ease 
with  which  small  repairs  are  made ;  their  disadvantage  is  the  large 
amount  of  repairs  necessary.  They  are  usually  constructed  by 
cutting  the  side  and  end  boards  to  the  required  lengths,  putting 
an  angle-piece  of  sheet-iron  at  each  corner,  and  bolting  the  boards 
to  it.  The  bolts  should  have  half-round  heads  placed  on  the  out- side of  the  tub,  with  the  nuts  inside. 
Wrought-iron  and  steel  bodies  are  largely  employed  ;  with  the 
latter  metal  the  weight  is  less,  but  corrosion  is  far  more  rapid 
than  with  wrought-iron.  With  rectangular  tubs  the  body  is generally  made  of  three  plates,  two  forming  the  sides  and  ends  and 
the  other  the  bottom.  The  latter  should  always  be  made  slightly 
thicker  than  the  former,  as  it  has  to  stand  the  continual  blows 
given  by  material  thrown  into  the  tub.  The  connection  between 
the  bottom  and  sides  is  made  with  angle-iron,  which  should  have 
unequal  sides,  say  3  in.  by  2  in.,  the  longer  side  being  placed 
vertically.  By  doing  so,  corrosion  is  prevented  at  the  point  where 
the  angle-iron  ends.  A  small  quantity  of  fine  coal  collects  in 
the  corners,  gets  wet  and  rots  the  plate.  If  the  angle-iron  is  made so  high  that  this  small  accumulation  does  not  reach  above  it  the 
action  is  stopped. 
A  band  of  flat  strip  steel  runs  round  the  top  of  the  body,  and 
the  joint  should  always  be  made  at  one  of  the  ends,  never  at  the 
sides.  Rivets  sometimes  come  out,  and  the  end  of  the  band  pro- 
jects. If  the  joint  be  made  at  the  side,  serious  injury  may  be 
caused  to  horses  through  the  projecting  part  catching  them.  For 
the  same  reason,  rivets  should  have  snap  heads  placed  outside, and  be  knocked  clown  on  the  inside. 
The  usual  form  of  tub  employed  on  the  Continent  is  shown  in 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
183 
FIG.  206. 
It* 
fin 
ira 
Fig.  206.  The  advantage  of  this  special  shape,  is  that  the  carry- 
ing capacity  is  increased  without  increasing  the  height,  for,  by 
bending  in  the  sides  at  the  bottom, 
practically  a  distance  equal  to  half the  diameter  of  the  wheels  is  added 
to  the  body  of  the  tub,  and  yet  the 
total  height  above  the  rails  remains the  same.  With  the  Continental  thin 
seams  this  is  important,  although,  of 
course,  the  cost  of  manufacture  must 
be  considerably  more  than  an  ordi- 
nary rectangular-bodied  tub.  With this  construction  equilibrium  is  very 
stable,  as  the  centre  of  gravity  is  low. 
They  are  made  entirely  of  steel,  the 
only  wood  employed  being  the  buffers, 
which  are  situated  at  each  end,  and 
run  right  across  the  plate.  In 
general,  seven  plates  are  used  in 
the  manufacture,  two  on  each  side,  one  at  each  end,  and  one  in 
the  bottom.  The  side  plates  are  riveted  together,  and  the  end 
plates  secured  to  the  side  and  bottom  ones  by  angle  steel.  The 
frames  or  feet  are  channel  steel  (the  pedestals  lying  in  the  grooves), 
and  are  bolted  to  the  bottom  plate. 
Frames. — The  body  rests  on  a  frame,  either  of  wood  or  iron. 
The  former  consists  of  two  longitudinal  pieces  running  the  entire 
length,  and  either  connected  by  two  cross  baulks,  or  by  two  iron 
strips.  These  bearers  project  past  the  body  and  form  buffers, 
which  should  be  lined  up  with  the  object  of  preventing  those  on 
two  successive  tubs  getting  interlocked  when  passing  round 
curves,  as,  if  they  do,  derailment  inevitably  ensues.  The  buffer 
end  is  generally  widened  out  by  adding  on 
the  inside  two  pieces  of  wood  and  placing  a 
wrought-iron  hoop  around,  but  the  better 
practice  is  to  employ  a  cast  -steel  or  malleable 
cast-iron  shoe  (Fig.  207). 
A  still  better  plan  is  to  use  iron  frames  ; 
they  cost  a  little  more,  but  wear  better,  and 
are  a  little  lighter.  Here  the  buffers  are 
formed  by  a  strip  of  wood  running  across  the 
end  of  the  tub,  and  cross-buffering  never  occurs.  Figs.  208  and 209  show  a  tub  body  and  iron  framework  employed  at  Bell  End 
Pit,  South  Staffordshire. 
Height. — The  height  of  a  tub  is  governed  by  the  thickness  of 
a  seam,  but  they  should  not  be  too  deep,  or  the  breakage  of  coal 
is  great.  In  low  seams,  if  the  tub  be  decreased  in  height  and 
the  space  between  it  and  the  roof  increased,  there  is  neither  the 
incentive  nor  the  necessity  to  break  the  coals  to  get  them  into  the 
FIG.  207. 

--- Page Break ---
184 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
tub.  To  remove  the  necessity  altogether,  one  end  of  the  tub  is 
frequently  made  hinged,  or  loose,  when  the  coal  does  not  have  to 
be  lifted  over  the  top  at  all. 
Size. — The  only  advantage  of  large  tubs  (carrying  20  to  30 
cwt.)  is  that  the  useful  weight  (load)  is  large  compared  with  the 
weight  of  the  tub.  The  disadvantages  are,  they  are  awkward  to 
move  about,  requiring  large  horses  to  haul  them,  and  when  derailed, 
several  men  are  required  to  get  them  on  again.  The  latter  objec- 
tion can  be  removed  to  a  certain  extent  by  the  employment  of 
small  hydraulic  lifting  jacks,  which  can  be  readily  carried  about. 
The  best  size,  perhaps,  is  one  carrying  from  12  to  14  cwt.;  they 
are  easy  to  handle,  capable  of  being  put  on  the  rails  by  one  man, 
and  with  any  ordinary  gradient  can  be  moved  by  a  pony. 
Wheels  and  Axles. — Wheels  may  be  constructed  of  cast-iron, 
cast-steel,  or  forged  steel,  the  former  being  rarely  employed.*  Their 
FIGS.  208  AND  209. 
1 1 1 It 
ioooooooooj OOOOOOOOOv 
1            U         ! 1     ,      !      Jl        I 
TACT 
size  should  be  as  large  as  possible,  with  a  view  of  reducing  friction. 
The  height  of  the  roadways  governs  the  diameter  of  the  wheel  where 
rectangular-bodied  tubs  are  used,  but  by  adopting  the  Continental 
form  already  referred  to,  a  large  wheel  can  be  employed  in  a  thin 
An  improvement  of  considerable  value  has  been  the  introduction 
of  Eyre's  solid  forged  steel  wheels,  which  are  perfectly  weldless, bosses,  body,  and  rim,  being  forged  out  of  a  single  steel  bloom. 
For  the  same  strength  as  cast-steel  wheels  they  can  be  made  much 
lighter,  may  be  either  fast  or  loose  on  the  axle.  wTear  very  well, and  are  practically  unbreakable. 
At  the  present  time,  axles  are  made  of  ordinary  round  bar 
steel,  which  is  rolled  to  such  perfection  that  it  requires  no 
turning.  While  the  diameter  should  be  as  small  as  possible  to 
reduce  friction,  strength  is  of  far  more  importance.  Weak  axles are  a  constant  source  of  loss. 
*  This  remark  applies  to  ordinary  castings, used  at  many  collieries  with  marked  success. 
Chilled  cast-iron  wheels  are 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  185 
Two  entirely  different  methods  are  used  for  connecting  wheels 
and  axles.  In  one  case,  the  wheels  are  loose  and  turn  freely  on 
the  axle,  in  the  other,  they  are  firmly  fixed  on  the  axle,  and  both 
are  forced  to  revolve  in  the  same  direction  with  the  same  velocity. 
The  loose  wheel  and  axle  are  employed  on  vehicles  travelling  on 
ordinary  roads,  which  are  very  uneven  and  where  motion  takes 
place  in  anything  but  straight  lines,  and  as  the  roads  in  older 
collieries  nearly  approximated  to  these  conditions,  loose  wheels 
were  at  one  time  largely  employed  on  underground  railways. 
Their  advantage,  and  the  only  one  they  possess,  is  the  small 
resistance  they  offer  in  passing  round  curves.  Naturally  a  wheel 
on  the  outside  rail  passes  over  more  ground  than  one  on  the 
inside,  and  if  both  wheels  have  to  travel  at  the  same  velocity,  a 
grinding  action  between  them  and  the  rails  must  be  set  up. 
At  the  present  time,  colliery  roads  more  nearly  approximate  to 
surface  railways,  and  as  a  result,  wheels  fast  on  the  axles  are 
becoming  more  and  more  employed.  On  the  straight,  there  is  less 
friction  than  with  loose  wheels.  Their  great  advantage  is  their 
absolute  trueness  of  gauge.  Loose  wheels  are  kept  on  the  axles 
by  cotters,  and  washers  have  to  be  placed  against  these  to  prevent 
excessive  wear.  No  matter  how  carefully  they  are  looked  after 
the  gauge  is  scarcely  ever  correct,  and  the  cost  of  repairs  to  loose 
wheels,  if  cotters  and  washers  are  included,  is  much  greater  than with  fast  wheels. 
Drawbars. — Tabs  are  connected  together  through  drawbars, which  are  preferably  riveted  to  the  bottom  of  the  tub.  Indeed, 
the  connection  between  iron  and  iron  should  always,  wherever 
possible,  be  made  by  rivets ;  if  bolts  are  used,  sooner  or  later  they 
work  loose.  In  the  construction  of  tubs,  two  points  should  be 
observed  :  strong  drawbars  and  strong  axles.  Nothing  is  gained 
by  making  either  too  weak,  and  one  breakage  will  minimise  all 
the  gain  resulting  from  the  decreased  first  cost. 
Where  tubs  run  in  sets,  drawbars,  similar  to  those  used  on 
railway  waggons,  are  employed ;  the  coupling  chains  are  always 
attached,  and  ready  connection  can  be  made.  With  some  haulage 
clips,  links  on  drawbars  cannot  be  used ;  in  such  cases,  a  piece  of 
flat  steel  is  used  with  a  hole  through  each  end. 
Pedestals — Two  types  are  employed,  one  for  loose  wheels,  the other  for  fast  ones.  The 
general  design  of  the  for-  Fl«s.  210  AND  211. 
mer  is  shown  in  Figs.  210 
and  211.  With  fast  wheels, as  the  axle  cannot  be 
threaded  through  a  hole  in 
the  pedestal,  the  bottom  part 
of  the  casting  is  omitted, 
and  a  wrought-iron  guard-strap  passed  around.  To  allow  of  auto- 
matic lubrication  this  strap  is  bent  on  one  side  and  leaves  the 
under  part  of  the  axle  exposed  (Fig.  212). 

--- Page Break ---
i86 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
To  reduce  weight,  the  pedestals  are  best  made  of  steel,  and, 
as  will  be  noticed,  are  cored  out  wherever  possille. 
Lubrication. — A  great  deal  depends  on  efficient  lubrication, 
which  with  loose  wheels  is  nearly  impossible,  except  at  great 
cost.  With  them,  the  tub  has  to  be  turned  over  and  liquid  oil 
poured  into  the  bearings.  This  not  only  means  considerable 
labour  cost,  but  the  waste  of  oil  is  great. 
In  some  cases,  the  tubs  are  run  over  a  pit  full  of  oil,  and  in 
doing  so  depress  a  piston,  which  shoots  up  a  jet  of  oil  on  to  each 
bearing.  All  the  waste  drops  back  again. 
Numerous  forms  of  self-oiling  wheels  and  pedestals  have  been 
designed,  the  majority  of  which  have  have  been  described  by  Mr. 
Emerson  Bainbridge,*  but  none  of  them  are  satisfactory  in  practice. So  long  as  they  are  new  and  are  looked  after  by  the  officials,  good 
FIG.  212. FIG.  213. 
results  are  obtained,  but  the  rough  work  of  collieries  is  unsuited 
to  delicate  appliances. 
A  recent  improvement  of  the  Hardy  Pick  Co.  shows  greater 
promise.  The  top  part  of  the  pedestal  (a,  Fig.  213)  is  of  the 
ordinary  type,  but  underneath  a  steel  dish,  stamped  out  of  one 
sheet  of  metal,  is  fitted,  this  keeping  the  axle  in  position,  and  at 
the  same  time  preventing  any  dust  or  dirt  getting  into  the  bearing. 
This  steel  dish,  £>,  is  shaped  to  hold  a  piece  of  hair-felt,  which  is 
soaked  in  oil.  A  considerable  number  are  in  use  at  Nunnery 
Colliery,  and  it  is  stated  that  one  application  of  lubricant  every 
two  or  three  weeks  is  sufficient,  while  a  fresh  piece  of  felt  is 
required  about  every  five  weeks. 
For  wheels  fast  on  the  axles,  by  far  the  greater  number  of 
lubricators  consist  of  revolving  brushes,  or  star  discs,  which  supply 
a  small  quantity  of  oil  to  the  bearing  as  the  tubs  pass  by. 
Brushes  soon  wear  out,  and  for  such  reason  the  latter  arrange- 
ment is  preferable.  Two  wheels,  one  for  each  bearing,  are  placed 
in  a  semicircular  trough,  and  are  generally  arranged  both  to 
revolve  and  travel  forward  a  short  distance.  They  are  seated 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxv.  215  ;  xxvii.  8. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  187 
on  springs,  and    can   thus   accommodate    themselves  to  varying 
heights  of  the  axle. 
The  advantage  of  this  class  of  greasers  is  that  they  can  be  put 
down  anywhere,  and  are  quite  automatic.  In  a  long  haulage 
plane,  they  can  be  placed  at  intervals  where  necessary,  and 
considerably  reduce  both  the  power  required  and  the  cost  of lubrication. 
In  the  paper  before  referred  to,  Mr.  Bainbridge  states  that 
the  cost  of  greasing  tubs  at  eighteen  different  collieries,  varied 
from  0.075  to  0.8210?.  per  ton  raised.  Oil  gave  the  worst 
results,  no  doubt  owing  to  the  quantity  of  waste.  "With  grease and  corrugated  wheels,  the  cost  varied  from  0.075  *°  o^Spd. 
per  ton.  It  will  be  noticed  that  this  result  is  over  one  half- 
penny less  than  the  maximum,  and  shows  that  some  efficient 
method  is  very  desirable.  A  low  cost  may,  however,  mean  that 
the  tubs  are  badly  lubricated. 
Haulage  by  Horses. — Even  where  mechanical  haulage  is  used 
on  main  roads,  horses  have  to  be  employed  to  bring  the  produce 
from  the  working  places.     They  are  connected  to  the  tubs,  either 
through  the  medium  of  a  pair  of  shafts,  or  a  tail-chain  joined  to- 
a  stretch-bar,  to  which  two  side  traces  are  attached.     Each  of 
these  systems  has  its  advantages.     With  downhill  gradients  a 
horse  cannot  hold  back  the  load  when  connected  to  it  by  a  chain, 
and,  therefore,  to  prevent  the  tub  running  away  and  overtaking 
the  horse,  the  wheels  have  to  be  "  lockered,"  which  is  done  by pushing  a  short  bar  of  iron  through  the  spokes,  and  preventing 
the   wheels  turning.      This  is  very  objectionable,  especially  on 
undulating   gradients,  and   causes  considerable   wear   and  tear. 
Shafts  are  dangerous  to  horses,  as  they  catch  the  timber  and 
hamper    movement,    particularly    so   in   narrow    and    heavily- 
timbered  roads ;  they  also  prevent  the  horse  getting  out  of  the 
way  of  the  moving  train  of  tubs  if  the  weight  overpowers  the 
animal.     Up  hill  there  is  no  difference  between  chains  and  shafts. 
Feeding. — The  chief  item  of  cost  in  horse  haulage  is  that  due 
to   feeding,  as  not  only  may  an  excessive  charge  be  incurred, 
but  the  condition  of  the  animals  may  be  so  reduced  as  to  unfit 
them   for   performing  the  maximum   amount    of    work.      The 
problem  is  to  keep  them  in  the  best  condition  at  a  minimum  cost, 
which  can  easily  be  done  by  a   proper  selection  and  mixing  of 
food.     It  may  be  stated  that,  however  concentrated  nutritious 
elements  are  obtained,  small  quantities  never  afford  satisfaction, 
as  hunger  is  not  appeased  until  the  stomach  is  filled,  and,  there- 
fore, in  addition  to  foods  supplying  waste  of  tissue  (oats,  beans, 
&c.),  some  bulkier  body  has  to  be  given.     This  is  the  reason  why 
hay  and  straw  are  found  in  the  feed. 
Some  prefer  to  give  hay  in  its  uncut  state,  placing  it  in  a  rack 
where  the  horse  may  nibble  at  it  as  it  prefers,  whilst  others  cut  it 
up  with  straw  into  the  state  of  chaff  and  mix  it  with  hard  corn. 

--- Page Break ---
i88  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  latter  procedure  seems  best.  Horses  going  out  of  the 
workings  into  the  stable  are  hungry,  and  bolt  their  food.  If  the 
manger  contains  hard  corn  only,  this  being  small  in  bulk,  is 
rapidly  consumed,  passes  into  the  stomach  without  being  properly 
masticated,  and  the  animal  does  not  obtain  the  nourishment  it 
should  do.  Hay  is  then  attacked,  and,  being  in  its  natural  state, 
has  to  be  pulled  from  the  rack,  pieces  are  dropped  on  the  floor, 
trampled  under  foot  and  lost,  thereby  occasioning  waste.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  hay  and  straw  be  cut  up  and  mixed  with  the  hard 
corn,  the  manger  contains  an  increased  bulk  ;  then,  if  the  horse 
takes  its  food  voraciously,  the  first  pangs  of  hunger  are  soon 
appeased,  the  remainder  is  consumed  in  a  leisurely  manner,  and 
the  full  benefits  of  the  nutritious  matter  are  obtained.  In  addition, 
waste  is  minimised  with  properly  constructed  mangers. 
Regarded  from  the  standpoint  of  cost  compared  with  benefit, 
bran  is  quite  out  of  place  as  a  food.  Its  chief  use  is  as  an  appe- tiser, and  for  its  corrective  and  laxative  properties.  Sometimes  it 
is  given  as  a  mash  at  week  ends,  when  a  horse  has  to  stand  in  the 
stable  all  the  next  day,  while  others  mix  a  small  quantity  with 
each  feed.  As  it  seems  preferable  to  avoid  extremes  with  such 
regular  bodies  as  those  of  colliery  horses,  the  latter  course  is 
generally  adopted. 
Respecting  the  different  varieties  and  mixtures  of  hard  corn, 
every  one  interested  in  the  management  of  colliery  horses  should 
refer  to  a  paper  by  Mr.  C.  Hunting,*  in  which  the  constituents  of various  foods  are  fully  described,  and  the  whole  question  gone 
into.  It  was  long  considered  that  oats  alone  were  sufficient. 
Mr.  Hunting  points  out  that  this  is  correct  to  a  certain  extent,  as 
they  contain  more  proportionate  quantities  of  nutritious  elements, 
but  for  very  hard  work,  such  as  underground  horses  have  to  do, 
the  consumption  of  muscle  is  far  in  excess  of  the  waste  of  any 
other  tissue,  and  food  containing  a  heavy  proportion  of  nitro- 
genous or  flesh-forming  material  must  be  given.  If  the  choice 
were  limited  to  one  article,  oats  are  superior,  but  an  equal 
weight  of  a  proper  mixture  of  beans  and  maize  gives  better  results 
than  oats  alone ;  better  in  a  double  sense,  because  not  only  is  its 
flesh-forming  capacity  greater,  but  it  is  considerably  cheaper. Peas  are  often  used  as  a  substitute  for  beans,  as  they  run  a  little 
cheaper,  but  are  very  heating,  and  should  only  be  used  with  care. 
Mr.  Hunting  strongly  advocates  the  use  of  a  mixture  of  green 
food  during  a  short  time  in  the  summer,  but  some  discretion  is 
required  in  its  administration.  Under  no  circumstances  should  it 
be  sent  down  the  pit  when  soaked  with  rain.  It  should  not  be 
allowed  in-bye,  where  a  tired  horse  may  gorge  itself  when  waiting at  a  siding. 
A  horse's  stomach  is  relatively  small  compared  with  its  bulk, 
•  N.  E.  I',  xxxii.  6l. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  189 
so  that  it  cannot  retain  sufficient  food  to  maintain  the  animal  for 
long  intervals.  Mangers  should  therefore  be  established  at  the 
siding  to  which  the  horses  travel,  so  that  they  can  eat  small 
quantities  while  waiting  there. 
Cost  of  Feeding. — At  a  colliery  where  the  horses  are  on  an 
average  15  hands  high  and  80  in  number,  the  cost  of  feeding 
during  the  years  1885-1892  has  varied  from  a  maximum  of  12.255. 
per  horse  per  week  to  a  minimum  of  8.665.,  the  average  for  the 
whole  of  the  time  being  los.  2. 89 id.  Two  samples  of  feed  are 
given  below  : — J Cos 
Beans 
Maize 
Oats 
Bran 
Hay. 
Clover 
Straw 
an.,  Feb.  and  March,  1888. 
t  per  horse  per  week,  11.448. Lbs.  per  day. 2-577  ) 
2.922   \   7.135 1.636  J 
9.398 
13.762 1.426 1.767 
Jan.,  Feb.  and  March,  1890. Cost  per  horse  per  week,  9.758. Lbs.  per  day. 
3-204  ) 
2.615  Y  7.349 1-530  J 
8.239 
14.499 0.549 
5-759 
Total    .     33.488  Ibs.  per  day.       ...        36.395  Ibs.  per  day. 
Cost  and  Life  of  Horses. — Figures  relating  to  the  purchase  of 
horses  at  the  same  colliery  for  a  period  of  thirteen  years  give  the 
average  cost  of  each  one  as  £2 1  4$.  The  average  life  for  the 
same  period  practically  amounts  to  about  eight  years,  but  the 
percentage  of  deaths  from  accidents  to  horses  employed  being 
rather  large — 6.198 — during  the  last  six  years,  the  life  may 
better  be  taken  at  nine  years,  which  is  the  figure  given  by  Mr. 
Hunting  in  the  paper  already  referred  to,  where  the  life  of 
horses,  on  an  average  at  twelve  collieries,  amounted  to  that 
length  of  time.  Mr.  Hunting  gives  the  average  number  of 
deaths  in  each  year  for  twenty-one  years:  horses,  4. 70;  ponies, 
3.08  per  cent. 
Cost  of  Corn  Cutting  and  Ostlers. — At  the  colliery  under  notice, 
the  feeds  are  all  prepared  and  mixed  at  bank  by  two  men,  and  the 
cost  per  horse  per  week  equals  5.2960?.  Two  men  are  employed 
cleaning  and  attending  the  horses  down  the  pit,  both  on  the  day 
and  night  shifts,  and  during  the  daytime  one  of  the  men  goes 
round  the  different  parts  of  the  pit  and  sees  that  the  horses 
are  supplied  with  corn  and  water,  while  the  other  cleans  out 
stables,  &c.  The  cost  per  horse  per  week  is  is.  9.513^. 
Shoeing. — "With  pit  horses  rough  shoeing  is  done,  old  scrap iron  being  used  up  in  many  cases,  but  against  this  has  to  be  set 
the  trouble  and  time  the  blacksmith  is  put  to  in  going  into  the 
workings,  often  a  considerable  distance,  when  a  horse  casts  a  shoe* 
The  average  charge  may  be  taken  as  6d.  per  horse  per  week. 
In  two  most  interesting  papers  by  Mr.  J.  A.  Longden*  the 
*  /Shoeing  of  Pit  Horses,  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  iv.  104;  Ches.  Inst.ix.273. 

--- Page Break ---
i9o  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
following  directions  are  given:  Never  pare  the  sole  or  frog, 
.and  only  cut  enough  of  the  horn  off  at  the  lower  end  of  the  hoof 
to  allow 'the  shoe  to  bed  properly  ;  above  all,  reduce  the  weight  of the  shoe  to  the  lowest  possible  point,  and  do  not  employ  "calkins" on  either  heels  or  toes.  Three  nails  on  the  outside  and  two  on 
the  inside  are  quite  enough  for  the  fore-feet,  and  they  should 
never  be  placed  near  the  heels.  He  gives  the  cost  of  shoeing 
ponies  at  Clay  Cross  and  Black  well  Collieries,  Derbyshire,  at  3.23^. 
per  horse  per  week. 
Taking  the  average  of  many  years,  the  total  cost  incurred  for 
•each  horse  per  week  is  as  follows : 
Keep   
Eepairs  to  harness .         .        .        .        . 
Cutting  and  preparing  feed    .        . Ostlers   
Brushes  and  currycombs 
Veterinary  surgeon  and  medicine   . 
Shoeing   o 
9. 
IO 
o' 
o 
X 
O 
o 
d. 
2.891 
2.538 
5.296 
9-153 
0.228 
3-058 6.000 
13 
Arrangement  of  Stables. — Pure  water  and  plenty  of  ventilation 
essential.     The  stables  at  Lye  Cross  Pit  are  shown  in  Figs. 
FIGS.  214  AND  215. 
'///>t/j//t/.'f/i'////i'///!/////if/////f//'/i.!?,'!!/.i>f/i,rn/i. 
;XV^  * •'    •      -     ''J—^   "•^"  •.•--".--"  T.-    — •£?     .-r,^1  ».*_..  _— 
'  fit-.   $'.  o'   >a  i 
214  and  215.  Each  horse  has  a  stall  7  ft.  long  by  6  ft.  wide, 
and  a  corn  manger  made  with  specially  shaped  bricks,  4  ft.  long. 
A  water  bosh  is  placed  between  each  two  stalls,  and  a  2  in.  main- 
pipe  with  down  branch  pipes  delivers  water  to  each  bosh,  which 
has  a  hole  and  plug  in  the  bottom  to  allow  of  easy  emptying. 
The  stables  at  Eppleton  Pit  are  most  elaborate.  Each  pony 
stands  in  a  distinct  arch,  5  ft.  6  in.  wide  by  6  ft.  long,  the  brick- 
work between  each  stall  being  18  in.  thick.  A  passage  is  provided 
behind  the  mangers  with  communications  to  each  stall,  through 
which  the  horse's  food  is  introduced,  thereby  not  only  facilitating 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  191 
the  work,  but  removing  all  source  of  danger  to  the  attendant 
through  the  kicking  of  the  horses.  The  floors  are  laid  with  blocks 
cast  out  of  furnace  slag,  on  such  an  inclination  that  sock  readily 
drains  away,  a  gutter  for  this  purpose  being  placed  in  the  centre  of 
each  stall,  which  in  its  turn  passes  into  the  main  channel  running 
clown  into  the  central  arch,  out  of  which  the  stalls  branch  on 
either  side.  The  mangers  are  also  constructed  of  specially  shaped 
bricks.  Water  troughs  are  not  provided  in  each  stall,  but  a  large 
one  is  placed  in  the  main  arch  near  the  entrance.  The  ponies 
drink  on  their  entry  to,  and  exit  from  the  stables. 
Cost  of  Horse  Haulage. — Given  a  considerable  output  and  long life,  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  economy  of  mechanical  haulage, 
but  the  saving  is  not  so  apparent  if  limited  quantities  are  dealt 
with.  At  small  collieries,  the  capital  outlay  with  interest  and  up- 
keep is  so  large  and  the  quantity  dealt  with  so  small,  that  horse 
haulage  compares  most  favourably  with  mechanical  means,  espe- 
cially where  the  gradients  are  in  favour  of  the  load.  An  instance 
of  this  is  given  by  Mr.  H.  F.  Bulman*  where  the  cost  of  leading 4407  tons  an  average  distance  of  1870  yds.  was  4.7^.  per  ton,  or 
4.46?.  per  ton  per  mile. 
Upon  the  relationship  of  gradient  to  load  the  success  or  other- 
wise of  horse  haulage  entirely  depends.  On  level  roads,  or  where 
the  inclination  is  slightly  out-bye,  the  amount  of  useful  work  per- 
formed by  a  horse  is  in  strange  contrast  to  that  where  the  condi- 
tions are  reversed,  and  the  gradient  is  against  the  load.  Lye 
Cross  Pit  supplies  a  very  good  instance  of  this.  One  stage 
measures  125  yds.  long,  the  first  35  yds.  being  practically  level, 
the  remaining  90  rise  out-bye  at  an  inclination  of  i  in  12.  Two 
horses  are  employed  to  haul  coal  this  distance,  each  one  making 
42  journeys  a  day,  a  total  distance  travelled  of  5.96  miles.  The 
load  of  coals  taken  each  time  is  one  ton  ;  the  useful  effect  of  each 
horse  for  this  stage  is,  therefore,  one  ton  led  2.98  miles — i.e.,  half 
the  distance  travelled.  The  stage  immediately  succeeding  the 
foregoing  one  is  200  yds.  long,  and  practically  level.  One  horse 
serves  this  distance,  making  21  journeys  per  day,  travelling  4.77 
miles.  The  load  of  coal  is  4  tons,  so  that  the  useful  effect  is  4 
tons  led  2.38  miles,  or  9.52  tons  led  i  mile.  A  better  illustra- 
tion is  afforded  by  another  stage,  where  a  horse  makes  38  journeys 
per  day,  travels  4.75  miles,  the  load  of  each  full  set  being  7  tons. 
The  useful  effect  is  therefore  7  tons  led  2.37  miles,  or  16.59  tons 
led  i  mile.  At  this  pit,  when  the  average  distance  each  ton  was 
led  by  horses  was  480.3  yds.,  the  cost  per  ton  was  4.195^.,  equal 
to  a  cost  per  ton  per  mile  of  15.37^. ;  when  the  average  distance 
was  774.7  yds.  the  cost  per  ton  per  mile  was  11.250?. 
Not  only  is  the  useful  effect  reduced  by  adverse  gradients,  but 
the  lives  of  the  horses  are  considerably  shortened ;  in  a  short  space 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xi.  176. 

--- Page Break ---
i92  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
of  time  they  become  worthless,  and  the  cost  of  up-keep  is  a  serious 
matter.  A  little  consideration  will  explain  the  reason  why 
gradients  have  such  influence  in  haulage  on  rails,  far  more  so 
than  in  surface  work  with  ordinary  carts.  With  well  lubricated 
bearings  and  wheels  on  rails,  the  resistance  to  motion  is  slight,  and 
a  horse  easily  moves  heavy  loads  under  favourable  circumstances. 
Down-hill  gradients  are  therefore  favourable  to  a  good  perform- 
ance of  useful  effect,  but  where  the  inclination  is  against  the  load, 
the  small  resistance  is  against  large  weights  being  moved,  as  the 
load  has  a  greater  tendency  to  run  back  than  if  the  surface  on 
which  it  rolls  was  rough  like  an  ordinary  road.  In  the  former 
case,  the  friction  is  so  small  that  the  horse  has  practically  to 
contend  with  the  full  weight  of  the  load  divided  by  the  gradient, 
while  in  the  latter,  the  greater  friction  reduces  the  strain. 
Mechanical  haulage  therefore  becomes  a  necessity  with  heavy 
gradients,  as  even  where  these  are  in  favour  of  the  load,  the 
strain  of  returning  the  empties  becomes  so  great  that  the  advan- 
tage gained  with  the  load  is  nullified. 
SELF-ACTING  INCLINES.— With  mines  having  the  neces- 
sary inclination,  gravity  supplies  the  motive  power  for  the  haulage, 
and  self-acting  inclines,  or  jig  brows,  are  employed,  the  principle 
of  which  is  that  the  loaded  tubs  running  down-hill  will  haul 
the  empty  tubs  up.  A  certain  gradient  is  necessary,  as  the 
weight  of  the  full  set  has  to  overcome  the  friction  of  the  two  sets, 
the  drum  and  rollers,  plus  the  weight  of  the  empty  set  and  rope ; 
the  latter  is  variable  and  greatest  at  the  start.  Roughly  speaking, 
a  gradient  of  i  in  36  is  required  with  wheels  and  axles  of  ordinary 
size ;  but  the  length  of  the  road  plays  an  important  part,  owing 
to  the  greater  weight  of  the  rope,  therefore,  as  the  plane  gets 
longer,  the  gradient  must  also  increase,  to  overcome  the  increased 
resistance.  A  flat  part  has  to  be  provided,  both  at  the  top  and 
the  bottom,  to  make  up  the  sets,  and  it  is  advisable  that  the 
gradient  at  the  top  of  the  incline  should  be  greater  than  it  is  at 
the  bottom,  as  the  set  then  easily  gets  into  motion. 
Arrangement  of  Rails. — Nothing  gives  better  results  than 
two  lines  of  rails  completely  from  the  top  to  the  bottom,  which  is 
only  possible  when  the  roof  is  sufficiently  good  to  allow  of  a  double 
way  being  kept.  If  it  will  not  stand  such  a  width,  three  rails 
are  carried  up,  with  four  in  the  middle  where  the  tubs  pass  each 
other.  These  are  the  common  arrangements,  but  rails  may  be 
arranged  in  many  different  ways. 
Where  the  roof  is  so  bad  that  a  double  road  cannot  be  made, 
even  in  the  middle,  two  lines  of  rails  are  used,  one  inside  the 
other.  The  tubs  run  on  the  outer  line,  and  haul  up  a  dead  weight 
travelling  on  the  inner  gauge.  At  the  point  of  meeting,  the  rails 
of  the  outer  gauge  are  raised  up  and  those  of  the  inner  depressed,, 
and  the  dead  weight  passes  underneath  the  tubs.  The  weight  of 
the  balance  must  be  less  than  that  of  the  full  set,  but  more  than 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
193 
FIG.  216. 
that  of  the  empty  one.  The  working  capacity  of  such  an  arrange- ment is  one-half  that  of  a  road  laid  with  a  double  line  of  rails. 
For  inclines  where  intermediate  landings  are  worked,  this  arrange- 
ment gives  excellent  results,  and  in  many  cases,  under  such  con- ditions, as  much  mineral  can  be  jigged  down  with  this  system  as 
by  any  other. 
In  stall  roads  going  into  the  working  place,  the  common  practice 
in  steep  mines  is  to  make  a  full  set  going  down  one  road  haul 
up  the  empty  set  in  the  next  adjoining  roadway.  Where  the 
inclination  is  great  (above  35°)  the  tubs  have  to  be  placed  on special  carriages  to  throw  the  coal  into  a  horizontal  position.  If 
this  were  not  done  the  load  would  be  emptied  as  it  passed  down the  incline. 
Blocks  or  Stops. — Arrangements  are  always  made  at  the 
top  of  inclines  to  prevent  the  tubs 
prematurely  running  down  before 
the  set  is  made  up.  The  common 
form  of  blocks  is  shown  in  Fig. 
216,  but  where  the  inclination  is 
steep,  the  top  part,  a,  is  stretched across  the  whole  width  of  the 
rails,  and  the  two  wheels  of  the 
tub  rest  against  it.  If  the  sets 
are  always  jigged  on  the  same side  a  balance  block  can  be 
used  (see  Fig.  237).  Mr.  A.  R. 
Sawyer  *  describes  a  good  block arrangement  which  is  opened  and 
shut  by  hand  at  a  distance,  the 
working  of  which  will  be  easily 
understood  from  Figs.  217  and 218. 
Drums   and  Pulleys.  —  In       5J 
permanent  situations,  and  on  long  j| 
inclines,  drums  similar  to  those        =J5 on  winding  engines  are  fastened  jj 
on  a  shaft,  the  empty  rope  coil-  ° ing  on  one  and  the  full  rope  on 
the  other.  A  brake  has  to  be  provided  to  retard  the  descent,  and 
to  keep  the  velocity  from  getting  too  great.  These  drums  occupy 
a  considerable  amount  of  room,  and  in  confined  situations  pulleys 
become  necessary.  These  may  either  be  fixed  on  a  vertical  or 
horizontal  axis,  and  may  be  made  for  working  with  a  chain  or 
rope.  Chains  are  very  convenient ;  they  can  be  easily  added  to,  if 
the  plane  lengthens,  or  are  shortened  with  equal  ease.  They  can 
also  be  transported  much  easier  than  wire  ropes,  but  they  are 
r 
*  Miscellaneous  Acridities  in  Mines,  1889,  p.  153. 

--- Page Break ---
i94  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
heavier,  more  liable  to  breakage,  and  require  a  steeper  incli- 
nation, owing  to  the  greater  friction.  If  ropes  are  employed 
either  a  clip,  or  a  C  pulley  with  several  coils  on  it  (see  p.  207) 
may  be  used,  while  for  chains,  the  throat  of  the  pulley  may  either 
be  fitted  with  Y  grips  or  feet,  and  in  the  latter  case  several  turns 
are  passed  round  it.     For 
FIG.  219.  short   inclines,  with   only one  or  two  tubs  jigged  at 
a  time,  small  hand  jig- wheels  are  employed  (Fig. 
2 1 9),  which  can  be  readily moved  about  from  place  to 
place,  and  are  usually  se- cured to  a  prop. 
Brakes. — All-round  ones 
are  preferable  on  small 
wheels,  the  brake  -  ring 
being  of  cast-iron,  and  the 
strap  of  wrought-iron.  Some  material,  such  as  a  wooden  curb, 
should  be  placed  between ;  in  the  smaller  wheels,  a  lining  of  hemp 
rope,  attached  to  the  brake-strap  by  bolts,  gives  excellent  results, 
but  care  should  be  taken  to  counter-sink  all  the  pin-heads. 
Mr.  Malissard  Taza  describes  an  ingenious  fan-brake  on  a  self- 
acting  incline  plane  at  Bilbao,*  which  consists  of  four  radial 
blades,  about  6jft.  wide  by  i6j  ft.  diam.,  two  band-brakes  being 
also  provided  for  safety.  The  fan-brake  works  slowly  at  first  as 
the  tubs  more  away,  gradually  increasing  in  speed  until  the 
journey  attains  the  rate  of  loft,  per  sec.,  after  which  motion  is 
uniform,  owing  to  the  resistance  of  the  air.  The  advantages  are  : 
absence  of  continuous  friction  of  brake -strap,  with  wear  and  tear, 
uniform  velocity,  speed  capable  of  any  regulation  and  variation 
by  addition  to,  or  removal  from,  the  arms  of  the  fan,  and  less 
attention  while  the  journey  is  running,  none  being  required 
except  on  the  arrival  of  the  waggons  at  the  top  of  the  incline. 
Rollers. — In  every  system  of  haulage  small  rollers  should  be 
placed  at  intervals,  to  keep  the  ropes  and  chains  from  dragging 
on  the  ground,  as,  if  they  do,  not  only  is  the  resistance  to  be  over- 
come much  greater,  but  wear  is  rapid.  The  rollers  employed  are 
small  cylinders  on  a  spindle,  and  may  be  either  constructed  of 
cast-iron,  steel,  or  wood.  Cast-iron  ones  possess  no  advantages, and  rapidly  wear  out.  For  surface  and  exposed  situations,  wood 
is  not  to  be  recommended,  as  it  cracks  and  splits  under  climatic 
influences.  Underground,  the  same  objection  does  not  hold  good, 
and  wood  is  often  employed,  it  being  contended  that  it  is  better 
that  the  rope  should  wear  the  roller  than  the  roller  wear  the  rope 't the  latter  may  happen  if  steel  of  a  hard  nature  is  employed, 
*  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (2°  Serie),  xiv.  1065. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
195 
Junctions. — In  steep  mines,  where  intermediate  hanging-on 
places  are  worked,  the  continuity  of  the  rails  has  to  be  inter- 
rupted at  such  places.  The  branch  roads  pass  away  level,  or 
nearly  so,  and  at  the  joining  place  an  iron  plate  is  laid,  which  is 
bridged  over  by  rails  that  can  be  lifted  in  and  out  of  position 
(Fig.  220). 
The  alteration  in  length  of  the  jigging-rope  is  either  obtained 
by  adding  on  a  piece  of  chain  provided  with  large  links  opposite 
FIG.  220. FIGS.    221    AND   222. 
each  intermediate  landing,*  or  by  employing  a  number  of  short 
pieces  of  chain,  which  lie  at  the  side  of  the  jig  when  not  in  use. 
Each  length  is  provided  with  one  piece,  which  can  be  joined 
either  by  shackle  connection  or  by  a  specially  shaped  pair  of 
links  f  (Figs.  221  and  222). 
Transmission  of  Power. — One  of  the  first  questions  to  be 
considered  in  mechanical  haulage  is  that  of  the  position  of  the 
engines. 
(ist)  They  may  be  placed  underground,  and  the  steam  gener- ated there  also. 
The  objections  to  placing  boilers  underground  are  the  great 
danger  of  the  fires  igniting  tire-damp,  or  the  coal  in  proximity  to 
the  boilers  or  flues,  and  the  insecure  foundation  afforded  by  the 
general  run  of  strata. 
(2nd)  The  engines  may  be  placed  underground,  and  steam 
generated  at  the  surface  and  conveyed  down  the  shaft  to  them. 
This  practice  has,  in  some  few  instances,  caused  fires,  by  the 
small  coal  which  accumulates  on  the  pipes  becoming  so  heated  as 
to  burst  into  flame.  A  loss,  which  increases  with  the  depth  and 
the  presence  of  water  in  the  shaft,  results  by  the  radiation  of  heat 
from  the  steam-pipes,  however  well  they  may  be  coated  with 
non-conducting  composition.  In  some  instances  the  loss  may 
reach  from  8  Ibs.  to  1 5  Ibs.  of  steam  pressure,  while  better  results 
*  Miscellaneous  Accidents  in  Mines,  A.  R.  Sawyer,  1889,  p.  162. t  Min.  Inst.  Scot.  ii.  122. 

--- Page Break ---
i96 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
show  not  more  than  4  Ibs.  or  5  Ibs.  Putting  aside  the  inconve- 
nience of  using  steam,  if  it  can  be  cheaply  generated  —  as,  for 
instance,  by  the  waste  heat  from  coke  ovens  —  a  good  performance 
of  useful  effect  is  given. 
At  Broomhill  Colliery,  Northumberland,*  steam  is  conveyed 
to  a  pump  1414  yds.  from  the  boilers  at  bank.  All  pipes  are 
coated  with  a  non-conducting  composition;  the  loss  by  condensa- 
tion is  21.06  per  cent.  The  pressure  at  the  pump  is  13  Ibs.  below 
that  in  the  boiler  at  bank. 
Mr.  Baure  f  states  that  experiments  at  Bezenet  Colliery,  France, 
with  an  engine  situated  underground,  1200  ft.  away  from  the 
boilers,  with  pipes  about  3^  in.  diam.,  showed  a  loss  of  i8j  per  cent. 
Two  receivers  were  placed  in  the  length  of  pipes,  one  at  the  top 
of  the  pit  (206  ft.  from  the  engine),  and  the  other  at  a  further- distance  of  984  ft. 
In  carrying  steam  large  distances,  the  pipes  should  be  covered 
with  a  non-conducting  composition,  and  rest  on  sup- 
ports fitted  with  a  roller  (Fig.  223),  so  that  they  can 
move  easily  to  and  fro.  Stuffing-box  expansion  joints 
should  be  used  throughout,  at  intervals  of  from  40 
to  50  yds.  The  secret  of  the  success  of  transmission, 
seems  to  be  due  to  providing  two  fixed  points  in 
each  length  of  pipe,  and  forcing  expansion  to  take 
place  equally  in  both  directions.  In  horizontal  lengths, 
the  pipes  are  clamped  half-way  between  two  expan- 
sion joints,  but  where  they  are  on  an  incline,  the 
fixed  points  are  placed  nearer  the  lower  end.  In 
addition,  steam  should  never  be  turned  out  of  the  pipes.  With 
these  precautions  little  difficulty  is  experienced  from  expansion, 
but  the  greatest  nuisance  is  in 
FIG.  223. 
getting  rid  of  the  condensed 
water,  for  although  steam 
traps,  or  separators,  may  be 
placed  in  the  range,  they  only 
collect  water  out  of  the  pipes, 
and  it  has  to  be  still  dis- 
charged into  the  roadways. 
The  recent  invention  of  what 
is  called  the  "steam  loop" promises  to  entirely  remove 
the  above  complaint. 
At  Elemore  Colliery,  Dur- 
ham, where  the  length  of  the 
column  is  224  yds.,  expansion  joints  are  entirely  dispensed  with  in 
the  shaft.  The  arrangement  at  the  surface  is  shown  in  perspective  in 
Fig.  224,  the  part  marked  A  being  a  knuckle-piece,  the  pipe  going 
*  N.E.I,  xxxv.  159;  xxxvi.  13.        t  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (2°  Serie),  xiv.  297. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  197 
through  two  right  angle  bends.  The  dotted  line  represents  a 
chain  passing  over  wheels,  holding  a  block  of  metal  weighing 
about  10  cwt.,  which  checks  the  too  sudden  fall  of  the  pipes  in 
the  shaft  during  contraction.  The  horizontal  length  of  pipes  in 
the  drift  is  40  ft.,  calculated  to  allow  for  a  movement  or  spring 
of  from  ii  to  12  in.,  which  is  the  greatest  amount  of  expansion 
when  carrying  steam.  At  every  third  pipe  (each  9  ft.  long)  in 
the.  shaft,  support  girders  are  fixed  below  the  flange  to  allow 
one  foot  of  slide.  If  it  were  not  for  these,  the  pipe  column 
would  bulge  on  expansion.  The  column  of  pipes  is  free  to 
move  in  a  vertical  direction,  and  the  whole  weight  is  supported 
by  a  pair  of  larger  girders  fixed  at  the  Main  seam  level.  The 
advantages  of  the  arrangement  are,  that  expansion  joints  are 
completely  done  away  with,  and  the  trouble  attending  them, 
as,  for  instance,  the  leakage  of  steam,  which  seriously  affects 
the  roof  and  sides  of  the  mine.  This  is  most  noticeable  at  the 
beginning  of  the  week,  when  steam  is  being  got  up,  and  when, 
owing  to  contraction,  steam  finds  vent  at  the  expansion  joints  (where 
such  are  in  use)  until  the  column  is  thoroughly  heated  again. 
(3rd)  The  haulage  engine  may  be  placed  on  the  surface,  and 
the  ropes  carried  down  the  shaft. 
This  is  the  practice  most  in  favour,  and  is  unquestionably 
the  best.  With  any  method  of  haulage,  where  the  rope  travels  at 
high  speeds,  and  is  continuous  from  the  engines  to  the  end  of 
the  plane,  perhaps  the  advantages  are  not  so  apparent.  Ropes 
working  in  the  roadways  of  mines  are  apt  to  get  injured,  and  are 
more  liable  to  break  in  the  shaft  and  cause  damage;  but  with 
any  of  the  slow  speed  endless  rope  systems,  where  the  shaft  rope 
is  only  used  to  transmit  power  from  the  surface  to  a  series  of 
pulleys  situated  near  the  pit  bottom,  and  is  not  liable  to  injury 
or  breakage,  most  satisfactory  results  are  obtained.  It  adds  the 
wear  and  tear  of  another  rope  to  the  expense,  but  such  a  rope 
can  be  placed  in  position  in  a  very  short  length  of  time,  compared 
with  that  necessary  to  fix  pipes,  either  for  steam  or  com  pressed  air. 
The  cost  of  excavation  for  engine-houses  underground  is  always 
more  than  on  the  surface,  as  the  men  work  shorter  hours  and  get 
more  money. 
Transmission  of  power  with  wire  ropes  for  very  long  distances 
or  circuitous  routes  is  not  to  be  recommended,  the  useful  effect 
being  small,  and  the  wear  and  tear  considerable. 
Compressed  Air. — Transmitting  power  by  compressed  air  has 
already  been  described.  The  great  advantage  of  employing  this 
agent  is  that  a  certain  quantity  of  pure  air  is  delivered  into  the 
mine,  which  is  practically  of  no  benefit  whatever,  if  it  be  done  at 
or  near  the  pit  bottom,  where  main  haulage  engines  are  generally 
placed.  In  cases,  however,  where  engines  have  to  be  worked  at 
considerable  distances  away  from  the  pit  bottom,  this  method  is 
very  advantageous. 

--- Page Break ---
198  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
Electricity. — This  subject  has  also  been  considered.  Its 
employment  offers  advantages  for  quick  speed  haulage  at  points 
a  long  distance  away  from  the  shaft.  The  convenience  and  ease 
with  which  it  can  be  applied  are  its  chief  recommendations.  It 
is  not  too  much  to  say  that  a  man  could  lay  a  greater  length  of 
electrical  mains  in  one  day  than  he  could  pipes  in  a  week.  In 
non-fiery  mines,  no  possible  objection  can  be  brought  against  this 
system,  and  by  employing  every  safeguard  possible,  its  use  should 
not  lead  to  danger  in  any  way. 
Different  Systems  of  Haulage. — Having  decided  on  the 
position  of  the  engines,  the  different  systems  of  haulage  that  are 
in  use  may  now  be  considered.  These  may  be  divided  into  four heads  : 
-  (a)  Direct  Haulage,  where  the  gradient  of  the  road  is  sufficient to  allow  the  empty  tubs  to  run  into  the  workings  and  to  draw 
with  them  the  haulage  rope. 
(b)  Tail-rope  System,  where  a  second,  or  tail-rope,  of  lighter make  has  to  be  used  to  haul  the  empty  tubs  and  the  main  rope 
into  the  workings,  the  gradient  not  being  sufficient. 
(c)  Endless  Chain  System,  where  an  endless  chain  passes  from 
the  engines  along  one  side  of  the  road,  round  a  pulley  at  the  far 
end,  and  back  again  on  the  other  side  of  the  road  to  the  haulage 
engines ;  the  empty  tubs  are  attached  to  one-half  of  the  chain, and  the  full  ones  to  the  other ;  the  former  proceed  towards  the 
workings,  and  the  latter  towards  the  shaft. 
(d)  Endless  Rope  System,  the  difference  between  this  and  the 
one  last  named  is  that  a  rope  is  employed  instead  of  a  chain. 
DIRECT  ACTING  HAULAGE.— This  system  is  employed 
for  hauling  out  of  workings  to  the  deep  of  the  pit  bottom.  It 
requires  a  single  line  of  rails,  and  a  gradient  against  the  load 
sufficient  to  allow  the  empty  tubs  to  run  back  themselves,  to 
carry  with  them  the  rope,  and  to  overcome  the  friction  of  the 
drum.  As  with  other  machinery,  the  engines  should  consist  of  a 
pair.  Only  one  drum  is  required,  which  should  be  capable  of  being 
thrown  out  of  gear  and  of  running  loose  on  the  return  journey. 
Size  of  Engines  Required. — The  number  of  tubs  in  a  loaded 
train,  or  *'  set,"  is  regulated  by  the  size  of  the  engines  and  by  the pressure  of  the  steam ;  the  size  of  the  engines  depends  on  the 
quantity  of  coal  which  has  to  be  hauled  each  day. 
To  illustrate  the  method  of  calculating  the  size  of  engines 
required,  it  will  be  best  to  assume  some  case.  Resistance  to 
traction  is  due  to  three  causes — (i)  Friction  of  axles  on  pedestals 
and  wheels  on  rails,  proportional  to  weight;  (2)  Imperfections 
of  road-laying — i.e.,  bad  joints  and  crooked  ways,  proportional 
to  weight  and  square  of  velocity;  (3)  .Resistance  offered  by  air currents. 
The  former  has  by  far  the  largest  effect.  With  a  well-lubri- 
cated turned  axle  and  large-sized  wheel  rolling  on  a  smooth  rail, 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  <*99 
friction  is  small,  but  colliery  tub  axles  are  generally  rough, 
unturned  ones,  and  can  seldom  be  kept  perfectly  lubricated  ;  it, 
therefore,  is  generally  considered  that  an  allowance  of  ^kh  of  the 
weight  should  be  made  for  friction. 
Let  it  be  assumed  that  75  tons  an  hour  have  to  be  hauled  up  an 
incline  1500  yds.  long,  having  an  average  inclination  of  i  in  20; 
that  the  tubs  weigh  6  cwt.  each,  and  carry  12  cwt.  of  coal;  that 
the  pressure  of  steam  at  the  engines  is  65  lbs.  ;  and  that  the 
average  speed  of  the  set  is  8  miles  an  hour. 
Eight  miles  =  14080  yards,  so  that  the  speed  per  min.  =  ^g0^8-0 
=  234.6,  and  each  journey  takes  -Jff.^-  =  64,  say,  7  minutes,  to travel  one  way.  The  time  in  and  out  will,  therefore,  be  14 
minutes,  and  allowing  3  minutes  at  each  end  for  changing  makes 
20  minutes.  Three  journeys  per  hour  should  thus  be  got  out; 
but  there  are  always  delays,  and  it  will  be  best  to  rely  on,  say,  2\. 
As  75  tons  per  hour  have  to  be  delivered,  each  set  contains  -^ 
=  30  tons  of  coal,  and  as  each  tub  holds  12  cwt.  there  will  be  50 
tubs  in  each  journey.  Fifty  tubs  weighing  6  cwt.  each  =  15  tons, 
therefore  the  gross  load  is  30  +  15  =  45  tons;  but  as  the  inclination 
is  i  in  20,  the  net  load  will  be  -f§  =  2.25  tons=  5040  Ibs. 
For  this,  a  plough  steel  rope  2§  in.  circumference,  weighing  7^ 
Ibs.  per  fathom,  will  be  sufficient,  and  its  total  weight  will  be 
750x74  =  5437.5,  say,  5440  Ibs.  The  net  load  on  the  engine 
will  be  ^|J^  =  2  77  Ibs. 
As  the  gross  weight  of  the  set  is  45  tons,  the  resistance  due  to 
friction  (taking  this  @  ^1otn)==M-  I-5  tons>  or  33^°  ^>s.  ;  for the  rope,  frictional  resistance  is  -2~|J^  =  182  Ibs. The  total  load  on  the  engine  is,  therefore  : 
Due  to  set     .        .        .        .  5040  "j „      rope  ....  277  I  _oo-olh<s 
Friction  of  set      .        .        .  3360  f  ~  8859  lbs- „       „  rope     ,         .  182  ) 
If  it  be  decided  to  have  a  drum  6  ft.  diam.  and  a  pair  of  engines 
having  a  stroke  of  3  ft.,  as  the  pressure  of  steam  is  65  lbs.  the 
size  of  the  engines  can  be  found  by  the  rule  : 
Area  of  cylinder  (a)  x  pressure  x  twice  the  length  of  stroke  = load  x  circumference  of  drum. 
In  this  case  : a     8.,8> 
65  x  2  x  3 
which  is  the  theoretical  area  of  the  two  cylinders  ;  to  overcome 
internal  resistance  and  friction  of  engine  35  %  of  this  amount 
should  be  added  —  i.e.,  147.83,  so  that  the  area  of  the  two  cylinders 
becomes  578.01,  or  each  of  them  =  289  sq.  inches. 
The  diam.  is,  therefore:  >J.^5-±,  practically  19  J  inches;  or,  to avoid  being  under  power,  say,  a  pair  of  20  in.  cyl.  by  3  ft.  stroke. 

--- Page Break ---
200  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  quantity  of  material  a  pair  of  engines  of  given  dimensions 
will  haul  in  a  certain  time  can  be  easily  determined  by  applying 
the  converse  reasoning  to  the  foregoing. 
MAIN  AND  TAIL-ROPE  HAULAGE.— In  this  method, 
a  lighter  rope,  called  a  tail-rope,  has  to  be  employed  to  haul  back the  empty  set  from  the  shaft  to  the  workings,  such  addition  being 
caused  either  by  the  gradient  being  undulating,  or  not  sufficient 
to  allow  the  tubs  to  run  back  of  themselves.  Fig.  225  illustrates 
FIG.  225. 
the  theory  of  the  system.  Two  drums  are  employed;  on  one 
a,  the  main  rope  is  coiled,  and  the  other,  6,  contains  the  tail 
rope,  which  passes  from  it  to  the  extreme  end  of  the  plane  round 
a  pulley,  c,  and  is  finally  attached  at  the  back  of  the  set.  As 
this  rope  only  has  to  haul  the  empty  tubs  back  again,  its  size  is 
much  less  than  the  main  rope,  but  it  has  to  be  twice  as  long. 
Devices  for  throwing  Drums  In  and  Out  of  Gear. — Each 
drum  on  the  engine  is  alternately  thrown  out  of  gear  and 
allowed  to  run  loose,  but  should  be  provided  with  a  brake  to 
prevent  it  travelling  too  fast  and  paying  out  slack  rope.  This 
can  be  accomplished  in  several  different  ways :  either  the  drum 
may  be  loose  on  the  shaft  and  driven  by  clutches,  or  fixed  to  the 
shaft  and  a  sliding-carriage  employed,  throwing  them  in  and  out 
of  gear.  If  clutches  are  employed,  they  may  be  the  same  as  those 
used  for,  and  described  under,  endless-rope  haulage.  With  drums 
running  loose,  and  travelling  at  high  speeds,  wear  is  considerable, 
and  they  should  be  bushed  with  some  metal,  such  as  brass,  which 
allows  them  to  turn  with  little  friction,  and  is  capable  of  renewal. 
Allowance  for  wear  should  also  be  provided  on  the  shaft,  which 
has  to  be  nicely  turned.  This  arrangement  possesses  an  advan- tage, inasmuch  as  both  drums  can  be  placed  on  the  same  shaft, 
while  with  a  sliding  carriage  they  must  be  on  separate  ones. 
Sliding    carriages    are     generally 
FIG.  226.  moved  by  an  arrangement  of  levers, 
but  even  with  compound  levers  a  con- siderable amount  of  force  is  required. 
At  Elemore  Pit,  the  sliding  carriages 
(Fig.  226)  are  moved  by  an  endless 
screw  gearing  into  a  cog-wheel,  on the  same  shaft  of  which  is  keyed  an 
eccentric,  with  its  link  going  to  the  carriage.  As  the  screw  is 
turned,  the  cog-wheel  and  shaft  revolve;  consequently,  the 
eccentric  draws  its  link  forward,  and  pulls  the  sliding  carriage 
out  of  gear. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 201 
Methods  of  Working  Branches.  —  In  branch,  or  subordinate 
roads,  a  return  pulley  is  necessary  at  the  far  end,  and  a  separate 
length  of  rope  is  required  for  such,  both  ends  of  which  reach  to 
the  junction  with  the  main  road.  Joints  are  provided  in  the 
main-road  ropes,  and  the  branches  are  worked  by  disconnecting 
portions  of  the  main-road  ropes,  and  attaching  the  ropes  of  the branch  road  to  them,  connections  being  made  by  ordinary  sockets and  shackles. 
Three  methods  are  adopted  for  changing  the  ropes  under  normal 
conditions  ;  such  cases  where  the  rope  overhauls  itself  —  that  is  to 
say,  where  it  runs  in-bye  without  the  aid  of  engine-power  —  are matters  of  detail,  and  do  not  affect  the  main  systems.  In  two  of 
these,  the  ropes  are  changed  when  the  set  is  at  the  branch  ;  in  the 
other,  when  it  is  at  the  pit  shaft. 
Fig.  227  illustrates  one  method  of  changing  when  the  set  is 
near  the  branch  end.  A  shackle  connection  is  provided  in  the 
tail-rope,  and  so  arranged  that  it  arrives  opposite  the  branch  at 
the  same  time  as  the  set  does  —  that  is  to  say,  it  ought  to  do  ;  but 
FIGS.  227  AND  228. 
here,  as  in  every  other  method,  it  is  found  advisable  to  have  a 
winch,  with  a  chain  and  hook  fixed  at  the  way-end,  to  winch  up 
the  main  rope  to  meet  the  branch  rope,  as  it  often  happens  that 
they  do  not  quite  face  each  other,  which  is  not  at  all  surprising, 
considering  the  great  length  of  rope  in  use.  The  main  road  tail- rope  is  then  disconnected  at  the  points  a  and  b,  and  the  shackles  of 
the  branch  rope,  a'  and  b',  attached  in  their  place.  As  soon  as  the engine  has  started  again,  the  empty  set  leaves  the  main  road  and 
goes  into  the  branch  one.  A  slightly  different  method  is  illus- trated in  Fig.  228,  the  changing  also  being  made  when  the  set  is 
at  the  branch.  The  end  a  replaces  b,  which  is  then  brought  on  a 
little  further  by  the  engine  and  connected  to  c.  Here  the  tail-rope always  remains  entire. 
In  the  other  method,  the  ropes  are  changed  when  the  set  is  at 
the  shaft.  Joints  in  the  main  rope  are  so  arranged  that  when 
the  set  is  out-bye,  all  the  shackles  are  opposite  the  different 
branches  (Fig.  229).  Suppose  there  are  three  branches,  A,  B  and 
C,  B  being  ready  for  an  empty  set.  The  full  set,  which  is  stand- ing at  another  branch  end,  say  A,  having  been  hauled  to  the 
shaft,  A's  branch  rope  is  disconnected  from  the  main  rope,  and 
L's  branch  rope  connected  to  it.  The  engine  is  then  started  aad 

--- Page Break ---
202 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  229. 
r&tiirn  pulley 
jet- 
tine  empty  set  at  the  shaft  hauled  in-bye  into  the  branch  B  with- 
out stopping  at  the  branch  end.     Nothing  can  be  more  simple 
and  expeditious  than  this 
method.  To  facilitate  mat- 
ters and  save  time,  if  it  be 
desired  to  bring  a  set  out 
from  C,  the  ropes  can  be 
partially  changed  while  A's set  is  running. 
In  the  latter  system,  no 
stop  takes  place  from  the 
start  to  the  completion  of 
the  journey,  as  the  ropes 
are  changed  at  the  branch 
at  the  same  time  as  they 
are  at  the  shaft;  while 
in  the  other  two  methods, 
a  stop  has  to  be  made 
at  the  branch  end,  or  in 
all  two  stops  are  required, 
as  the  ropes  have  also  to 
be  changed  at  the  shaft. 
Where  time  is  an  object, 
the  advantages  of  the 
third  method  are  self-evi- dent. 
The  rope  is  automatically 
disconnected  from  the  set  when  it  reaches  the  shaft  either  by  a 
knock-off  link  (Fig.  230),  or  preferably  by  the  arrangement  shown 
return/  -puUey 
FIG.  230. FIG.  231. 
in  Fig.  231.  As  drawn,  the  hauling 
rope  which  is  attached  to  the  short 
length  of  chain,  a,  will  pull  the  set 
along,  but  at  the  detaching  point  at 
the  out-bye  or  shaft  end,  a  hori- 
zontal striking  bar,  which  is  stretched 
across  the  road,  catches  the  lever,  6, 
moves  it  backwards  in  the  direction  —    — " shown  by  the  arrow,  lifts  up  the 
link,  c,  and  detaches  the  set,  which  runs  down  an  inclined  "  kip  " to  the  shaft. 
ENDLESS  CHAIN.— This  system  differs  from  the  foregoing 
in  the  fact  that  a  double  line  of  rails  is  necessary;  that  a  chain  is 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
203 
employed  travelling  over  the  top  of  the  tubs,  and,  as  the  name 
implies,  is  endless ;  that  the  speed  is  small,  not  more  than  three 
miles  an  hour ;  and  that  the  tubs  are  attached  singly  at  equidis- 
tant intervals,  depending  on  the  quantity  required  to  be  hauled. 
Attachment  of  Tubs. — Where  the  gradient  is  small,  the 
weight  of  the  chain  resting  on  the  tubs  is  sufficient  to  drag  them 
along,  but  for  steeper  inclinations  a  Y-shaped  fork,  catching  a  link 
of  the  chain,  is  firmly  riveted  to  the  end  of  each  tub  («,  Fig.  206). 
Driving  Pulleys. — For  giving  motion  to  the  chain,  two  dif- 
ferent forms  of  pulley  are  adopted.  In  one,  a  series  of  Y-shaped 
jaws,  with  the  groove  at  the  bottom  just  wide  enough  to  take  the 
link  edgeways,  are  arranged  at  intervals  around  the  circumfer- 
ence. The  chain  only  passes  half  round  the  pulley,  the  necessary 
grip  being  obtained  by  the  links  of  the  chain  catching  in  the  forks. 
In  this  system,  as  with  the  endless  rope,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
for  efficient  working  that  small  guide  ("  leading-on  ")  pulleys  should be  arranged  just  before  the  chain  (rope)  reaches  the  driving  wheel, 
so  that  it  may  be  accurately  led  on  in  the  proper  place. 
FIG.  233. FlG3.    234  AND  235. 
Section, front 
Instead  of  fixing  forks  in  the  throat  of  the  pulley,  a  series  of 
pieces  of  square  iron  (a,  Fig.  232)  may  be  placed  alternately  on 
opposite  sides.  This  iron  is  bent  back  at  the  top  to  clip  the  rim, 
and  at  the  other  end  passes  through  a  hole  in  the  throat  of  the 
pulley  and  is  secured  on  the  underside  by  a  nut. 
With  the  ordinary  form  of  fork,  no  allowance  is  made  for  the 
lengthening  of  the  links  of  the  chain  due  to  wear.  When  every- 
thing is  new  they  are  h'xed  at  correct  intervals,  grip  the  chain, and  prevent  any  slip.  With  wear,  the  links  lengthen,  and  do  not 
properly  fit  the  jaws.  This  inconvenience  has  been  overcome  by 
an  arrangement  due  to  Mr.  Biuart,  which  consists  of  a  series  of  Y- 
shaped  grips  of  steel  screwed  into  the  periphery  of  the  pulley 
(Fig.  233).  As  the  links  of  the  chain  lengthen,  the  grips  are 
unscrewed,  so  as  to  increase  the  distance  between  each,  thus  fitting 
the  altered  length  of  the  links  of  the  chain. 
The  better  plan  appears  to  be  to  use  a  series  of  blocks  of  steel, 
called  "  feet,"  arranged  at  intervals  around  the  circumference  of the  pulley,  and  coil  the  chain  two  or  three  times  round  to  get  the 
necessary  grip.  These  feet  are  of  an  inverted  cone  shape  in  section 
(Figs.  234  and  235),  with  the  object  of  preventing  the  chain  from 

--- Page Break ---
204 
TEXT-BOOK  OP   COAL-MINING. 
climbing,  and,  owing  to  the  recess  between  each,  the  circum- 
ference of  that  part  of  the  pulley  on  which  the  chain  works  is  in 
plan  like  a  polygon,  preventing  any  possibility  of  slip.  They 
also  take  any  wear,  effecting  considerable  economy  from  this 
source.  They  are  secured  to  the  throat  of  the  pulley  by  bolts 
with  counter-sunk  heads,  which  may  either  pass  through  holes  in 
the  feet,  or,  preferably,  through  a  slit  running  down  the  centre, 
as  the  latter  allows  a  little  adjustment. 
Taking  up  Slack. — It  is  just  as  essential  with  endless  chain 
as  with  endless  rope  that  means  should  be  provided  for  auto- 
matically taking  up  the  slack  produced  by  lengthening  during 
wear.  This  is  a  point  often  neglected ;  indeed,  the  common 
practice  is  to  allow  the  chain  to  extend  until  it  is  only  kept  on 
tjie  pulley  with  great  difficulty,  and  then  to  cut  out  a  piece.  Far 
better  results  are  given  by  any  of  the  tension  arrangements 
described  under  endless  rope  haulage. 
Working  Branches  and  Curves. — The  chief  advantage  of the  endless  chain  is  the  ease  and  small  amount  of  labour  with 
FIG.  236. 
which  branches  and  curves  can  be  worked.  With  branches,  all 
that  has  to  be  done  is  to  arrange  a  series  of  pulleys  one  above  the 
other  on  a  vertical  shaft,  each  one  working  a  chain.  Even  with 
the  most  regular  output,  the  quantity  coming  from  any  branch  is 
seldom  the  same  as  that  from  its  neighbour,  and  hindrances  may 
often  occur  in  any  one  of  them.  If  all  these  pulleys  are  keyed  on 
the  upright  shaft,  the  stoppage  of  one  branch  means  the  stoppage 
of  all.  To  allow  any  of  them  to  remain  idle  while  the  others  are 
working,  only  one,  and  that  the  driving  pulley,  is  keyed  on  the 
shaft;  the  others  are  loose,  and  arranged  to  be  thrown  in 
and  out  of  gear  by  clutches,  similar  to  those  used  in  endless  rope 
haulage. 
When  the  tubs  approach  a  junction  or  the  delivery  end,  they 
are  easily  detached  by  arranging  a  small  guide  pulley  close  to  the 
roof,  and  passing  the  chain  over  it  (Fig.  236).  At  this  point  the 
chain  is  lifted  out  of  the  fork  on  the  tub,  and  detached  without 
any  manual  labour,  and  if  the  rails  are  arranged  on  a  slope,  the 
tub  still  continues  moving  under  the  influence  of  gravity,  passes 
unler  the  upright  pulleys,  meets  the  chain  again  further  on,  and 
automatically  re-attaches  itself.  Curves  are  worked  on  the  same 
principle ;  the  tubs  detaching  and  attaching  themselves,  and 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
205 
237. 
FIGS.  238  AND  237. 
gravitating  round  the  curved  portion.  "With  an  endless  rope automatic  detachment  can  be  secured,  but  in  only  one  form  of 
clip  can  the  tubs  re-attach  themselves. 
Means  of  Minimising  Breakages.  —  Unfortunately  breakages are  common  occurrences  with  the  endless  chain.  The  proverb 
is  quite  true  "that  a  chain  is  not  stronger  than  its  weakest 
link."  The  result  of  a  breakage  on  a  steep  incline  may  be  very disastrous,  as  the  tubs  run  downhill,  sweeping  everything  before 
them.  To  prevent  this,  it  is  usual  to  apply 
on  the  loaded  road  a  balance-block  arrange- 
ment  (Fig.  237)  pivoted  on  a  point,  a.  In 
its  journey  each  tub  depresses  the  end,  b, 
and  passes  over  the  obstruction,  but  imme- 
diately they  have  gone  by  the  block  falls 
into  the  position  shown,  and  stops  the  tubs 
running  back. 
Where  the  inclination  is  not  steep,  the 
arrangement  illustrated  in  Figs.  238  and  239 
can  be  employed.  In  their  normal  position 
two  blocks,  a  a,  pivoted  about  pins  at  5, 
lie  across  the  rails,  as  shown  in  plan,  but 
are  pushed  aside  by  the  wheels  of  the  tubs 
up  a  small  greased  inclined  plane,  c,  to 
descend  again  immediately  the  tubs  have 
gone  by,  and  so  block  the  road. The  chain  is  carried  above  the  surface  of 
the  road  on  the  tubs,  that  is,  so  long  as  it  is 
entire;  if  broken  it  trails  on  the  ground. 
If,  therefore,  a  series  of  Y-grips  be  arranged in  the  centre  of  the  way,  they  do  not  catch 
the  chain  so  long  as  it  is  whole,  but  directly  it 
breaks  they  come  into  action  and  firmly hold  it. 
ENDLESS  ROPE  HAULAGE  :—  Driving  Appliances.— 
The  methods  employed  for  driving  may  be  divided  into  (a)  clip 
pulleys  ;  (b)  conical  wheels  ;  (c)  grooved  wheels. 
(a)  Clip  Pulleys.  —  The  general  construction  of  these  are  that  the 
rope  is  conducted  into  a  groove,  in  which  are  placed  sliding  j-ivvs, which  are  pushed  downwards,  causing  them  to  grip  the  rope 
firmly  and  prevent  slipping.  They  occupy  little  space,  are  con- 
venient, side  friction  is  entirely  avoided,  and  as  the  rope  only 
passes  half  round  the  pulley  the  bending  action  is  not  great. 
A  good  form  of  clip  pulley  is  Barraclough's.  One  side  of  the pulley  is  entirely  separate  from  the  other,  connection  being  made 
by  bolts,  while  any  required  distance  between  the  two  parts  cnn 
be  maintained  by  set  pins,  placed  at  intervals  around  the  circum- 
ference. By  such  means,  the  pulley  can  be  altered  to  accommo- 
date any  size  of  rope  in  a  few  minutes.  All  round  the  circnmfer- 

--- Page Break ---
2O6 TEXT-BOOK    OF  COAL-MINING. 
ence  are  a  series  of  taper  pockets  opposite  each  other,  inside  which 
work  two  sliding  jaws  (a,  Fig.  240),  which  are  hollowed  at  the 
bottom  and  sides  to  receive  the  rope.  These  jaws  are  seated  on 
springs,  b.  When  the  rope  enters  the  pulley,  the  weight  forces 
the  jaws  down  the  taper  sides  of  the  throat,  and  so  narrows  the 
distance  between  the  jaws,  causing  them  to  grip  the  rope,  while, 
as  soon  as  the  weight  is  taken  off,  the  springs  assist  to  release  and 
relieve  the  rope. 
A  pulley  employed  in  Scotland,  both  for  cable  tramways  and 
mine  haulage,  is  that  shown  in  Fig.  241.  The  ordinary  arms  of 
the  pulley  terminate  in  a  horizontal  and  vertical  flange,  a  and  6, 
to  which  are  respectively  bolted  the  taper  throat  rims,  c  and  d,  a 
piece  of  wood,  e,  being  interposed  between.  It  is  stated  that  no 
injury  whatever  is  caused  to  the  rope,  and  Mr.  D.  Ferguson  * gives  some  figures  which  seem  to  bear  out  that  view. 
It  is,  however,  difficult  to  see  how  any  clip  pulley  can  work 
without  flattening  the  rope ;  their  very  principle  of  action  is  to 
grip  or  wedge  the  rope,  and  the  greater  the  load,  the  greater  the 
wedging.  There  are,  of  course,  good  and  bad  clip  pulleys,  and 
probably  the  latter  predominate,  at  any  rate,  they  are  responsible 
for  a  great  deal  of  prejudice.  At  a  colliery  with  which  the  author 
is  connected,  one  of  the  best  known  forms  of  clip  pulley  was 
originally  used  for  driving  rope  haulage,  but  was  removed  and 
replaced  by  a  taper  C  pulley.  Considerably  more  than  three 
times  the  work  is  now  being  obtained  from  the  driving  ropes. 
To  avoid  the  flattening  action,  a  pulley  has  been  designed 
aaving  a  serpentine  groove  in  the  throat,  and  so  long  as  this 
*  Min.  Inst.  Scot.  vii.  145. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
207 
remains  in  the  curved  state,  and  does  not  wear  straight,  fair 
results  are  said  to  be  obtained. 
(6)  C  Pulleys. — To  avoid  the  flattening  of  the  rope,  C  pulleys  are 
employed,  which  originally  consisted  of  a  pulley  in  the  shape  of  a 
C,  around  which  the  rope  was  coiled  several  times  to  give  the 
necessary  grip  and  prevent  slipping.  Here  flattening  is  certainly 
avoided,  but  another  disadvantage  is  introduced  in  the  shape  of 
side  friction.  On  their  adoption,  it  was  found  that  the  pulleys 
wore  in  rather  a  peculiar  manner ;  their  dished  form  was  soon 
lost  and  the  diameter  of  the  coming-off  side  became  less  than  the 
going-on  side.  Seeing  that  the  pulley  wore  in  this  way,  it  soon 
became  the  practice  to  construct  them  so,  and  now  the  great 
majority  are  made  slightly  conical,  the  diameter  of  the  going-on 
side  being  larger  than  the  coming-ofF  side. 
The  throat  of  the  pulley  is  made  parallel  (Fig.  242),  but  loose 
wearing  segments,  a,  are  bolted  in.  These  wearing  segments  save 
large  sums  of  money.  A  pulley  costs  from  ^15  to  ^20,  while  the 
segments  can  be  obtained  for  ^£3.  In  addition,  the  segments 
FIG.  242. 
D 
n 
can  be  changed  in  a  short  time  and  are  easily  handled ;  pulley 
changing  not  only  requires  far  longer  time,  but  considerably 
more  men.  Another  point  is  that  pulleys  should  always  be 
purchased  in  halves ;  in  such  state  they  can  be  transported  and 
got  into  place  with  half  the  expense  they  otherwise  would.  Loose 
wearing  segments  and  pulleys  in  halves  have  materially  reduced 
the  cost  of  modern  rope-haulage. 
As  to  the  amount  of  taper  necessary,  experience  is  the  only 
guide,  but  the  heavier  the  load  the  greater  it  must  be.  If  pro- 
perly proportioned  these  pulleys  work  very  smoothly ;  the  rope 
practically  does  not  slip  downwards,  but  follows  a  serpentine  path 
from  the  time  it  goes  on  at  the  top  until  it  comes  off  at  the 
bottom.  Side  friction  is,  to  a  certain  extent,  avoided,  as  practi- 
cally none  exists  between  the  successive  coils,  but  where  the  rope 
leads  on  the  pulley  there  is  a  small  amount  against  the  upper  coil, 
which  is  an  objection.  Also,  to  obtain  good  results  the  speed 
must  be  rather  slow  ;  practically,  it  would  hardly  be  possible  to 
go  more  than  three  miles  an  hour. 
(c)  Grooved  Pulleys. — In  order  to  get  rid  of  side  friction 
and  prevent  the  slipping  which  takes  place  on  taper  C  pulleys, 

--- Page Break ---
208  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL  MINING. 
a  series  of  parallel  grooves  are  put  in  the  main  driving 
pulley,  and  a  similar  pulley  with  one  groove  less,  placed  some 
distance  away,  the  rope  being  wound  from  one  to  the  other,  each 
coil  having  a  separate  groove  to  work  in.  As  each  coil  only 
passes  half  round  the  circumference,  and  as  the  second  pulley  is 
not  a  driver,  but  a  follower,  the  rope  has  little  grip,  and  conse- 
quently several  grooves  have  to  be  employed  on  each  pulley.  To 
meet  this  objection,  the  rope  is  frequently  taken  from  one  pulley 
to  the  other  in  the  form  of  the  figure  00 »  but  although  this 
reduces  the  number  of  coils,  the  rope  is  bent  backwards  and 
forwards,  for  it  passes  under  and  over  the  pulley.  This  not  only 
injures  it,  but  shortens  its  life,  as  compared  with  a  rope  always 
coiling  round  a  wheel  in  the  same  direction. 
Another  method  to  lessen  the  number  of  coils,  is  to  drive  both 
pulleys,  which  is  the  common  procedure  on  cable  tramways.  No 
matter,  however,  whether  both  pulleys  are  driven,  or  whether  one  is 
a  follower,  they  only  work  properly  when  the  grooves  are  of  equal 
diameters.  When  new,  this  condition  is  possible,  as  the  pulleys 
can  be  turned  in  a  lathe.  The  greatest  strain  during  working 
naturally  comes  on  the  first  groove,  which  is  therefore  subjected 
to  more  wear  than  the  second,  while  the  latter  also  wears  far 
more  than  the  third,  and  so  on.  By  such  action  the  grooves  not 
only  increase  in  depth  but  do  so  unequally.  From  the  time  the 
rope  passes  into  the  first  groove,  to  the  time  it  leaves  the  last  one, 
no  slipping  can  result.  It  is  also  evident  that  when  the  wear  in 
the  grooves  has  progressed  to  such  an  extent  as  to  make  a  difference 
in  the  diameters  of  the  first  and  the  last  one,  the  speed  of  the  rope 
is  governed  by  that  of  the  groove  having  the  smallest  diameter 
(the  going-on  side),  and  a  point  on  the  circumference  of  the  largest groove  will  obviously  travel  faster  than  this.  As  it  is  impossible  for 
the  rope  and  part  of  the  pulley  to  travel  at  different  speeds,  a  grind- 
ing action  between  the  pulley  and  the  rope  is  set  up,  and  the  latter 
rapidly  wears  out.  To  show  the  extent  of  the  wear  in  the  grooves, 
it  may  be  stated  that  after  three  years'  wear,  those  in  the  leading drum  of  a  cable  tram  way  line  measured  respectively,  2j  in.,  2|  in., 
2 1  in.,  2 1  in.,  3  in.,  and  4T\-  in.  deep. When  the  grooves  are  fixed  together  as  in  ordinary  pulleys,  each 
groove  tightens  one  coil  of  rope  on  the  other,  until  when  the  last 
groove  is  reached,  the  strain  amounts  to  so  much  that  it  has  in 
actual  cases  sometimes  broken  the  pulley,  or  in  others  the  rope. 
For  such  reasons,  instead  of  the  second  set  of  grooves  being 
made  in  one  solid  pulley  keyed  fast  to  the  shaft,  a  number  of 
separate  pulleys  running  loose  on  a  bearing  are  employed,  this 
being  the  form  adopted  at  Lye  Cress  Pit.  A  pulley  7  ft.  diam., 
having  five  grooves,  is  keyed  on  to  the  third  motion  shaft  (a,  Figs. 
243  and  244),  and  four  loose  pulleys,  b,  are  threaded  on  a  shaft  15  ft. 
away.  The  in-going  rope,  c,  is  led  on  to  the  underside  of  the  first groove  on  pulley  a,  coils  half  round  it,  and  passes  on  to  the  first 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
209 
loose  pulley  at  5,  and  then  back  again  to  the  second  groove  on 
pulley  a  and  so  on,  until  it  finally  leaves  the  last  groove  on  a  and 
passes  away  at  d.  By  such  means  the  wear  on  the  driving  rope  is 
FIGS.  243  AND  244. 
FIG.  245. 
reduced  to  a  minimum,  for  the  second  set  of  loose  pulleys  can 
move  at  varying  velocities,  and  so  accommodate  themselves  to  the 
different  speeds  required  by  the  unequally  sized  grooves  of  the 
solid  driving  wheel.  The  objection  is,  that  as  only  one  pulley  is 
driven,  a  large  number  of  grooves  have  to  be  employed  where  the 
load  to  be  moved  is  a  heavy  one. 
The  Walker  Differential  Pulley,  adopted  at  Bell  End  Pit,  com- 
pletely gets  over  all  difficulties. 
Briefly  described,  it  consists  of 
a  series  of  loose  rings  (a,  Fig. 
245),  threaded  on  to  an  ordinary 
pulley,  these  rings  being  grooved 
to  receive  the  rope.  Both  pul- 
leys have  loose  rings,  and  both 
are  driven,  the  second  pulley 
having  one  less  groove  than  the 
first.  The  flange,  d,  on  one  side 
of  the  pulley  is  removable,  and 
secured  in  position  by  a  series 
of  bolts,  e,  indiarubber  washers 
being  provided  at  g  and  h  to  prevent  the  bolts  becoming  loose 
during  working. 
The  peculiar  point  appears  to  be,  that  all  the  grooves  are  loose. 
At  first  sight  it  would  be  thought  that  at  least  one  fixed  groove 
must  be  provided  to  obtain  the  required  grip;  but  this  is  not 
necessary.  The  explanation  appears  to  be  that  the  pressure  of  the 
rope  in  the  groove  of  each  individual  ring,  is  transferred  to  the 
underside  of  the  ring,  hence  the  friction  is  just  as  great  there  as 
o 

--- Page Break ---
210 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
it  would  be  under  the  rope  if  the  pulley  had  solid  grooves.  Each 
ring  adjusts  itself  to  the  unequal  strain  on  the  rope,  or  wear  in 
the  groove,  and  constantly  accommodates  itself  to  these  conditions 
whilst  in  motion.  The  fact  that  the  ropes  equalise  themselves  on 
the  rings  gives  each  wrap  its  proportion  of  duty,  and  there  is  no 
necessity  to  secure  any  of  the  grooves.  It  is  essentially  a  friction 
drive,  with  each  ring  accommodating  itself  as  explained.  The  rope 
never  moves  on  the  grooves,  as  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  when  it 
is  at  work  the  impression  of  the  rope  is  left  in  the  oil  at  the 
bottom  of  the  rings,  which  conclusively  shows  that  no  slipping  takes 
FIGS.  246  AND  247. 
place.  The  bottom  and  sides  of  the  rings  are  thoroughly  lubri- 
cated by  automatic  grease-cups,  inserted  in  a  hole,  b,  in  the  under- 
side of  the  rim  of  the  pulley,  a  groove  being  provided  opposite 
each  hole,  as  shown  at  c. 
The  complete  design  of  what  may  be  taken  as  the  most  modern 
type  of  endless  rope  haulage  plant,  as  adopted  at  Bell  End  Pit,  is 
illustrated  in  Figs.  246  and  247.  It  consists  of  a  pair  of  16  in. 
cyl.  engines  by  2  ft.  6  in.  stroke.  On  the  crank  shaft  is  a  pinion, 
a,  5  ft.  diam.,  gearing  into  a  crown  wheel,  b,  15  ft.  diam.  on  the 
second  motion  shaft.  This  is  provided  with  three  bearings,  and  on 
it  is  keyed  a  pinion,  c,  2  ft.  diam.  gearing  right  and  left  into  crown 
wheels,  d  and  et  7  ft.  6  in.  diam.,  each  keyed  on  to  third  motion 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 211 
shafts  provided  with  two  bearings,  one  of  which  is  carried  on  a 
special  bed-plate,  while  the  other  is  situated  on  a  prolongation  of 
the  right-hand  engine  bed-plate.  The  two  third-motion  shafts 
overhang  their  right-hand  bearings,  and  on  the  outside  is  keyed 
two  Walker  differential  pulleys,  f  and  g.  The  object  of  this  is, 
that  at  any  time  required  the  loose  rings  can  be  taken  off,  cleaned 
and  oiled,  or  anything  done  to  the  rope  without  interfering  in  the 
slightest  degree  with  any  portion  of  the  engines.  To  take  the 
outward  thrust,  an  adjustable  strut,  7i,  connects  the  two  third - 
motion  shafts  ;  this  is  made  in  halves,  connected  by  right-  and  left- 
hand  threaded  screws.  Such  arrangement  takes  off  a  great  deal 
of  the  strain,  which  would  otherwise  come  on  to  the  right  hand 
bearings. 
Arrangement  for  taking  up  Slack  Rope.— Successful  work- 
ing is  influenced,  to  a  great  extent,  by  the  arrangement  for  taking 
up  "  slack,"  and  at  the  same  time  putting  enough  tension  on  the rope  to  prevent  any  slip  on  the  driving  pulley.  Ropes  lengthen 
with  use,  and,  in  addition,  the  varying  inclination  of  the  plane 
FIG.  248. FIG.  249. 
Oft 
influences  their  tightness,  or  otherwise.  Tension  carriages  should 
always  be  placed  at  the  lowest  end  of  the  road  ;  the  full  rope  is 
led  on  to  the  driving  pulley,  then  to  the  tension  pulley,  and  passes 
away  as  the  empty  rope.  Naturally,  the  pulling,  or  full  rope,  is 
always  tight. 
Sometimes  this  tightening  pulley  is  firmly  connected  to  a  screw 
— it  may  just  as  well  not  be  applied  at  all.  What  is  wanted  is 
some  arrangement  that  gives  and  takes,  and  automatically  accom- 
modates itself  to  the  varying  load.  This  may  be  done  in  many 
ways.  One  form  is  shown  in  Fig.  248,  which,  however,  is  not 
recommended.  Long  experience  has  proved  that  the  life  of  ropes 
is  considerably  decreased  when  the  wires  are  alternately  bent  in 
opposite  directions.  The  better  plan  is  to  carry  them  half  round 
a  pulley  on  a  carriage,  which  can  be  either  weighted  and  travel  on 
an  incline,  or  it  may  be  on  the  flat,  with  a  weight  attached  behind 
by  a  length  of  chain,  this  weight  exercising  a  direct  pull  on  the 
waggon  (  Fig.  249). 
The  heavier  the  load  on  the  rope,  the  heavier  should  be  the 
weight  on  the  tension  waggon,  and  vice  versa.  The  weight  giving 

--- Page Break ---
212 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MIMNG. 
the  best  results  is  easily  determined  by  experiment,  and  when 
once  found,  need  not  be  varied  unless  the  load  on  the  rope 
increases.  The  pulleys  on  the  tension  waggons  are  often  made 
smaller  in  diameter  than  the  driving  wheel,  but  the  far  better  plan 
is  to  make  them  the  same  size.  Indeed,  every  main  pulley  around 
which  the  rope  coils  should  be  of  equal  size  throughout — one 
pulley  should  be  a  duplicate  of  another. 
Clutches  for  Working  Branches. — It  has  been  often  stated that  branches  cannot  be  worked  with  such  ease  in  the  endless 
rope  system  as  with  some  others,  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  why 
such  an  opinion  should  be  held.  Indeed,  the  number  of  branches 
may  be  unlimited,  if  each  pulley  is  able  to  be  thrown  in  and  out 
of  gear  by  a  clutch  arrangement.  In  some  cases,  the  rope  along 
all  the  branches  and  main  roads  is  made  in  one  continuous  length, 
and  a  stoppage  anywhere  stops  the  pit. 
Numerous  clutches  are  in  use.  In  the  ordinary  forms  there 
may  be  a  cone  sliding  into  a  conical  box,  or  a  series  of  lugs  on 
the  pulley  fitting  into  a  sliding  coupling  box.  The  efficiency  and 
life  of  the  ropes  (which  mainly  affect  the  cost)  depends  on  the 
speed  at  which  they  are  run,  and  the  freedom,  or  otherwise,  from 
jerks  or  strains,  and  neither  the  cone  nor  claw  clutch  should  be 
used,  if  the  duration  of  the  ropes  is  to  be  secured.  Supposing  the 
main  rope  to  be  travelling  at  its  normal  speed,  and  a  branch 
thrown  into  gear ;  with  the  ordinary  clutches,the  branch  rope  has 
to  suddenly  take  the  speed 
FIGS.  250  AKD  251. that  the  main  rope  is  travel- 
ling at,  a  very  serious  strain 
is  thrown  upon  it,  and  often 
something  breaks.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  it  be  desired 
to  throw  a  branch  out  of 
gear,  it  can  seldom  be  done 
without  stopping  the  main 
rope.  Cone  clutches  often 
"jam,"  and  cannot  be  got out  anyhow. 
Fisher's  Clutch. — To  over- come these  disadvantages, 
friction  clutches  have  been 
designed,  a  very  successful 
one  being  that  invented  by 
Mr.  Henry  Fisher.  It  con- 
sists of  a  driving  drum,  firm- 
ly keyed  on  to  the  shaft. 
Around  the  periphery  of  this 
drum  is  arranged  a  series  of 
segments  (a  a,  Figs.  250  and 
251),  connected  by  right-  and  left-hand  screws,  b.  An  arrange- 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  213 
ment  of  levers  is  provided,  by  means  of  which  these  screws  can 
be  turned.  If  they  are  turned  one  way,  the  segments  close 
together  and  grip  the  drum;  if  the  other  way,  they  open  and 
leave  the  drum.  The  number  of  segments  is  generally  three, 
sometimes  four,  and  in  the  centre  of  each  is  an  oblong  hole,  in 
which  is  inserted  a  square  pin,  c  ;  the  other  ends  of  these  pins 
pass  into  the  arms  of  the  driving  pulley.  The  drum,  being  keyed 
to  the  shaft,  is  always  revolving ;  the  driving  pulley  is  loose,  but 
attached  to  the  friction  segments  through  the  pins,  c.  If  these 
segments  are  tightened  on  the  drum,  practically  they  become 
part  of  it,  and  revolve,  carrying  with  them  the  driving  pulley. 
The  amount  of  friction,  or  grip,  is  determined  by  the  amount  of 
rotation  given  to  the  screws,  and  can  be  so  regulated  that  sufficient 
pressure  is  only  exerted  to  drive  the  pulley  under  its  normal  load. 
Should  a  tub  come  off  the  rails,  or  any  excessive  load  be  thrown 
on  the  rope,  the  clutch  gear  should  slip.  Strain  is  therefore 
totally  avoided. 
The  same  thing  takes  place  when  a  branch  is  thrown  into  gear. 
When  the  segments  are  first  tightened,  considerable  slip  takes 
place,  the  branch  moves  off  at  first  very  slowly  and  gradually 
increases  in  speed  as  the  inertia  of  its  load  is  overcome,  until  it 
travels  at  the  same  rate  as  the  main  rope.  As  soon  as  it  does  this, 
a  very  good  plan  is  to  slack  the  segments  on  the  driving  drum 
until  only  just  enough  grip  is  given  to  drive  the  branch  rope. 
The  only  drawback  is  its  cost.  It  is  very  carefully  made,  the 
friction  parts  are  bushed  with  copper  to  get  more  adhesion,  and 
there  is  a  lot  of  fitting  work.  Its  economy  and  advantages  are 
indisputable,  but  it  is  possible  to  purchase  economy  too  dearly. 
Many  other  friction  clutches  exist  which  do  not,  perhaps,  give 
such  satisfactory  results,  but  their  cost  is  so  much  smaller  that, 
except  in  the  more  important  situations,  their  use  is  recommended. 
Bever  and  Darling's  Clutch. — In  this  form,  what  might  be  called a  brake  flange  is  attached  to  the  driving  wheel.  Inside  this  flange 
is  an  inner  split  ring.  The  bearing  surface  of  the  ring  and  the 
brake  flange  are  each  carefully  turned.  On  the  driving  shaft  is 
a  collar,  which  can  be  slid  up  and  down,  but  is  forced  to  revolve 
with  the  shaft  as  it  travels  over  a  long  key.  To  this  collar  is 
attached  an  arm,  and  to  one  end  of  the  arm  a  wedge,  which,  when 
the  clutch  is  out  of  gear,  only  just  enters  the  slit  in  the  split  ring. 
To  throw  the  clutch  into  gear,  this  collar  is  moved  towards  the 
driving  pulley,  and  in  doing  so  the  wedge  is  driven  into  the  split 
ring  and  expands  it,  causing  it  to  grip  the  brake  flange  and  so 
turn  the  pulley.  The  principle  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  Fisher 
and  Walker  clutch,  but  as  the  pressure  is  only  exerted  at  one 
point  its  action  cannot  be  so  perfect. 
Edmestoris  Clutch. — This  is  the  same  as  Bever  and  Dorling's, except  that  the  split  ring  is  expanded  or  closed  by  the  aid  of  one 
right-  and  left-hand  screw  instead  of  a  wedge. 

--- Page Break ---
214 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Brakes  for  Branches. — When  a  branch  road  is  thrown  out 
of  gear,  if  its  gradient  is  a  steep  one,  the  tubs  may  continue 
moving,  even  after  connection  with  the  main  haulage  has  been 
broken ;  this  only  takes  place  when  the  inclination  is  such  that 
the  road  is  nearly  self-acting. Even  when  such  motion  is  in  the  same  direction  as  in  general 
(that  is,  towards  the  shaft)  such  continuation  is  objectionable,  as, 
unless  the  rope  were  required  to  stop,  it  would  not  be  thrown  out 
of  gear.  Where  the  gradient  is  in  favour  of  the  load,  an  ordinary 
band  brake  is  usually  arranged,  so  connected  that  it  is  put  on  as 
the  clutch  is  thrown  out  of  gear. 
Where  the  gradient  is  against  the  load,  and  the  tubs  have  a 
tendency  to  run  back,  a  most  ingenious  brake  is  applied  by 
Walker  Bros.,  and  has  been  working  with  great  success  at  Lye 
FIG.  252. 
Cross  Pit.  Four  brake  blocks  (a,  Fig.  252)  are  arranged  at 
intervals  around  the  pulley,  and  are  pivoted  about  the  points  b. 
Each  is  provided  with  a  right-  and  left-hand  screw  to  allow  for 
adjustment,  and  to  take  up  wear.  These  brake  blocks  are  not  at 
right  angles  to  the  brake  rim,  but  slightly  inclined  to  it,  and  are 
pushed  away  from  the  wheel  so  long  as  it  turns  in  its  normal 
direction,  indicated  by  the  arrow,  but  are  kept  up  to  their  work 
by  the  pull  of  a  small  weight.  When  the  branch  is  thrown  out 
of  gear,  the  moment  the  wheel  starts  to  run  back,  the  arms  carry- ing the  brake  blocks  try  to  take  a  position  at  right  angles  to  the 
brake  rim  ;  but  as  this  is  shorter  than  the  inclined  distance,  the 
blocks  are  wedged  against  the  brake  rim  and  prevent  the  pulley 
from  running  back.  In  the  illustration,  as  long  as  the  pulley 
turns  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrow,  the  brake  keeps  off, 
but  immediately  it  attempts  to  go  the  other  way  the  four  arms 
endeavour  to  take  a  position  at  right  angles  to  the  circle  a  a. 
Ropes  Under  and  Over  Tubs. — Two  systems  of  endless  rope 
haulage  are  in  use.     In  one  the  rope  travels  over  the  tubs,  in  the 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  215 
other  under  them.  The  advantages  of  the  former  are,  the  rope  is 
always  carried  above  the  ground,  and  is  not  dragged  on  it,  causing 
friction,  wear  and  tear,  and  less  life  to  the  ropes,  and  all  the 
machinery  is  overhead  and  can  be  easily  inspected.  The  dis- 
advantages are,  that  the  tubs  cannot  be  loaded  high,  as  is  the 
practice  in  some  districts,  without  attaching  to  the  tub  means  for 
carrying  the  rope,  which  not  only  leads  to  complication,  but  in- 
troduces another  possible  cause  of  failure.  This  disadvantage  may 
be,  and  is,  avoided  by  attaching  the  rope  to  the  sides  of  the  tubs  ; 
but,  inasmuch  as  the  pull  is  not  in  the  centre  of  the  load  being 
moved,  frequent  derailments  result.  With  the  rope  over  the  tub, 
curves  are  not  easily  worked.  If  any  exist,  they  should  be  made 
as  sharp  as  possible,  and  a  good  large  guide  pulley  placed  at  the 
bend.  Practically,  every  curve  with  the  rope  over  the  tubs 
requires  an  additional  man,  as  it  is  not  safe  to  allow  the  tubs  to 
work  round  without  supervision.  For  a  day,  perhaps,  everything 
may  go  right ;  but  one  accident  costs  more  than  a  man's  wages  for a  week.  If  the  rope  is  under  the  tubs,  any  amount  of  curves  may 
be  worked  easily ;  but  here  they  should  be  made  as  large  and  of 
as  wide  a  sweep  as  possible.  Hollers  are  placed  all  round  the  curve, 
and  the  clips  easily  pass  round  these,  if  the,  rollers  are  large  in 
diameter,  and  placed  near  together.  For  good  working  they  must 
be  the  largest  size  allowable.  Automatic  detachment  of  the  tubs 
is  a  very  simple  matter  when  the  rope  travels  underneath,  but 
over  the  tubs  it  is  only  possible  with  one  form  of  clip. 
Arrangement  of  Tubs. — The  tubs  may  be  connected  to  the 
rope  either  in  sets  or  singly.  On  the  branches,  one  tub  at  a  time 
is  attached,  but  on  the  main  line,  from  two  to  four  tubs  have  to 
be  massed  together.  Where  the  tubs  are  run  in  sets,  from  ten  to 
twenty  are  attached  to  each  other,  and  only  one  of  them  connected  to 
the  rope.  Such  a  train  requires  an  attendant,  and  the  chief 
advantage  of  this  system  of  haulage  is  lost — viz.,  regularity  of delivery.  Where  only  one  or  two  tubs  are  attached  at  a  time,  the 
delivery  to  the  shaft  bottom  is  a  model  of  regularity ;  the  tubs 
come  and  go  with  scarcely  any  attention. 
One  or  Two  Road  Systems. — The  endless  rope  system  proper requires  two  lines  of  rails  and  a  wide  road.  Where  the  roof  is  a 
good  one  this  is  not  a  disadvantage,  except,  perhaps,  in  the  closing 
years  of  the  colliery's  life.  The  nature  of  the  roof  in  some  mines prevents  the  double  line  system  being  applied.  The  difficulty  is 
overcome  by  running  the  tubs  in  sets,  and  arranging  pass-byes  at intervals.  An  attendant  travels  with  each  set,  and  waits  at  the 
siding  until  the  train  travelling  in  the  opposite  direction  arrives 
there ;  they  pass  each  other,  one  proceeds  towards  the  shaft,  and 
the  other  in-bye.  Connection  between  the  set  and  rope  is  usually 
made  by  a  screw-clip  attached  to  a  bogie  carriage  (Fig.  253)  on which  the  train-man  rides. 
Another  plan,  which  avoids  the  inconvenience  and  expense  of 

--- Page Break ---
2l6 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
running  sets,  is  to  provide  two  roads  each  laid  with  a  single  line 
of  rails.  In  one,  the  full  tubs  travel  out-bye,  while  in  the  other, 
the  empty  ones  pass  into  the  workings. 
For  steep  gradients,  where  the  load  would  be  too  great  for  a 
single  rope,  two  may  be  employed.  At  Newbattle  Colliery,  Edin- 
burghshire,*  such  system  is  adopted,  each  tub  being  connected to  two  ropes. Although   an   elaborate   arrangement    of  friction 
FIG.  253. FIG.  254. 
clutches  were  applied  to  allow  the  ropes  to  automatically  adjust 
themselves,  and  each  take  their  share  of  the  load,  yet  such 
were  found  unnecessary. 
Bails  at  Junctions. — At  main  stations,  where  branches  are 
worked,  the  usual  arrangement  of  switches  and  crossings  is 
employed,  and  as  the  ropes  are  either  above  or  beneath  the  road, 
no  provision  has  to  be  made  to  prevent  their  being  injured. 
For  junctions,  with 
FIGS.  255  AND  256.  under-rope    haulage, several  methods  are 
used;  two  of  the 
more  general  ones 
being  shown  in  Figs. 
254  and  255. 
In  Fig.  254  the 
empty  tubs  are  taken off  the  rope  as  soon 
as  they  have  passed the  switch  at  A  and 
are  then  run  back 
into  the  junction  road,  as  indicated  by  the  arrow.  The  full  tubs 
from  the  workings  pass  at  once  on  to  their  proper  road,  as  shown 
by  the  illustration. 
*  Min.  Inst.  Scot.  ix.  211. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  217 
The  better  plan  is  that  of  Fig.  255.  It  is  more  compact  and 
easily  worked.  The  illustration  explains  itself.  In  both  these 
figures  it  will  be  noticed  that  small  breaks  or  spaces  are  left  in 
the  crossing  rails,  and  in  these  the  rope  generally  works.  "Unless some  such  provision  were  made,  the  rope  would  receive  serious 
injury  from  the  flange  of  the  tub's  wheels  as  they  passed  from the  junction  to  the  main  line,  as  each  wheel  would  have  to  roll 
over  the  rope  as  it  lay  on  the  top  of  the  rails.  To  prevent  any 
chance  of  this  happening,  not  only  are  recesses  provided,  but  the 
rails  at  the  junction  are  raised  some  3  in.  above  the  general  level, 
as  shown  by  Fig.  256.  Just  before  reaching  the  junction,  a  short 
length  of  inclined  rail  is  fixed,  followed  by  level  rails  at  the 
junction,  and  then  another  short  inclined  piece  is  inserted, 
throwing  down  the  rails  to  their  original  level.  At  the  junction, 
the  haulage  rope  is,  therefore,  below  the  lower  flange  of  the  cross 
rails,  and  tubs  joining  the  main  engine-plane  can  do  no  injury. 
When  a  tub  on  the  engine-plane  reaches  the  junction,  the  clip, 
which  carries  the  rope  a  uniform  distance  above  the  floor,  lifts 
the  rope  out  of  the  groove  and  lets  the  tub  pass  without  obstruc- 
tion, the  rope  falling  back  into  the  recess  immediately  the  tram 
has  gone  by.  Check  and  guard  rails  are  used  at  all  junctions,  as 
shown  by  the  figures. 
For  over-rope  haulage,  no  better  plan  can  be  adopted  than  that 
of  raising  up  the  empty  road  for  some  distance  before  the  junction, 
until  on  arriving  there,  sufficient  height  is  gained  to  allow  of  the 
construction  of  a  bridge,  over 
which  the  empty  tubs  pass  FIG.  257. 
either  straight  on  or  into  the 
branch  (Fig.  257),  and  be- neath which  the  full  tubs 
from  the  branch  are  taken. 
The  illustration  explains  the  arrangement,  which  is  preferable  to 
having  the  crossing  on  the  same  level;  there  is  no  chance  of 
collision  or  derailment,  and,  owing  to  the  height  to  which  the 
empty  tubs  are  raised,  they  run  freely  round  the  curves,  and 
require  scarcely  any  attention. 
CLIPS. — Tubs  are  attached  to  the  rope  in  many  different  ways. A  good  clip  should  be  capable  of  easy  and  ready  attachment  and 
detachment,  should  not  injure  the  rope,  have  few  wearing  parts, and  act  equally  well  on  a  downhill  or  uphill  gradient. 
Clips  for  "  Under  "  Haulage  :  Screw  Clip. — The  common form  of  clip  consists  of  two  plates  connected  together  by  a  screw, 
and  attached  to  a  hook,  through  which  they  can  be  joined  to  the 
draw-bar.  This  certainly  holds  the  rope,  but  is  neither  easy  to attach  or  detach. 
Smallmaris  Clip. — The  principle  of  this  is  the  same  as  that  of 
the  screw  clip,  but  the  gripping  action  is  obtained  in  a  much 
easier  and  readier  manner.  It  consists  of  two  plates  (a  a,  Figs.  258 

--- Page Break ---
218 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
and  259),  connected  together  by  a  bolt,  b,  in  the  centre ;  a  lever,  c, 
turning  about  a  point,  d,  is  provided,  its  shorter  arm  being  enlarged, 
as  shown  at  e  (Fig.  259).  This  slides  along  wedge-shaped  recesses 
in  the  side  plate,  and,  as  a  result,  the  lower  pare  of  the  plates 
FIGS.  258  AND  259. 
FIG.  260. 
can  either  grip  or  release  the  rope.  Adjustment  for  wear  can 
easily  be  made  by  tightening  the  bolt,  b.  A  very  powerful  grip  is 
obtained,  the  rope  is  not  damaged,  as  it  is  gripped  for  several 
inches,  attachment  is  easy,  and  the  clip  passes 
freely  round  curves.  It  is,  however,  rather  cumber- some, and  cannot  be  automatically  detached. 
Fishers  Clip  consists  of  a  hook  having  a  hinged 
piece,  a  (Fig.  260),  at  the  far  end,  which  can  be 
doubled  back  and  locked  by  a  sliding  collar,  b  ;  a 
recess  is  provided  to  receive  the  rope.  The  hook 
is  placed  in  the  draw-bar,  and  the  clip  grips  the 
rope  by  deflecting  a  small  portion  of  it.  It  is 
essential  that  the  hole  through  the  clip  should 
be  the  same  size  as  the  rope  and  of  softer  material, 
so  that  it  wears  itself  instead  of  the  rope.  To 
allow  this,  the  recess  is  provided  with  bushes,  c, 
of  soft  iron,  which  are  kept  in  position  by  rivets, 
and  are  easily  replaced  when  worn. 
With  Fisher's  or  any  similar  clip,  it  is  absolutely essential  that  the  rope  should  have  a  wire  core,  if 
not,  it  stretches  too  much,  and  the  clip  will  not 
hold.  The  hook  part  is  made  of  a  very  good  quality 
of  iron,  and  is  the  weakest  part,  so  that  in  the 
event  of  the  tub  being  derailed,  the  hook  straightens 
out  and  the  rope  is  not  damaged.  This  clip  acts 
equally  well  uphill  or  downhill  and  round  curves, 
and  can  be  easily  and  automatically  detached  in  the 
same  way  as  any  other  clip  which  is  locked  by  a  sliding  collar. 
Clips  for  Over  Haulage. — The  common  method  of  attaching 
tubs  to  the  rope  is  by  means  of  a  chain,  one  end  of  which  is 
booked  on  to  the  draw-bar  of  the  tub,  the  other  end  passed  twice 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
219 
round  the  haulage  rope,  and  then  hooked  back  on  to  the  chain 
passing  from  the  tub ;  as  soon  as  the  full  weight  comes  on  to  this 
chain,  the  coils  get  quite  close  together  and  form  a  compact 
fastening.  This  attachment  is  not  by  any  means  perfect,  although 
a  very  convenient  one.  On  undulating  gradients,  two  chains  are 
required — one  before  and  one  behind  each  tub,  but  both  must  not 
be  tight  at  the  same  time,  as  in  such  a  case,  if  the  rope  was  sud- 
denly stretched,  the  tub  would  inevitably  be  lifted  off  the  rails. 
"Wire  ropes  are  in  the  habit  of  twisting,  and  when  they  do,  if  the above  attachment  is  used,  the  chain  twists  with  them,  winding  up 
whatever  slack  portion  there  may  be ;  consequently,  on  reaching 
turn  pulleys,  or  any  bend,  where  the  rope  is  raised  higher  than 
its  normal  position,  the  tub  is  overturned,  and  all  succeeding  tubs 
are  overthrown  until  the  rope  is  stopped. 
Ward  and  Lloyd's  Clip. — Many  of  the  above  disadvantages  are overcome  by  the  clip  employed  at  Sandwell  Park  Colliery.  It  is 
exceedingly  simple,  consist- 
ing only  of  a  hinged  lever,  FIGS.  261  AND  262. to  the  bottom  end  of  which 
is  attached  the  chain  fastened 
to  the  tub.  (Figs.  261  and 
262).  The  lever  works  about 
a  pivot,  a,  and  immediately 
the  weight  of  the  tub  comes 
on  to  the  end,  b,  the  rope  is 
gripped  between  the  top  end, 
c,  and  the  curved  plate,  d. 
The  lever  is  hinged,  which 
allows  the  clip  to  fall  into 
the  guide  pulleys  when  pass- ing round  curves.  It  has 
now  been  in  use  six  years, 
and  has  given  every  satis- faction .  It  is  easily  attached 
and  detached,  but  this  cannot  be  done  automatically,  and  on  undu- 
lating gradients  two  clips  have  to  be  used  for  each  tub. 
Rutherford  and  Thompson's  Clip. — The  great  advantage  of  this appliance  is  that  it  automatically  attaches  and  detaches,  enabling 
curves  and  junctions  to  be  worked  on  the  gravity  principle,  in  the 
same  way  as  with  endless  chain  haulage.  It  does  away  with  one 
man  or  boy  at  each  junction,  for  with  an  ordinary  clip  some  one 
has  to  be  employed  to  take  off  empty  tubs  and  put  on  full  ones  ; 
while  with  this  one,  all  that  is  necessary  is  that  some  one  should 
be  in  attendance  to  space  the  tubs,  and  to  lift  off  the  clip  from  the 
empties,  and  attach  it  to  the  full  ones. 
Figs.  263,  264  and  265,  which  are  respectively  front  and  side 
elevations  and  plan,  show  details  of  the  rope  gripping  apparatus 
usually  employed,  which  is  composed  of  two  Y-forked  jaws,  a  a', 

--- Page Break ---
220 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  263,  264  AND  265. 
A 
mounted  and  geared  together  as  shown  by  Fig.  265,  so  that  they 
can  oscillate  about  the  two  pins,  b  &',  as  centres.  As  soon  as  the clip  comes  into  the  same  line  as  the  hauling  rope,  the  motion  of the  latter  turns  the  forks 
slightly  about  the  centres, 
b  b',  and  causes  them  to  close on  the  rope  and  grip  it 
firmly.  The  stronger  the 
pull,  the  tighter  the  grip, 
hence  the  clip  is  well  suited 
for  heavy  gradients  ;  and  as it  is  attached  to  the  tub 
through  a  rigid  rod,  which 
is  hooked  over  the  top  while 
the  other  end  passes  into  a 
small  bracket  on  the  front, 
and  as  the  jaws  can  move either  backwards  or  forwards 
it  works  well  on  undulating 
gradients. The  rope  can  be  lifted  out 
of  this  clip,  or  dropped  into 
it  again,  with  as  much  ease as  a  chain  is  lifted  out  of 
the  Y  on  an  ordinary  tub, 
but  inasmuch  as  these  clips  are  not  fixed  to  the  tub  but  are 
detachable,  an  arrangement  is  employed  to  prevent  them  being 
accidentally  lifted  off'  when  the  rope  is  disconnected. Automatic  Detachers.— Little  difficulty  is  found  in  automati- 
cally detaching  any  clips  of  such  a  type  as  Fisher's,  where  the grip  on  the  rope  is  determined  by  the  position  of  a  sliding  collar, 
because  if  this  collar  is  lifted  up,  the  clip  is  released.  If  the  rope 
and  clip  be  conducted  into  a  groove,  having  sides  arranged  on  an 
inclined  plane,  and  if  the  rope 
FIGS.  266  AND  267.  is    kept    down    as    the    clip 
passes  through,  the  collar  is lifted  up. 
At  Nunnery  Colliery  a  very 
simple  appliance  is  used  to 
perform  this  action.  At  the 
detaching  point,  two  strips of  iron  are  connected  at  one 
end     by   a   cross   piece,   and 
are  pivoted  about  pins  near 
the  centre.  Figs.  266  and  267  show  plan  and  elevation  of 
the  arrangement.  The  space  between  these  two  strips  is  wide 
enough  to  allow  the  rope  to  pass  through,  but  not  the  collar  on 
the  clip.  The  end,  c,  of  the  two  strips  of  iron  cannot  be  pressed 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 221 
down  because  the  other  end,  a,  is  under  the  rope,  consequently  the 
collar  of  the  clip  has  to  slide  up  the  inclined  plane  and  is  gradually 
lifted,  releasing  the  rope. 
An   apparatus    of   more    elaborate,  and    perhaps   more   sure 
character,  has  been  designed  by  Mr.  J.  F.  Lee,  of  Castle  Eden 
FIGS.  268  AND  269. 
Colliery.  It  consists  of  a  groove  having  inclined  sides,  out  of which  the  rope  and  the  lower  part  of  the  clip  cannot  be  lifted,  as each  side  is  formed  of  an  angle-piece  (Fig.  269).  The  con- 
FlG.   270. 
tinuation  of  the  jaws  is  made  by  two  levers  (a,  Fig.  268)  kept 
up  by  a  weight,  6,  but  when  the  pressure  becomes  excessive  they 
may  be  pushed  down,  the  object  of  this  being  that  the  levers  can 
accommodate  their  height  to  suit  the  varying  positions  of  collars 
on  different  clips.  The  rope  and  lower  part  of  the  clip  pass 
underneath  the  jaws,  which  taper  towards  the  point  of  exit ;  the 

--- Page Break ---
222  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
collar  passes  up  the  inclined  plane  and  is  lifted,  thus  detaching 
the  tub.  To  prevent  any  chance  of  failure,  the  collar  of  the  clip 
is  provided  with  a  flange. 
At  Skelton.  Park  Colliery*  the  ropes  are  attached  to  a  simple hook  beneath  the  tubs,  as  the  gradient  is  slight,  and  the  weight  is 
sufficient  to  haul  them  along.  They  are  detached  by  an 
apparatus,  consisting  of  a  lever  («,  Fig.  270)  working  between 
split  rails,  and  depressed  by  the  passing  tubs.  This  turns  the 
shaft,  d,  raises  the  lever,  6,  and  lifts  the  rope  out  of  the  hook,  c. 
At  the  same  time,  a  slight  divergence  is  made  in  the  line  of  rails, 
causing  the  hook  to  move  aside  from  the  rope,  which  then  drops 
when  released  by  the  lever,  b. 
With  Rutherford  and  Thompson's  clip,  detachment  is  obtained 
FIGS.  271  AND  272.  FIG.  273. 
la, 
by  an  appliance  which  consists  of  a  holding-down  pulley  (a,  Figs. 
271  and  272),  and  of  two  inclined  guide-blocks,  b,  one  on  each side  of  the  rope,  the  spaces  between  them  being  such  that  the 
rope  can  rise  up,  but  that  the  forks  of  the  clip  catch  the  under  side. 
As  a  tub  and  its  clip  come  to  the  detacher  the  rope  gradually 
gets  higher  and  higher,  tending  to  lift  the  clip  out  of  its  socket, 
but  is  prevented  from  doing  so  by  the  two  guide  blocks,  b  b,  which 
catch  the  top  of  the  forks.  Ultimately  the  rope  is  lifted  com- 
pletely out,  and  the  tub  runs  away.  With  a  clip  having  a  very 
tight  grip,  a  jerk  is  thrown  on  the  rope  by  such  action,  and  to 
prevent  this  extending  down  the  road  to  the  tubs  further  in- bye, 
a  movable  holding-down  pulley  is  placed  a  short  distance  away 
which  checks  vibration  in  the  following  manner  : — A  shaft  («,  Fig. 
273)  is  fixed  across  the  road  above  the  rope  and  on  it  are  keyed 
three  arms,  one  carrying  a  holding-down  pulley,  /;,  the  second 
having  a  weight,  c,  at  the  end  of  a  lever,  while  the  third,  d, 
hangs  downwards.  The  action  of  c  is  to  keep  the  pulley  firmly  on 
the  rope,  and  that  of  d  to  lift  the  pulley  when  the  tubs  are 
passing,  this  being  necessary,  or  the  clips  would  catch  it  and  break. 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxxi.  105. 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE. 
223 
The  tubs  which  are  travelling  in  the  direction  from  a  to  6,  push 
aside  the  arm  d  which  hangs  down  before  them,  and  on  doing 
so,  turns  the  shaft,  «,  round,  and  lifts  up  the  pulley  and  weight, 
which  fall  again  immediately  the  tub  has  passed. 
At  curves,  where  the  continuing  road  is  on  a  downhill  gradient, 
the  tubs  run  round  and  attach  themselves  to  the  rope  again  imme- 
diately this  comes  low  enough  to  grip  the  clip,  but  where  the 
gradient  rises  out-bye  other  means  have  to  be  employed,  as  the 
rope  tends  to  get  further  away  from  the  clip.  It  is  impossible  to 
deflect  the  rope  far  enough  downwards  with  a  fixed  guide  pulley, 
as  these  have  to  be  placed  high  enough  to  clear  the  clip.  The 
movable  one  just  described  is  inadmissible  here,  as  the  tubs  being 
detached  from  the  rope,  are  only  moving  with  the  force  due  to 
FIG.  274. 
the  inclination  of  the  road,  and  would  not  have  sufficient  power  to 
lift  the  lever  and  weight.  The  ingenious  appliance  shown  in  Fig. 
2  74  has  been  designed  to  meet  such  cases.  A  pulley,  a,  is  fixed 
at  such  a  height  as  will  allow  the  tub  and  clip  to  pass  beneath 
when  it  is  in  its  normal  position.  This  pulley  is  not  a  fixture, 
but  it  is  suspended  from  a  shaft,  6,  fitted  with  guide  blocks,  and 
connected  by  crank  levers,  c  d  e,  and/gr  h,  and  the  links,  b  c,  ej 
and  h  i,  with  the  rails  forming  the  road  at  this  point.  There  are 
two  sets  of  levers,  one  on  each  side  of  the  rails.  The  rails,  for  a 
distance  of  about  1 2  ft.,  are  carried  on  a  platform  hinged  at  the 
point,  7c,  and  by  means  of  a  balance-weight  take  the  inclination shown  at  i  k.  The  tubs  when  detached  from  the  rope,  run  down 
the  slope,  I  &,  pass  beneath  the  pulley,  a,  and  continue  by  the 
momentum  they  have  gained  up  the  slope,  i  k ;  their  weight, 
however,  over-balances  the  counterpoise.  The  platform  descends 
about  the  centre,  k,  takes  the  position,  i'  k,  pulls  down  the  link, h  i,  moves  over  the  two  cranks,  and  depresses  the  guide  pulley,  «, 
and  the  rope  to  such  a  distance  that  it  is  caught  by  the  clip,  and 
the  tub  consequently  moves  away.  As  soon  as  the  tub  has  gone 
off  the  platform,  the  counterpoise  raises  it  again  and  the  guide 
pulley,  so  that  the  whole  appliance  is  automatic.  The  points 
d,  g  and  k,  are  fixed,  the  remainder  movable.  At  the  moment  of 

--- Page Break ---
224  TEXT-BOOK  OJF  COAL-MINING, 
attachment  of  the  tubs  to  the  rope,  the  different  parts  of  the 
apparatus  occupy  the  position  shown  by  the  dotted  lines ;  the 
travel  of  the  pulley, «,  is  about  10  in. 
Threading  the  Rope. — It  is  rather  a  difficult  matter  to  put 
on  the  first  rope  of  a  new  application  of  endless  rope  haulage.  As 
supplied  by  the  manufacturers,  ropes  are  very  carefully  coiled 
and  should  be  unwrapped  from  the  outside,  care  being  taken  that 
no  "  slack  "  is  payed  out,  or  the  rope  will  at  once  kink  and  spoil itself.  If  a  new  rope  is  replacing  an  old  one,  the  threading  is  an 
easy  matter,  but  one  requiring  care.  First  of  all,  the  old  rope  is 
cut  through,  and  one  end  of  the  new  rope  attached  to  the  old  one, 
but  in  between  the  two  ends  a  swivel  must  be  placed.  The  object 
of  this  is  to  take  out  all  the  twist  in  the  new  rope ;  unless  this  is 
done,  difficulty  will  afterwards  be  experienced  in  the  working. 
The  coil  of  rope  is  placed  on  a  turntable  to  which  some  moderately 
strong  brake  power  can  be  applied.  The  engine  is  then  started 
and  the  old  rope  moves  away,  dragging  with  it  the  new  one,  the 
latter  following  the  former,  and  occupying  its  place.  When  the  two 
ends  come  together,  they  should  be  strained  as  tight  as  possible, 
which  is  done  by  attaching  blocks,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the 
tension  pulley  is  braced  up  as  close  as  can  be,  as  the  ropes  invari- ably stretch  in  use. 
Unless  an  old  rope  is  available,  horses  have  to  be  employed ; 
their  movements  are  very  irregular,  and  there  is  considerably  more 
chance  of  damaging  the  rope. 
Comparison. — If  a  good  representative  of  each  type  of  haulage is  taken,  the  cost  per  ton  per  mile  is  about  the  same  in  all  of 
them.  To  a  great  extent,  the  cost  depends  on  the  number  of 
junctions  and  branches,  because  attendants  have  to  be  provided 
at  these  points  to  attach  the  tubs.  In  comparing  the  cost  of  one 
system  with  another,  it  is  usual  to  reduce  the  cost  to  a  uniform 
distance  hauled  of  one  mile — that  is  to  say,  if  the  cost  is  twopence 
per  ton  per  half  mile,  a  simple  proportion  gives  fourpence  per  ton 
for  one  mile,  but  although  some  uniform  distance  must  be  intro- 
duced, yet  it  does  not  give  a  fair  comparison  in  every  instance. 
Take,  for  example,  an  endless  rope  or  chain  plane,  exactly  a  mile 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  with  no  junctions.  One  man 
at  each  end  should  perform  all  the  labour  of  taking  off  and  put- 
ting on  the  tubs,  and  the  cost  per  mile,  on  the  one  mile  length, 
would  be  very  small ;  but  if,  in  another  case,  there  are  four  junc- tions in  a  similar  length  of  plane,  each  of  these  junctions  will 
require  the  services  of  an  attendant,  and  the  labour  cost  will  show 
very  much  higher  than  in  the  former  case,  providing  the  same 
quantity  is  hauled,  and  yet  the  two  planes  may  be  exact  facsimiles 
of  each  other,  and  both  be  laid  out  with  the  same  care  and  labour 
saving  appliances. 
Another  point  to  which  attention  should  be  directed  is  that  in 
published  statements  of  costs,  many  estimates  entirely  overlook 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  225 
some  part  of  the  first  cost  of  the  plant.  Hauling  engines  cannot 
be  worked  without  steam,  and  the  extra  amount  for  additional 
pulleys,  fittings,  pipes,  &c.,  caused  by  adding  haulage  machinery, 
should  be  charged  against  the  plant.  Then  again,  the  stores' charges  for  the  machinery  should  be  noted. 
The  most  careful  experiments  which  have  ever  been  made  to 
determine  the  cost  of  different  systems  were  those  carried  out  by 
the  North  of  England  Institute.*  This  was,  however,  many  years ago.  The  endless  rope  system  was  then  in  its  infancy,  while  little 
improvement  has  since  taken  place  in  either  the  tail  rope  or  end- 
less chain  systems.  This  report  strongly  brought  out  the  merits 
of  endless  chain  haulage,  so  far  as  regards  its  ease  and  cost  of 
working,  but  friction  clutches,  automatic  detachers,  improved 
driving  pulleys,  and  the  other  similar  labour-saving  appliances  of modern  endless  rope  haulage  were  then  unknown.  At  that  time, 
a  life  of  one  or  two  years  in  a  haulage  rope  was  considered  a  very 
good  performance  ;  at  the  present  time  seven  to  nine  years  is  by 
no  means  an  unusual  occurrence.  At  many  collieries  the  rope 
cost  per  ton-mile  does  not  exceed  o.2d. 
The  great  advantage  of  the  endless  rope  system  is  the  perfect 
regularity  of  the  delivery.  The  tubs  come  one  at  a  time  at 
regular  intervals,  and  are  easily  dealt  with ;  in  addition,  the  full 
tubs  going  down  inclines  assist  in  pulling  the  empty  tubs  up. 
Both  these  advantages  are  common  to  the  endless  chain  system, 
but  the  disadvantages  of  the  latter  is  the  enormous  weight  of  the 
chain  and  its  liability  to  break,  especially  on  long  planes.  For 
surface  work,  the  endless  chain  possesses  one  advantage,  inasmuch 
as  it  is  little  affected  by  the  action  of  the  weather,  but  under- ground this  advantage  disappears. 
With  the  tail  rope  system  the  tubs  work  in  sets,  and,  there- 
fore, travel  at  a  high  velocity,  fifteen  to  twenty  miles  an  hour 
being  often  reached.  The  delivery  is  intermittent;  a  train  of 
from  fifty  to  sixty  tubs  is  brought  into  the  pit  bottom  at  a  time, 
and  men  have  to  be  there  to  deal  with  the  set ;  on  its  arrival,  all 
is  hurry  and  confusion  for  a  few  minutes  until  the  empty  set  has 
been  despatched  to  the  workings,  and  then  the  men  have  little  to 
do.  Should  a  tub  become  derailed  when  travelling  at  this  speed 
the  damage  done  is  considerable.  With  an  endless  rope,  travel- 
ling at  only  two  or  three  miles  an  hour,  there  is  little  possibility 
of  derailment,  and  even  if  this  does  occur,  the  damage  done  is 
slight.  With  the  tail  rope  system,  less  length  of  rail  is  required, 
but  a  larger  pair  of  engines  are  necessary  than  for  endless  rope, 
because  in  the  former  case  they  have  to  be  powerful  enough,  to 
deal  with  the  heaviest  load  up  the  heaviest  gradient,  have  to  travel 
at  a  very  high  speed,  and  derive  no  benefit  from  the  counter- 
balancing effect  of  gravity  on  undulating  gradients.  Their  action 
*  Vol.  xvii. 

--- Page Break ---
226  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
is  intermittent  and  they  require  an  engineman  always  in  attend- 
ance. It  has  been  pointed  out  that  main  and  tail  rope  haulage 
possesses  an  advantage  over  the  other  types,  inasmuch  as  the  men 
may  ride  in-bye,  with  the  result  that  their  time  at  the  face  is 
increased.  The  advantage  is,  however,  not  a  large  one,  as  only  a 
small  proportion  of  the  total  men  employed  can  be  transported  in 
the  first  set  travelling  in-bye.  This  is  practically  the  only  one 
available,  as  before  the  second  set  is  ready,  the  remaining  men could  walk  to  their  work. 
With  the  endless  rope  system,  the  constant  attendance  of  an 
engineman  can  be  dispensed  with  by  arranging  a  clutch  gear  at 
the  bottom  of  the  pit,  where  the  main  strap  rope  terminates. 
This  point  is  the  principal  junction  of  the  pit,  and  men  have  to  be 
there  to  attach  and  detach  the  tubs.  If  a  signal  comes  from  the 
workings  to  stop  the  main  rope,  one  of  these  men  can  easily  turn 
the  wheel  which  disconnects  the  clutch  gear,  and  the  engine  on 
bank  may  continue  running.  The  author  is  not  aware  where  the 
services  of  an  engineman  have  been  dispensed  with  at  a  hauling 
engine,  except  in  the  instances  of  two  of  the  collieries  under  his 
charge.  By  spending  ^100  on  a  good  efficient  clutch  gear  oue 
engineman  looks  after  three  continuously  running  engines — i.e., 
hauling,  fan,  and  shop  machinery,  and  not  the  slightest  hitch  has 
ever  occurred.  The  only  objection  to  this  system  is  the  possibility 
of  some  accident  happening  to  the  shaft  rope,  but  an  experience 
of  eight  years  does  not  support  such  contention. 
The  author  has  at  work  every  system  of  haulage  ;  but  the  one 
that  stands  pre-eminent  is,  undoubtedly,  the  slow  moving  endless 
rope,  with  the  tubs  attached  at  regular  intervals.  This  appears 
to  be  the  common  experience,  as  nine  out  of  every  ten  systems 
which  have  been  put  to  work  during  the  last  ten  years  are  endless 
rope,  with  the  probable  exception  of  the  North  of  England,  and 
even  there  this  system  is  rapidly  gaining  ground. 
An  endless  rope  can  be  employed  anywhere,  although  to  obtain 
the  best  results  the  roads  should  be  laid  out  to  suit  it.  The  only 
objection  against  it  is  that  a  double  road  is  necessary  to  obtain  its 
advantages  to  perfection,  and  that  double  roads  are  expensive  to 
maintain  where  the  roof  is  bad.  As  previously  pointed  out, 
even  this  disadvantage  may  be,  and  is,  removed  by  employing  two 
roads,  each  laid  with  a  single  line  of  rails,  one  for  the  full  tubs 
and  one  for  the  empties. 
Locomotives. — At  best,  haulage  by  locomotives  is  not  to  be recommended,  as  neglecting  the  dangers  of  and  the  difficulties  of 
dealing  with  the  smoke,  steam,  &c.,  the  system  has  the  disadvan- tage of  being  intermittent  in  the  matter  of  supply.  The  engines 
have  to  be  small  ones,  and  are  not  only  very  expensive  in  up-keep, but  are  very  liable  to  derailment.  Locomotives  worked  by  steam 
have  been  applied  in  English  collieries  and  in  the  American 
anthracite  mines.  Locomotives  worked  by  compressed  air  have 

--- Page Break ---
HAULAGE.  227 
been  tried  on  several  occasions,  but  have  never  given  satisfac- tion. 
Electric  Locomotives.— The  first  locomotive  worked  by 
electricity  was  applied  in  1882  at  Zauckerode  Colliery  in  Saxony. 
The  current  is  conveyed  along  the  roof  of  the  roadways  by  a 
J_  iron  conductor,  and  is  transmitted  to  the  motor  by  a  conducting 
piece  which  slides  along  the  j_  iron.  The  locomotive  has  worked 
most  satisfactorily  ever  since  its  application,  and  performs  the  work 
more  cheaply  than  horses  which  it  replaced.  Altogether,  there 
are  four  electrical  locomotives  in  German  mines,  and  Mr.  K. 
Eilers*  states  that  the  cost  of  tramming  with  electricity  is  at Stassfurt  and  Zauckerode,  75  per  cent.,  and  at  Hohenzollern 
Colliery,  67  per  cent,  of  what  it  originally  was  when  horses  were 
employed. 
At  the  present  time  (1893)  the  only  electrical  locomotive  em- 
ployed in  English  mines  is  that  introduced  by  Mr.  G.  B.  Walker 
at  YVharncliffe  Silkstone,f  where  the  engine  does  not  depend  for 
its  grip  on  the  friction  between  the  wheels  and  the  rails,  but  gets 
a  direct  pull  on  a  fixed  rope.  The  latter  is  fixed  at  either  end  and 
lies  parallel  to  the  road,  and  is  passed  over  a  sprocket  wheel  or 
friction  clutch  geared  in  a  suitable  manner  to  an  electric  motor  on 
a  trolley.  The  road  is  500  yds.  long,  the  inclination  averages  4  in. 
to  the  yard,  and  the  rolling  load  is  approximately  4  tons. 
Several  installations  have  been  made  in  American  mines,  and 
Mr.  H.  C.  SpauldingJ  states  that  the  Thomson-Houston  Co.  have 
recently  constructed  the  largest  in  that  country.  The  locomotive 
is  60  H.P.,  weighs  21,600  Ibs.,  is  3  ft.  gauge,  and  has  a  maximum 
speed  of  10  miles  an  hour.  The  armature  speed  is  1020  revolutions 
per  minute,  and  the  locomotive  is  3  ft.  3  J  in.  high,  3  ft.  6£  in.  wide, 
and  12  ft.  6£  in.  long. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject- matter  of  this  chapter  : — 
N.  E.  I. :  On  the  Conveyance  of  Coal  Underground,  N.  Wood,  iii.  239  and 
Appendix,  v.  65 ;  Conveyance  of  Coal  Underground,  John  Daglish, 
xvi-  53  5  Underground  Haulage  at  Pulton  Colliery,  D.  P.  Morison  and 
J.  Nelson,  xvi.  117;  Report  of  Tail  Rope  Committee,  xvii;  De- 
scription  of  fourteen  different  Methods  of  Lubricating  Coal  Tubs  or 
Corves,  Emerson  Bainbridge,  xxv.  215  and  xxvii.  8 ;  A  new  Method  of 
Rnpe  Haulage,  J.  Pease,  xxviii.  235  ;  Some  Remarks  on  Endless  Rope 
Jfaulage,  W.  Jackson,  xxviii.  243  ;  Points  of  Interest  at  the  Skelton 
Park  and  Lumpsey  Mines,  A.  L.  Steavenson,  xxxi.  105  :  The  Feeding 
and  Management  of  Colliery  Horses,  Charles  Hunting,  xxxii.  61. 
SOC.  IND.  MIX.  :  Note  sur  la  traction  mecanique  par  corde-tete  et  corde-queue 
installee  aux  mines  d'Aniclie  a  la  fosse  Sainte  Marie,  G.  Vuillemin 
(2e  8<3rie),  iv.  429  ;  Exposition  de  1878  :  De  divers  systemes  de  traction mecanique  appliques,  ou  pouvant  tfappliquer,  aux  mines,  P.  Holtzer 
(2"  Serie),  ix.  129;  Trainage  mecanique,  puits  Jules  Chagot,  Mines  d& 
Jilmi~ti,  E.  Snissft  (V  Si-vie'),  i.  451;. 
*  Amer.  Inst.  M.  E.  xx.  365.  t  Inst.  C.  E.  civ.  116. 
J  Eng.  and  Min.  Jour.  Oct.  jo,  1891,  p.  434. 

--- Page Break ---
228       TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
BEIT.  soc.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Tail  Rope  Haulage,  J.  Wroe,  i.  328  ;  Description  nf 
improved  Colliery  Stables,  J.  P.  Kirkup,  iv.  127  ;  Shoeing  of  Pit 
Horses,  J.  A.  Longden,  iv.  107 ;  Conveyance  of  Coal  underground  by 
Electricity,  J.  A.  Longden,  vi.  1 14 ;  Electric  Haulage  at  Zauckerode 
Colliery,  H.  W.  Hughes,  viii.  47  and  ix.  79  ;  Haulage  of  Coa's,  Emma Pit,  Towneley  Colliery,  F.  R  Simpson,  x.  1 72 ;  Underground  Haulage, 
Historical  Notes,  &c.,  H.  F.  Bulman,  xi.  166  ;  Endless  Hope  Haulage 
at  Castle  Eden  Colliery,  W.  Bell,  xiii.  63  ;  Endless  Rope  Haulage  'at South  Derwent  Colliery,  H.  W.  Hughes,  xiii.  113. 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT,  :  Fife  System  of  Cut  Chain  Haulage  on  Inclines,  R.  Andrew, 
ii.  122  ;  Haulage  by  Endless  Ropes  and  Chains,  M.  McFarlane, 
ii.  256  ;  Haulage  Experiences,  J.  Hyslop,  iii.  303 ;  Tail  Rope  Haulage 
at  Earnock  Colliery,  James  Gilohrist,  vi.  206  ;  Cadzow  Colliery  End- 
less Rope  Haulage  System,  D.  Ferguson,  vii.  78  ;  Description  of  Haul- 
age Exhibits  at  Newcastle  Exhibition  (1887),  ix.  106  ;  A  System  of  End- 
less Hope  Haulage  at  Newbattle  Colliery,  A.  M.  Grant,  ix.  211  ;  77cm/- 
age  by  Self -Acting  Endless  Chains,  D.  M,  Mowat,  x.  152;' 7%  Ponies, their  Feeding  and  Management,  J.  B.  Hamilton,  xi.  260. 
SO.  WALES.  INST.  :  The  comparative  merits  of  Large  and  Small  Trams  for 
Colliery  Use,  James  Brogden,  vi.  173  ;  Small  Trams,  Thomas  Burns 
vii.  164 ;  Underground  Horses,  W.  D.  Wight,  xii.  285 ;  Endless  Rope 
Haulage,  James  Colquhoun,  xiii.  123;  Endless  Rope  Haulage  at 
Clifton  Colliery,  Nottinghamshire,  H.  Huxham,  xiv.  33;  Thellasard 
Collieries,  Belgium,  M.  W.  Davis,  xv.  192. 
ENG.  AND  MIN.  JOUE. :  Improvements  in  Winding  (Haulage}  Machinery, 
1.  8,  July  1890;  Gravity  Plane  at  Moulton  Hill  Mine,  Quebec, 
Ii.  143  and  325,  Jan.  and  March  1891. 
CUES.  INST.  :  Pit  Ponies,  J.  A.  Longden,  ix.  273  :  Endless  Rope  Haulage  at 
Clifton  Colliery,  Henry  Fisher,  xii.  123. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC.  :  Underground  Haulage  at  Astley  and  TyUesley  Collieries, 
G.  H.  Peace,  xvii.  354. 
AMEE.  INST.  M.  E.  :  Wire  Rope  Hau'oge  and  its  application  to  Mining, F.  C.  Roberts,  xvi.  213;  Electricity  and  Haulage,  F.  A.  Pocock, 
xviii.  412;  Electric  Locomotives  in  German  Mines,  K.  Eilers,  xx.  356. 
N.  STAFF!  INST.:  A  few  remarks  on  'Underground  Haulage,  J.  R.  Haines, vi.  194. 
REV.  UNIV.:  Note  sur  le  trainage  automoteur par  chaitieflottante  cles  mines  de, 
Fillols,  C.  Blanchart  (2e  Serie),  vi.  142 ;  Note  sur  un  syateme  de 
plancher  mobile  en  fer  applicable  ti  T exploitation  des  tallies  chassantes 
par  plan  incline,  C.  Ruidant  (3°  Serie),  ii.  80. 
ANN.  DES  MINES  :  Note  sur  quelques  details  de  plans  inclines  automoteurs, 
M.  Villot  (8e  Serie),  xvi.  409. 
FED.  INST.  :  A  short  description  of  the  Underground  System  of  Haulage  at 
Mitchell  Main  Colliery,  T.  W.  H.  Mitchell,  iii.  147  ;  Electric  Haulage 
at  the  Cannock  and  Rugdey  Collieries,  R.  S.  Williamson,  iii.  483  ; 
Electric  Haulage  at  West  Cannock  Colliery,  W.  Wardle,  iii.  486  ; 
Underground  Haulage  by  Endless  Rope  at  Ansley  Hall  Colliery,  W.  G. 
Phillips,  iii.  847  ;  Underground  Haulage  at  the  West  Riding  Collieries, 
Normanton,  W.  E.  Garforth,  iii.  960  ;  Endless  Rope  Hau'age  at Thorncliffc,  Rockinghatn  and  Tankersley  Collieries,  W.  Hoole 
Chambers,  iii.  970. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER    IX. 
WINDING. 
THE  material  having  been  brought  to  the  pit  bottom,  the  next  thing 
is  to  convey  it  to  the  surface.  This  is  done  by  placing  the  tubs  in 
a  suitable  apparatus  called  the  cage,  to  which  one  end  of  a  rope 
is  connected,  while  the  other  is  attached  to,  and  wound  round,  the 
drum  of  an  engine  at  the  surface.  On  reaching  the  top,  the  full 
tubs  are  taken  off  and  replaced  by  empty  ones,  and  the  cage  then descends. 
Pit  Frames. — As  some  support  has  to  be  provided  for  the  rope, 
a  pit  frame  with  pulley  attached  is  used  for  such  purpose.  At 
modern  collieries  with  large  winding  machinery  running  at  quick 
speeds,  one  stroke  of  the  engine  means  a  considerable  lift  of  the 
cage,  and  unless  the  head-gear  pulleys  are  placed  a  good  height above  the  surface  level,  and  the  engineman  is  very  careful,  the 
cage  may  be  brought  up  against  the  pulley,  and  over-winding 
take  place.  In  addition,  the  great  majority  of  collieries  are 
provided  with  screening  appliances,  which  are  inclined  so  that  the 
coal  may  run  down  them,  and,  as  the  trucks  into  which  the  coal  is 
loaded  stand  at  the  ground  level,  the  landing  place  has  to  be  some 
distance  higher  up.  A  further  height  is  therefore  given  to  the 
pit  frame,  and  it  is  quite  common  to  find  the  head-gear  pulleys 60  or  70  ft.  above  the  ground.  These  erections  are  constructed  of 
different  materials.  On  the  Continent,  towers  of  masonry  are 
employed,  but  such  procedure  has  never  received  favour  in  this 
country,  nor,  indeed,  a  very  extended  application  anywhere  else. 
The  material  mostly  in  favour,  until  recently,  was  wood,  wrought- iron  was  afterwards  employed,  and,  as  in  every  other  branch  of 
engineering,  the  use  of  steel  is  rapidly  becoming  common. 
Before  describing  the  method  of  construction,  perhaps  it  would 
be  best  to  refer  to  the  general  method  of  design.  The  structure, 
as  a  rule,  consists  of  six  main  parts :  (i)  two  vertical  upright  legs 
(to  carry  the  weight  to  be  lifted)  ;  (2)  two  front  vertical  legs  (for 
affording  support  to  the  cross  timbers  carrying  the  guide  ropes)  ; 
(3)  two  back  legfc  (to  prevent  the  whole  structure  being  dragged 
over  by  the  pull  of  the  winding-rope  going  to  the  engine).  These 
main  legs  are  braced  and  connected  together  by  various  cross- 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
pieces,  added  to  give  general  stability  to  the  whole  structure. 
There  is  nothing  particular  in  the  four  legs  of  the  front  frame- 
work, except  that  they  enclose  a  wider  space  at  the  ground  level 
than  at  the  top,  the  object  of  such  being  to  prevent  them  toppling 
over  sideways ;  but  the  position  of  the  back  legs  is  of  considerable 
importance.  Their  bottom  ends  have  to  be  placed  at  such  a  dis- 
tance from  the  front  legs  as  will  effectually  prevent  any  chance  of 
the  frame  being  pulled  over  towards  the  winding-engine.  The 
proper  position  of  these  back  legs  is  very  easily  determined, 
although  in  many  instances  they  are  placed  anywhere  but  in  the 
right  position.  Often  they  are  carried  so  far  towards  the  winding- 
engine  that  additional  vertical  supports  have  to  be  provided 
underneath  them ;  no  advantage  is  gained  by  this,  indeed  it  only 
introduces  an  element  of  instability,  as  the  legs  may  not  be  strong 
enough  even  to  carry  their  own  weight.  The  strain  on  the  pit 
frame,  both  as  regards  direction  and  amount,  is  the  resultant  of 
two  forces.  First  of  all  there  is  the  weight — viz.,  the  weight  of  the 
tubs,  coal,  cage,  and  the  rope  hanging  down  the  shaft,  which  is  a 
moving,  or  live  load,  and,  therefore,  throws  more  strain  on  the structure  than  if  it  were  an  inert  mass.  The  other  strain  is  that 
coming  from  the  winding-rope,  which  has  to  exert  sufficient  power to  lift  up  the  weight  hanging  in  the  shaft  at  a  certain  velocity. 
The  direction  of  the  pull  due  to  the  weight  in  the  shaft  is  always 
vertical,  but  the  direction  of  the  one  due  to  the  winding-rope 
may  be  at  any  angle  to  the  vertical,  its  direction  being  determined 
by  the  height  of  the  head-gear,  and  the  height  of  the  drum  above ground  level,  and  its  distance  from  the  centre  of  the  shaft. 
The  relative  position  of  the  back  legs  to  the  front  ones  is  deter- 
mined by  the  principle  of  the  parallelogram  of  forces,  and  may 
either   be   worked   out    by 
FIG.  275.  calculation   or    graphically. 
Supposing  a  b  (Fig.  275)  is 
the  ground  level,  c  the  pul- 
ley, and  d  the  drum  of  the 
winding- engine  ;  c  b  is  the direction  of  the  force  acting 
—  downwards,  and  c  d  that 
due  to  the  winding-rope, 
and  which  tends  to  over- turn the  structure.  Under 
ordinary  circumstances  the 
amount  of  force  acting  along  c  d  must  be  equal  to  that  along  c  b. 
Take  the  distance  c  b  as  being  equal  to  the  amount  of  force 
acting  in  that  direction,  and  lay  off  along  c  d  a  distance  c  e,  equal 
to  c  b.  From  e,  a  line,  ef,  is  drawn  parallel  to  c  6,  and  another 
line,  bf,  is  drawn  parallel  to  c  e.  The  direction  and  magnitude  of 
the  resultant  force  will  be  given  by  the  line  c/,  the  diagonal  of 
the  parallelogram.  In  the  case  under  consideration,  the  back- 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  231 
stay  should  reach  the  ground  at  the  point  g,  where  the  diagonal 
cuts  the  line  a  b ;  but,  even  at  the  best  regulated  collieries,  acci- 
dents happen,  and  the  cage  may  be  drawn  violently  against  the 
head-gear,  or,  even  without  doing  this,  it  is  possible  for  some 
larger  power  to  be  applied  along  the  line  c  d  than  that  due  to 
the  weight  hanging  down  the  shaft.  To  be  on  the  safe  side,  it  is 
preferable  to  lay  off  along  c  d  a  distance  c  e'  equal  to  twice  c  6, 
ef  and  bf  are  drawn  parallel  to  c  b'  and  c  d'  respectively,  and 
the  parallelogram  constructed  as  before.  The  point  g',  where  the diagonal  c  f  cuts  the  line  a  b,  will  determine  the  length  of  the 
base  of  the  pit  frame.  In  an  actual  case  of  over- winding,  the 
weight  of  the  pit  frames  reduces  the  likelihood  of  their  being 
pulled  over,  and  adds  to  their  stability;  indeed,  it  is  very  pro- 
bable that  unless  a  detaching-hook  is  used,  either  the  head-gear 
would  be  smashed  or  the  rope  broken. 
Wood. — Where  wood  is  the  material  used  it  is  generally  pitch- 
pine,  which  should  be  free  from  sap  and  knots.  The  height  and 
position  of  the  back  legs  having  been  determined,  the  strengths  of 
the  required  timbers  are  found  by  calculation,  and  depend  on  the 
height  and  load  to  be  carried.  In  side  elevation,  the  front  legs 
are  vertical,  their  position  with  respect  to  the  centre  of  the  shaft 
being  determined  by  the  size  of  the  pulley,  because  they  come 
directly  under  its  centre,  while  the  throat  of  the  pulley  has  to  allow 
the  rope  to  pass  down  the  axis  of  the  shaft.  In  end  elevation,  the 
width  at  the  top  is  determined  by  the  distance  between  the 
centres  of  the  two  cages,  because  each  pulley  has  to  lead  its  own 
rope  on  to  the  centre  of  each  cage.  If  to  the  distance  between 
the  centres  of  the  cages,  be  added  the  distance  between  the 
centres  of  the  pulleys'  bearings,  the  length  from  centre  to  centre 
of  the  two  main  cap-pieces  is  obtained.  This  gives  the  width  at 
the  top.  The  width  at  the  bottom  is  determined  by  the  amount 
of  inclination  given  to  the  legs,  which  is  usually  i  in  9  or  10. 
The  main  legs,  both  back  and  front,  are  braced  and  connected 
together  by  horizontal  and  diagonal  struts,  and  often  too  many 
are  introduced.  There  is  no  necessity  to  add  one  more  than  is 
absolutely  necessary,  as  they  only  weaken  the  erection  by  burden- 
ing it  with  additional  weight.  The  structure  often  rests  on  two 
main  parallel  sills  running  from  the  back  to  the  front  legs,  but 
such  practice  is  not  recommended.  These  sills  rest  on  brick- 
work, and  dirt  and  soil  accumulate  around  them,  with  the  result 
that  they  are  the  first  part  of  the  structure  to  get  rotten,  and, 
no  matter  how  carefully  they  are  painted,  decay  cannot  be  pre- 
vented The  best  plan  is  to  put  each  leg  into  a  cast-iron  shoe 
(similar  to  Figs.  276-278),  resting  on  a  pillar  of  masonry,  and  held 
in  position  by  tie-bolts.  Part  of  the  timber  is  buried  in  the  shoe, 
and  at  the  point  where  the  iron  ends  and  the  timber  first  becomes 
exposed  to  the  atmosphere  a  crevice  exists,  through  which  moisture 
and  damp  can  find  its  way.  Unless  this  is  prevented,  the  timber 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
WINDING  233 
will  rot  quicker  than  if  it  was  on  wooden  sills.  To  prevent  this,  the 
joints  should  be  most  carefully  filled  in  with  putty  and  painted, 
and  then  a  strip  of  zinc  placed  all  round. 
Iron  or  Steel. — Pit  frames  have  gradually  increased  in  height, 
and  the  tendency  has  also  been  to  raise  heavier  loads  at  quicker 
speeds.  It  has,  therefore,  become  difficult,  to  obtain  timber  of  the 
required  size  and  lengths,  except  at  great  expense.  As  a  result, 
wrought-iron  erections  were  first  substituted,  to  be  replaced  in 
their  turn  by  steel.  The  position  of  the  various  parts  should  be 
the  same  as  if  wood  were  used.  On  the  Continent,  a  design  is 
employed  where  the  legs  are  composed  of  tubular  girders  braced 
together  by  channel  section  stays,  but  the  general  English  practice 
is  to  construct  the  legs  either  of  box  or  lattice  girders.  A  fine 
example  of  the  latter  design  is  one  of  the  pit  frames  at  Sandweli 
Park  Colliery,  the  construction  of  which  is  shown  in  Figs.  276  to 
278,  which  are  respectively  side,  front,  and  back  elevations.  The 
general  construction  and  dimensions  are  given  on  the  illustrations. 
All  the  main  struts  are  of  lattice  girder  work,  which  consists  of 
four  angles,  one  at  each  corner,  connected  by  diagonal  pieces  of  flat 
strip ;  the  pulleys  are  carried  by  girders,  which  are  of  box  con- struction in  section,  but  the  sides  are  lattice  work  to  allow  for 
the  adjustment  of  the  pulley  carriages.  The  plates  shown  in  the 
front  elevations  are  open  at  the  bottom. 
As  the  legs  have  to  bear  less  weight  at  the  top  than  at  the 
bottom,  it  is  common  to  make  them  taper.  With  a  lattice  girder, 
if  it  tapers,  every  set  of  cross-pieces  binding  the  corner  angles 
together  is  necessarily  of  a  different  length,  which  increases  the 
cost  of  manufacture ;  to  remove  this  disadvantage,  the  legs  have 
lately  been  made  parallel  throughout.  By  doing  this  the  weight 
of  the  girders  is  slightly  increased,  and  they  are  stronger  at  the  top 
than  required,  but  as  the  cross-stays  in  each  girder  are  of  exactly 
the  same  length,  each  one  can  be  cut  and  rivet-holes  punched  from one  template,  instead  of  the  innumerable  sizes  which  are  required 
with  taper  girders.  The  economy  of  construction,  therefore,  far 
outweighs  the  extra  cost  of  the  small  additional  weight. 
As  a  lattice  girder  is  rather  expensive  to  make,  and  as  of  late 
years  it  has  been  possible  to  roll  very  long  strips  of  either  iron  or 
steel,  the  box  girder  form  of  leg  has  been  adopted  in  many  cases. 
The  one  at  St.  Hilda  Colliery,  South  Shields,  may  be  quoted  as  an 
example.  It  is  75  ft.  high  and  commences  at  the  bottom  with  a 
section  18  in.  square  and  finishes  15  in.  square  at  the  top.  Each 
member  consists  of  four  plates,  bound  together  by  angle  pieces 
at  the  corners.  In  the  main  struts,  the  four  plates  are  -fw  in. 
thick,  and  the  angle  iron  is  3^  in.  by  3!  in.  by  |  in. 
Pulleys. — At  one  time  chains  were  employed  for  winding,  but, 
except  in  the  rarest  instances,  none  are  now  to  be  found,  ropes 
either  of  flat  or  round  section  being  employed.  Upon  the  type 
of  rope  used  depends  the  shape  of  the  throat  of  the  pulley,  such 

--- Page Break ---
234 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  279. 
part  being  the  only  variable  one,  their  general  design  being  the 
same  either  for  round  or  flat  ropes.  They  consist  of  a  cast-iron 
boss  and  rim,  connected  together  by  wrought- iron  spokes  (Fig. 
279).  The  shaft,  or  "gudgeon,"  is  composed  of  wrought-iron, having  turned  bearings.  With  a  view  of  reducing  friction,  the 
bearings  should  be  as  small  and 
the  pulley  as  large  as  possible. 
The  large  diameter  of  the  pulley 
introduces  another  advantage,  as 
it  reduces  the  bend  of  the  rope, 
and  it  is,  therefore,  not  uncommon 
to  find  pulleys  having  a  diameter 
of  1 8  to  20  feet.  Beyond  such 
size  there  is  a  difficulty  in  making 
the  pulley  strong  enough  to 
stand  a  heavy  load,  and  at  the 
same  time  keeping  its  weight 
within  bounds.  It  is  very  neces- 
sary that  these  pulleys  should  be 
as  light  as  possible ;  if  not,  with 
quick  winding  they  have  a  ten- dency to  spin  after  the  ropes cease  running. 
When  flat  ropes  are  used,  the 
groove  in  the  rim  must  be  made 
perfectly  flat,  or  the  rope  will  be 
unduly  strained.  With  round 
ropes,  the  bottom  of  the  groove 
will  be  semicircular,  of  a  sufficient 
size  to  suit  the  rope.  It  is  essen- tial that  the  throat  should  be 
made  wide  enough  to  allow  the 
rope  a  certain  amount  of  play,  for, as  each  successive  coil  is  wound 
on  the  drum,  it  is  obvious  that 
the  position  of  the  rope  is  constantly  changing  with  respect  to 
the  vertical  plane  of  the  pulley. 
SKIPS  AND  CAGES. — At  one  time  the  mineral  was  wound 
from  the  shaft  in  what  were  called  skips,  which  were  attached  to  the 
winding-rope  through  the  medium  of  chains  and  swung  loose  in 
the  shaft.  The  Mines  Regulation  Act,  1872,  made  it  compulsory 
that  guides  should  be  adopted  in  all  shafts  over  50  yards  deep ; 
and  at  the  present  time  practically  all  shafts  are  provided  with 
guides,  and  the  tubs  placed  in  a  framing,  called  a  cage. 
Shape  and  Construction. — The  shape  of  the  cage  is  deter- 
mined by  the  size  of  the  tubs,  and  the  number  on  each  deck.  A 
common  procedure  in  dealing  with  large  quantities  is  to  place  two 
tubs,  end  to  end,  on  each  deck,  and  to  have  four  decks.  If  the 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
235 
tubs  are  small  ones,  four  may  be  placed  on  each  deck.  Then  as  to 
material.  Everywhere  cages  are  now  constructed  of  steel.  Each 
time  a  winding  takes  place,  a  certain  useless  dead  weight  has  to 
be  lifted,  consisting  of  the  weight  of  the  tubs,  the  cage,  and  the 
rope  hanging  in  the  shaft,  and  it,  therefore,  becomes  imperative, 
with  deep  shafts  and  heavy  loads,  to  use  material  having  the 
greatest  strength  and  the  least  weight.  Every  second  saved  in 
the  time  of  winding  is  of  importance.  Nothing  is  gained  by 
having  cages  too  heavy,  while  everything  is  lost.  A  heavy  cage 
FIGS.  280  AND  281. 
knocks  itself  to  pieces,  while  the  cost  of  a  light  one  is  so  small, 
that  the  gain  in  output,  which  results  from  quicker  winding, 
more  than  compensates  for  repairs  and  renewal.  A  good  example 
of  the  modern  colliery  cage  is  that  illustrated  in  Figs.  280  and  281. 
It  holds  two  tubs  on  each  deck,  each  weighing  7  cwt.,  carries 
52  cwt.  of  coal,  and  weighs  itself  only  30  cwt.,  so  that  the  useful 
load  is  47.2  per  cent,  of  the  total  weight.  The  horizontal  frames  are 
composed  of  angle  steel,  3  in.  by  3  in.  by  T7^-  in.,  tied  together  by  two 
vertical  angle  pieces  and  one  flat  strip  on  each  side.  A  strength- 
ening plate,  9  in.  deep  by  T5F  in.  thick,  runs  along  each  side  of  the horizontal  frame,  and  the  three  uprights  are  bound  together  by 
diagonal  struts.  The  author  has  employed  a  cage  of  exactly 

--- Page Break ---
236  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
similar  construction,  only  lighter,  carrying  22  cwt.  of  coal  and 
an  8  cwt.  tub,  the  weight  of  the  cage  and  bridle  chains  being  only 
nj  cwt.  ;  the  useful  load  is  here  53.0  per  cent,  of  the  total  load. 
Means  for  Keeping  Tubs  on  Cages.  —  When  the  tubs  are 
placed  on  the  cage  some  means  have  to  be  provided  for  keeping 
them  there  during  the  process  of  winding.  This  is  done  in  a 
variety  of  ways,  but  by  far  the  commonest,  and  perhaps  the  best, 
is  to  employ  a  bar  of  iron  running  along  the  side  of  the  cage,  each 
end  of  this  bar  being  bent  back  at  right  angles.  In  its  normal 
position  it  hangs  as  at  a  (Fig.  281),  and  locks  the  tubs,  but  on 
arriving  at  bank  it  is  rotated,  the  ends  describing  the  arc  of  a 
circle,  shown  by  the  dotted  lines,  and  taking  the  position  drawn  at 
b,  allowing  the  tubs  to  run  off  at  one  side,  to  be  replaced  by  others, 
the  bar  being  then  pulled  down  again. 
In  some  instances  this  bar,  instead  of 
FIG.  282.  being  at  the  side  of  the  cage,  runs  along  the 
top  of  it,  and  when  in  its  ordinary  position 
the  ends  hang  vertically  under  the  influ- 
n\,  ence  °f  gravity.  The  bar  (a  b,  Fig.  282) 
works  about  the  centre,  a,  and  is  provided 
with  a  stop.  On  reaching  the  surface, 
the  banksman  pushes  the  hanging  piece, 
c  d,  to  the  left  hand,  and  a  tooth  in  it 
catches  the  stop,  a  b,  and  holds  it  in  a 
horizontal  position.  To  release,  the  end 
b  is  lifted,  and  the  catch  drops  to  the 
vertical  position,  and  so  keeps  the  tubs  in  the  cage. 
ROPES.  —  Two  forms  of  rope  are  used  at  collieries  —  flat  and 
round.  The  advantage  of  the  former  is  that  as  the  rope  is  wound 
on  the  drum,  each  lap  coils  successively  on  the  one  below  it,  and 
the  vertical  plane  of  the  drum  and  pulley  therefore  coincide.  A 
certain  amount  of  counter-balancing  also  takes  place,  as  the  drum varies  in  diameter.  At  the  commencement  of  the  wind  it  is  small, 
but  as  the  coils  are  wrapped  on,  it  increases  in  diameter,  until  at the  end  its  maximum  size  is  attained.  These  considerations 
influenced  at  first,  in  a  very  marked  degree,  the  choice  of  ropes 
for  winding  purposes,  and  flat  ones  were  largely  adopted.  Expe- 
rience has  not,  however,  justified  the  selection,  the  above-named 
advantages  being  found  to  be  more  imaginary  than  real.  Even 
with  the  deepest  pits,  it  is  possible  to  place  the  winding  machinery 
at  such  a  distance  from  the  shaft  that  the  angling,  caused  by  a 
round  rope  coiling  on  the  drum,  is  scarcely  perceptible,  or,  at  any 
rate,  is  not  very  objectionable,  and  it  is  also  possible  to  perfectly 
counterbalance  the  weight  of  round  ropes  by  several  methods, 
which  are  described  further  on.  Excepting  on  the  Continent,  flat 
ropes  are  becoming  a  thing  of  the  past.  They  cost  twice  as  much 
as  round  ones,  and  only  wear  about  half  as  long. 
Ropes  are  constructed  of  three  materials  —  hemp,   iron,  and 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  237 
steel.  In  English  collieries,  hemp  has  never  been  used  to  any 
large  extent,  and  at  the  present  time,  not  at  all.  On  the 
Continent  hemp  ropes  are  numerous,  and  iron  or  steel  ones  rare ; 
aloe  fibre  is,  however,  employed  instead  of  hemp.  It  is  difficult 
to  understand  why  this  class  of  material  is  retained,  for  its  strength 
is  so  small,  that  a  very  large  and  heavy  rope  has  to  be  employed. 
The  engineers  state  that  its  great  advantage  is  the  non-liability 
to  breakage,  owing  to  the  perfect  reliability  and  uniformity  of 
construction,  but  statistics  do  not  bear  out  this  claim. 
Wire  Ropes. — In  the  early  days,  no  doubt,  some  steel  ropes did  fail  in  an  unaccountable  manner,  but  at  the  present  time  their 
manufacture  has  reached  a  high  degree  of  perfection,  especially 
in  England. 
.  Wire  ropes  were  first  constructed  of  iron,  but  are  now  made 
almost  entirely  of  steel.  No  advantage  is  gained  by  using  the 
former  material ;  it  does  not  wear  well,  and  its  tensile  strength  is 
so  small  that  heavy  ropes  are  required.  Most  manufacturers 
supply  steel  in  three  qualities — Bessemer,  crucible,  and  plough. The  latter  is  about  50  per  cent,  stronger  than  the  former,  but 
only  about  12^  per  cent,  stronger  than  crucible  steel.  Crucible 
steel  ropes  can  be  purchased  in  all  ordinary  sizes  from  ^32  to 
£41  per  ton,  while  plough  steel  ropes  cost  from  £54  to  £66. 
For  all  situations  where  a  rope  is  worn  out  and  not  spoiled,  the 
latter  are  worth  the  extra  money.  Every  rope  put  to  work 
should  have  a  record  kept  of  its  performance,  that  is  to  say,  the number  of  tons  that  it  either  hauls  or  winds.  Statements  are 
sometimes  made  that  a  rope  has  lasted  so  many  years.  Unless  the 
number  of  tons  is  known,  such  an  assertion  is  valueless,  because 
a  rope  in  another  position  might  have  lasted  only  half  as  long, 
and  yet  have  dealt  with  more  tonnage.  On  inclines,  or  places 
where  a  rope  is  subjected  to  severe  shocks  and  strains,  it  is  not 
advisable  to  use  plough  steel,  because  the  rope  may  be  broken  and 
spoiled  before  it  is  anything  like  worn  out,  but  for  slow-moving 
rope  haulage,  or,  especially  winding,  the  highest  priced  ropes  are 
the  cheapest  in  the  end ;  in  the  first  place,  owing  to  their  great 
strength,  a  smaller  weight  is  required,  and  in  the  second,  their 
life  is  much  longer. 
Ropes  usually  stretch  when  first  started,  and  probably  get 
more  brittle  with  work.  They  should  be  carefully  manufactured, 
and  carefully  and  thoroughly  examined.  The  best  signs  of  the 
limit  of  work,  are  the  wearing  and  occasional  breakage  of  the 
wires.  The  principal  cause  of  failure  is  due  to  oxidation,  espe- 
cially with  steel.  Unless  ropes  are  kept  free  from  rust,  they  will 
never  last,  no  matter  what  material  is  used  in  construction.  How 
often  oiling  is  required  depends  on  the  conditions  of  the  working 
places.  The  grease  required  for  such  purpose  should  be  rich  in 
fat  and  quite  free  from  acids,  and,  what  is  of  the  greatest 
importance,  should  not  turn  hard,  or  the  outside  wires  will  get 

--- Page Break ---
238 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
well  greased,  while  the  inside  goes  rusty.  A  simple  but  effective 
rope-greasing  apparatus  consists  of  a  cylindrical  case  made  in  two 
halves,  and  provided  with  two  handles,  which  are  grasped  by  the 
attendants,  one  on  each  side.  Brushes  are  arranged  in  the  top 
part  and  clean  off  the  old  grease,  while  the  rope  runs  through  a 
bath  of  oil  held  in  a  cup  just  below ;  the  grease  is  thoroughly 
rubbed  in  by  some  loose  felt,  also  saturated  with  grease,  which  is 
situated  in  the  base  of  the  cylinder. 
The  drums  and  pulleys  should  be  as  large  as  feasible,  a  good 
rule  being  that  their  diameter  should  never  be  less  than  a 
hundred  times  that  of  the  rope.  The  angle  that  the  rope  makes 
with  the  pulley  should  be  as  small  as  possible.  Ordinary  ropes 
consist  of  six  strands,  of  seven  wires  each,  twisted  round  a  hemp 
core ;  but  for  special  cases  where  small  drums  have  to  be  employed, 
the  diameter  of  the  wire  is  decreased,  and  more  wires  and  strands 
used  to  make  up  the  rope.  Except  for  such  purposes,  no  ad- 
vantage is  gained  by  this  construction,  as  although  the  tensile 
strength  of  the  wires  is  increased,  they  are  apt  to  break  after  a 
little  wear.  After  a  thin  wire  has  worn  a  little,  only  a  small 
quantity  of  material  remains,  while  the  same  amount  of  wear  on 
a  larger  wire  is  scarcely  perceptible. 
For  ropes  with  hemp  cores,  if  the  circumference  in  inches  be 
squared,  the  product  will  practically  be  the  weight  in  Ibs.  per 
fathom.  In  deciding  on  the  size  of  rope  required,  the  weight  to 
be  lifted  is  first  determined.  For  a  winding-rope  such  load  must 
include  the  weight  of  cage,  tubs,  coal,  bridle-chains,  and  the  rope 
hanging  in  the  shaft.  Each  manufacturer  issues  a  card  giving 
the  breaking  strain  of  different  qualities  of  ropes,  or  if  the  par- 
ticulars are  forwarded,  he  will  readily  advise  a  suitable  size. 
The  breaking  strain,  however,  is  not  the  working  load.  For 
shaft  work  the  safe  load  is  ta.ken  at  one-tenth  the  breaking 
strain,  and  for  inclines  one-seventh.  In  the  former  case,  men have  to  travel  on  the  rope, 
FIGS.  283  AND  284.  and  for  such  reason  a  higher 
margin  is  allowed. 
Ordinary  Lay. — As  ordi- narily constructed  (Fig.  283) 
the  strands  of  a  rope  are 
laid  in  the  opposite  direction to  the  twist  of  the  wires  in 
each  strand,  with  the  result 
that  the  wear  on  the  crown 
of  the  strand  is  great  and  the  wires  readily  break  there  (Fig.  284). 
Lang's  Patent. — In  England  the  first  successful  change  from  the old  construction  was  introduced  by  Messrs.  Cradock,  in  1880.  In 
Lang's  patent,  the  wires  are  spun  in  the  strands  in  the  same  direc- 
tion as  the  strands  are  laid  in  the  rope  (Fig.  285).  There  is,  there- 
fore, a  much  larger  surface  exposed  to  friction.  In  working  round 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
239 
FIGS.  285  AND  286. 
drums,  &c.  the  wires  are  bent  obliquely,  and  thus  the  greatest 
amount  of  wear  is  obtained.     Lang's  rope  wears  out  ;  it  is  only under  the  most  exceptional  circumstances  that  wires  break.     Fig. 
286,   from    a    photograph, 
illustrates  the  gradual  re- duction that  takes  place  in 
the    diameter.     This   con- struction has  increased  the 
life  of  the  ropes  at  least  100 
per  cent.,  and  no  greater 
argument  can  be  adduced in  its  favour  than  the  fact 
that    as    soon    as    Messrs. 
Cradock  abandoned  their  patent  rights  every  manufacturer  com- 
menced making  ropes  of  this  construction.     There  seems,  however, 
to  be  still  some  "  unknown  quantity,"  as  the  author's  experience 
of  Messrs.  Cradock's  ropes  is  that  they  give  better  results  than those  of  other  firms  made  on  the  same  principles. 
Locked  Coil.  —  With  the  object  of  increasing  the  wearing  surface, 
locked  coil  ropes  were  introduced  in  1885.  A  series  of  coils  of 
wire  are  spirally  wound  upon  each  other,  all  of  which,  or  some- 
times only  the  outer  one,  are  composed  of  special  section  wires, 
which  when  closed  together,  interlock,  and  present  a  smooth  uni- 
form working  surface.  The  rope  in  external  appearance  resembles 
a  bar  of  iron,  but  is  exceedingly  flexible,  and  has  little  tendency  to 
twist.  At  first,  there  must  have  been  some  defect  in  the  manu- 
facture, as  the  outside  coils  slipped  on  the  inside  ones  and  the 
ropes  broke  up  soon.  At  present,  their  chief 
disadvantage  is  the  impossibility  of  splicing 
and  difficulty  of  capping.  Recently,  flat- 
tened stranded  ropes  have  been  introduced, 
and  can  be  spliced  with  readiness,  but  have 
not  been  in  use  long  enough  to  establish  any 
data  as  to  their  economy  or  otherwise. 
Attachment  to  Cage.  —  The  end  of  the 
rope  is  connected  to  the  cage  chains  through 
what  is  known  as  the  capping,  which  exists 
in  many  different  forms.  The  old  plan  was 
to  employ  two  semicircular  collars  encircling 
the  rope,  these  being  prevented  from  slipping 
or  drawing  off  by  rivets,  which  passed  both 
through  the  rope  and  capping.  The  driving 
in  of  these  rivets  necessarily  injured  the 
ropes  ;  to  remove  this  disadvantage,  a  capping 
with  collars  driven  on  (Fig.  287)  was  adopted. 
A  better  plan  is  to  employ  a  conical  socket 
(Fig.  288).  In  attaching  this,  the  rope  is 
first  of  all  threaded  through  the  thin  end  and  drawn  out  a  short 
287.    FIG.  288. 

--- Page Break ---
240  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
distance  beyond.  The  ends  of  the  strands  are  opened,  and  bent 
back  on  themselves,  part  of  each  strand  being  cut  away,  and  in 
every  instance  are  secured  with  thin  binding  wire.  The  end  of 
the  rope  is  now  conical,  and  is  drawn  into  the  socket.  As  an  addi- 
tional security,  a  conical  wedge  is  often  inserted  in  the  place  origin- 
ally occupied  by  the  hemp  core.  Except  under  abnormal  conditions, 
it  is  impossible  to  draw  the  thick  end  of  the  rope  through  the 
small  end  of  the  socket,  except  by  splitting  it.  If  properly  con- structed of  suitable  material,  such  could  scarcely  happen,  but  for 
very  heavy  loads,  collars  are  shrunk  on.  At  the  point  where  the 
rope  leaves  the  capping  the  wires  are  subjected  to  a  nipping  action, 
and  often  break.  It  is,  therefore,  advisable  that  careful  inspec- 
tion should  be  made,  and  a  plan  is  adopted  at  many  collieries  of 
re-capping  ropes  at  regular  intervals,  whether  they  appear  to 
require  it  or  not.  In  wet  shafts,  the  wires  rust  inside  the  capping, 
and  such  action  cannot  be  detected.  To  prevent  it,  the  capping  is often  run  full  of  lead. 
Cage  Chains. — The  cage  is  attached  to  the  capping  through the  medium  of  chains,  usually  six  in  number,  one  at  each  corner, 
and  one  from  each  centre  of  the  two  longest  sides.  The  two  latter 
are  often  allowed  to  be  slack,  and  only  the  corner  ones  kept  taut. 
There  appears  no  reason  why  such  should  be  done,  as  if  six  chains 
are  required,  all  should  do  a  proportion  of  the  work.  It  is  argued, 
that  the  object  of  the  central  chains  is  to  take  the  weight  if  any- 
thing happens  to  the  corner  ones,  and,  no  doubt,  it  is  a  difficult 
matter  to  keep  six  chains  of  such  a  length  that  all  take  an  equal 
bearing,  but  the  difficulty  is  overcome  by  providing  the  two 
central  ones  with  adjusting  screws,  which  enable  any  slack  to  be 
readily  taken  up.  These  cage  or  bridle  chains 
FIG.  289.  should  be  of  the  very  best  quality  of  iron 
obtainable,  and  should  be  regularly  taken  off 
every  three  or  four  months  and  annealed  ;  FO 
much  depends  on  them,  that  no  precaution 
should  be  neglected.  As  a  rule,  each  pair  of 
chains  is  connected  to  a  larger  link  at  the 
end  furthest  from  the  cage,  and  each  of  the 
three  larger  links  are  in  turn  connected  to  a 
still  larger  link,  which  is  fastened  to  the 
capping  by  a  bolt.  With  this  method,  if  any- thing happens  to  the  main  link  the  cage  is 
detached  from  the  rope.  The  better  plan,  and 
common  procedure  in  the  North  of  England 
and  on  the  Continent,  is  to  connect  the  link 
joining  each  pair  of  chains  to  a  compound 
plate,  shown  in  Fig.  289. 
The  breaking  strain  of  chain  made  from  the  best  qualities  of 
iron  can  be  found  by  an  easily  remembered  rule : — If  W  =  break- 
ing strain  in  tons,  d  —  diameter  in  eighths  of  an  inch :  W=  — .  The 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 241 
safe  working  load  for  shafts  should  not  be  more  than  one-tenth 
of  the  breaking  strain. 
Method  of  Taking  Off  Strain. — When  the  cage  is  resting  at the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  and  is  suddenly  lifted,  the  strain  on  the 
winding  rope  is  much  greater  than  that  due  to  the  load,  especially 
if  there  is  any  slack  chain.  Messrs.  Cradock  have  published  a 
table  showing  the  result  of  some  tests,  very  carefully  made  by  a 
dynamometer,  from  which  it  appears  that  the  extra  strain  may 
amount  to  over  twice  the  real  load,  as  will  be  seen  from 
following  extract : 
Cage  and  four  full  tubs  weighed  by  machine 
„     lifted  gently       ..... 
Tons.  Cwts. 
5      i 8    10 10    10 12      IO 
The  extra  strain  has  an  injurious  effect  on  the  rope,  and 
numerous  devices  have  been  proposed  from  time  to  time  to  reduce 
it.  The  author,  in  visiting  Mariemont  Colliery  ir»  Belgium, 
FIG.  290. 
observed  a  simple  but  effective  device,  which  he  has  since  adopted 
at  Lye  Cross  Pit.  In  addition  to  the  ordinary  bridle-chains,  a 
central  one,  passing  from  the  capping  of  the  rope  to  the  centre  of 
the  cage,  is  also  employed  (a,  Fig.  290).  It  may  be  considered  as- Q 

--- Page Break ---
242 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
a  prolongation  of  the  winding  rope,  but  is  shorter  than  the  vertical 
distance  from  the  capping  to  the  top  of  the  cage.  To  it  is  attached 
an  apparatus,  b,  shown  enlarged  in  Fig.  291.  The  central  bridle- 
chain  is  connected  to  a  stirrup,  a,  while  the  pin,  b,  is  attached  to 
the  cage.  Threaded  on  this  pin  are  alternate  discs  of  sheet-iron, 
c,  and  india-rubber,  e,  kept  in  proper  place  by  the  nut  and  lock- 
nut  at  the  top  of  the  pin.  b ;  both  india-rubber  and  sheet-iron  dis;-s are  enclosed  in  a  cylindrical  case,  d,  to  protect  them  from  dirt,  «fcc. 
"When  the  lift  commences,  the  central  chain,  being  shortest,  dot  s all  the  work,  the  stirrup,  a,  slides  on  the  spindle,  b,  and  compresses 
the  india-rubber  discs,  until  the  central  chain  lengthens  to  such 
an  extent  that  the  corner  chains  come  into  operation  and  do  their 
share  of  work.  Instead  of  this  arrangement,  volute  springs  are 
sometimes  employed,  and  have  been  used  at  Mariemont,  but  were 
t abandoned  through  unreliability,  as  they  often  broke  and  caused 
mishap.  The  weight  of  such  a  rope-easing  gear,  including  the central  chain,  two  angle  pieces  across  the  top  of  the  cage,  and  all 
the  fittings  caused  by  the  addition,  is  only  7 1  Ibs.,  and  its  cost  is small. 
In  some  cases  india-rubber  blocks  have  been  placed  beneath  the 
pulley  pedestals,  but,  being  exposed  to  the  weather,  the  blocks 
soon  become  hard  and  lose  their  elasticity.  A  superior  plan  is  to 
place  the  pedestal  on  springs  similar  to  those  used  in  railway 
waggons.  Fig.  292  shows  such  an  arrangement  at  Bell  End  Pit. 
The  pedestals,  a,  work  in  guides,  6,  and  have  a  play  of  about  2  in. 
The  guides  compel  the  pulley  to  travel  in  a  vertical  plane  and 
prevent  it  from  canting.  A  stop,  c,  is  provided  underneath  the 
spring  to  prevent  it  compressing  too  much,  and  a  cro^s-bar,  d, 
is  placed  over  the  top  to  prevent  the  carriage  being  sprung  out 
of  the  guides  under  abnormal  shocks.  This  arrangement  is  used 
in  conjunction  with  the  central  chain-gear  just  described. 
It  is  rather  a  difficult  matter  to  estimate  definitely  the  addi- 
tional life  of  a  rope  caused  by  adopting  such  arrangements,  but 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
243 
FIGS.  293  AND  294. 
•some  good  must  result,  and  the  cost  of  either  or  both  of  them  is small. 
GUIDES. — The  cages  are  not  allowed  to  swing  free  in  the 
shaft,  but  are  kept  in  the  proper  direction  by  guides,  which  may 
either  be  wood,  iron  rails,  or  wire  ropes. 
Wood  guides  are  usually  made  of  pitch-pine,  are  joined  together 
in  lengths,  and  are  secured  to  cross  baulks  by  screws.  They  are  uii- 
suited  for  quick  winding,  are  costly  to  fix  and  keep  in  repair,  but 
they  are  rigid,  and  their  first  cost  is  small.  For  deep  shafts  and 
heavy  loads,  the  small  advantage  in  cost  is  soon  counterbalanced 
by  the  cost  of  the  up-keep.  With  few  exceptions,  they  are  a thing  of  the  past. 
Rails. — To  obtain  the  rigidity  of  wood  and  to  avoid  rapid  wear, rail  guides  firmly  attached  to  buntons  have  been  substituted.  It 
is  obvious  that  the  ordinary  form  of  chair  employed  on  railways 
cannot  be  used,  as  the  head  and  neck  of  the  rail  have  to  be  left 
clear,  in  order  that  the  sliding  attachment  on  the  cage  may  pass 
freely  along.  As  a  rule,  the  flange  of  such  rails  is  made  broader 
than  the  ordinary  construction,  and 
is  fitted  into  a  chair,  a  (Figs.  293 
.and  294),  and  prevented  from,  moving 
laterally  by  two  pins,  b  6,  the  heads  of 
which  are  bent  round  to  grip  the  foot 
of  the  rail,  and  counter  sunk  in  the 
-chair  to  prevent  the  guide  shoe,  c, 
catching  them.  The  two  pins  pass 
through  the  chair,  a,  and  are  bolted at  the  far  end  to  the  cross  buntons 
of  timber,  d,  carrying  the  whole  struc- 
ture. At  Horloz,  near  Liege,  rail 
guides  are  fastened  together  by  fish- 
plates at  the  back,  bolted  to  the  rails ; the  buntons  in  this  case  are  not 
placed  at  the  joints. 
Rail  guides  are  not  only  expensive, 
but  require  a  lot  of  attention.  Mr.  Ch. 
Demanet  *  gives  the  following  state- ment of  the  cost,  where  the  rails 
weighed  58  Ibs.  to  the  yd.,  were  each  9  yds.  long,  and  were 
fished  and  bolted  to  oak  buntons  set  5  ft.  apart.  In  the  wall- 
ing, the  buntons  were  set  in  cast-iron  sockets ;  in  the  tubbing, iron  circles  of  U  section  rested  on  the  ribs,  and  these  carried 
transverse  girders,  to  which  the  rails  were  attached.  A  space  ot* 0.078  in.  was  left  open  between  the  ends  of  the  rails  for  ex- 
pansion, and  the  bolt-holes  in  the  r.dls  and  fish-plates  were  made oval  in  the  usual  way. 
*  For.  Abs.  N.E.I,  xxxi.  28. 

--- Page Break ---
244 TEXTBOOK   OF    COAL-MINING. 
Cost  where  Shaft  was  tubbed. 
(a)  Circles.—  Cost  of  each  circle  complete,  placed  in  pit,  includ- ing nil  bolts  and  washers,  and  erecting 
(b}  Hails.— @,  ^5  143.  per  ton,  (4  yds.  required  for  each  yard  of shaft)   
Fixing  in  shaft   
(c)   Fishplates   
£  s.    d. 
Total  cost  per  yard 
Cost  where  Shaft  was  waUed. 
(a)  Bunting. — Oak  buntons   6'  io£"x6'x8",  with washers,  and  fixing  in  shaft  . 
Rails  and  fish-plates  as  above        .        .       '-. 
Total  cost  per  yard 
bolts  and 
FIG.  295. 
On  the  Continent,  the  common  system  of  fixing  rail  guides  is 
that  due  to  Mr.  Al.  Briart,  which  consists  in  dividing  the  shafts  by 
a  single  series  of  buntons  of 
H  steel  girders,  which  at 
Mariemont  are  14.96  feet 
long,  0.82  feet  deep,  and  are 
placed  9.84  feet  apart.  The utmost  care  is  exercised  in 
getting  these  buntons  in  the 
same  vertical  plane,  and  pre- 
vious to  being  fixed  they  are 
notched  to  receive  the  rails, 
which  are  each  19.66  feet 
long,  thus  giving  a  slight 
play  between  the  joints.  To 
secure  the  rails  to  the  bun- 
tons  two  steel  glands  (a,  Fig. 
295)  are  fixed,  one  on  each side  of  the  rail,  which  they 
firmly  grip,  a  bolt,  b,  passing 
from  one  gland  to  the  other. 
To  prevent  any  chance  of 
movement,  a  block  of  cast- 
iron,  c,  through  which  the- 
bolts  pass,  is  placed  between 
the  rails,  and  is  furnished 
with  a  slight  projection,  which 
lies  in  a  corresponding  groove 
rolled  in  the  flange  of  the 
rail.  At  buntons  where  joints 
occur,  two  sets  of  these  glands 
and  blocks  are  fixed,  one  above  and  one  below  ;  but  at  the  inter- 
mediate buntons  only  one  set  at  the  top  of  the  girders  is  used.. 
FIG.  296. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
245 
In  passing  through  tubbing,  the  buntons  are  cirried  in  shoes 
boKed  to  the  internal  flanges,  the  girders  being  wedged  in  position 
with  wood  keys  (Fig.  296). 
Wire  Ropes.  —  In  the  majority  of  cases,  rope  guides  are  em- 
ployed, but  differ  from  ordinary  wire  ropes  in  the  fact,  that 
instead  of  consisting  of  a  number  of  small  wires  twisted  into 
strands,  and  then  into  a  rope,  each  strand  consLsts  of  only  one 
wire,  but  such  wire  is  of  large  diameter.  At  first  guides  were 
made  like  ordinary  ropes,  but  when  a  little  wear  had  taken  place 
.and  a  wire  broke,  the  projecting  piece  was  caught  by  the  shoe  of 
the  cage,  and  the  rope  "  stripped,"  causing  frequent  stoppages. As  rope  guides  have  only  to  sustain  small  weights,  wire  of  high 
tensile  strength  is  not  required. 
Rope  guides  are  cheap  in  first  cost  (they  can  be  bought  for  £16 
&  ton),  are  easily  fixed,  require  no  attention  except  oiling,  and 
their  wear  is  almost  unlimited.  They  must,  however,  be  kept 
taut  by  proper  means.  At  their  upper  extremity  they  should  be 
capped  like  a  winding-rope,  and  connected  to  eye-bolts  in  the 
head-gear.  At  the  bottom  they  should  pass  by  the  side  of  a 
bunton,  be  held  there  by  a  staple,  and  weights  added  to  their 
lower  end.  Instead  of  weights,  screws  are  sometimes  used.  In 
deep  shafts  expansion  and  contraction  regularly  take  place  in  the 
guides  owing  to  the  variation  in  temperature,  and  the  length 
alters  considerably  from  a  hot  day  in  summer  to  a  cold  day  in 
winter.  If  screws  are  used,  the  guides  require  constant  attention 
if  they  are  to  be  kept  taut,  whereas,  if  they  are  weighted,  they 
are  always  tight,  as  the  tension  is  always  the  same. 
It  is  a  difficult  matter  to  say 
what  weight  should  be  applied  to 
each  rope,  and  for  this  reason  it 
is  not  advisable  that  such  weight 
should  be  in  a  solid  block.  The 
proper  weight  is  a  matter  of 
^xper.'ment;  it  varies  from  2  to 4  tons.  In  addition,  one  large 
weight  r*  very  awkward  to  deal 
with.  A  series  of  single  weights, 
therefore,  appears  preferable,  and 
are  best  constructed  as  shown  in 
Figs.  297  and  298.  Each  one  is 
provided  with  two  handles,  a  a, 
has  a  hole  through  the  centre,  6, 
and  a  loose  wedge-shaped  piece,  c, 
which  when  removed  allows  each  weight  to  be  slid  on  the  rope 
without  moving  any  of  the  others.  This  piece,  c,  is  not  only 
wedge-shaped  in  plan,  but  also  in  cross  section,  and  cannot  drop 
out  of  place  when  the  weight  is  in  a  horizontal  position.  The 
blocks  weigh  about  165  Ibs.  each,  and  can  be  handled  by  two  men. 
FIGS.  297  AND  298. 
r:::/q1 
?  •*     \f5f/        -— ~       - 

--- Page Break ---
246  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
Conductors  between  Cages. — The  only  objection  urged 
against  wire  guides,  is  that  the  clearance  between  the  cages  has 
to  be  more  than  if  a  rigid  conductor  was  employed.  For  deep 
shafts  this  is,  no  doubt,  true,  if  the  guides  are  connected  to  the 
cage  on  both  sides ;  but  a  method  is  used  which  entirely  removes 
the  disadvantage,  and  allows  the  cages  with  wire  conductors  to  be 
safely  worked  with  as  little  clearance  as  if  rail  or  wood  guides 
were  employed.  In  ordinary  cases  three  conductors  will  be  fixed 
to  each  cage;  in  the  special  method,  two  conductors  only  are 
fixed  to  each  cage,  both  on  one  side  of  it,  but  in  between  the  cages, 
and  unconnected  to  either  of  them,  two  other  ropes  are  suspended. 
These  latter  ropes  are  often  flat  ones,  and  at  the  point  of  meeting 
are  lined  with  steel  strips  pacing  fi cm  one  to  the  other,  vhile 
the  cages  are  lagged  up  on  the  inside.  The  result  of  the  whole 
FIG.  299. FIG.  300. 
arrangement  is,  that  from  the  top  of  the  shaft  to  the  bottom,  the 
cages  are  on  opposite  sides  of  the  central  conductors,  and  cannot 
possibly  catch  each  other  when  passing. 
Guide  Shoes. — Some  connection  has  to  be  made  between  the 
cage  and  the  guides,  so  that  the  former  shall  travel  correctly 
along  the  latter.  If  the  guides  are  of  wood,  the  shoe  need  not 
encircle  them,  and  the  form  shown  in  Fig.  299  is  employed. 
With  iron  rail  guides,  which  are  also  rigid,  the  common  form  of 
shoe  has  already  been  illustrated  in  Fig.  293,  but  with  a  view  of 
reducing  resistance,  rolling  has  been  substituted  for  sliding  friction, 
and  at  Anz'n  Colliery,  France,  the  guide  shoe  is  composed  of  two- wheels,  one  on  each  side  of  the  rail  guide  (a  a,  Fig.  300),  revolving 
on  a  pin  bolted  to  the  side  of  the  cage. 
For  wire  ropes,  which  are  flexible,  the  guide  shoe  must  go 
completely  round  them,  or  any  oscillation  would  throw  the  slipper 
off  the  guide.  A  common  mistake  is  to  make  the  shoes  very  much 
stronger  and  heavier  than  necessity  requires.  If  the  guides  are 
properly  hung,  and  the  centres  of  the  shoes  set  to  the  correct 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING 
247 
gauge,  very  little  strain  is  thrown  on  them,  and  only  a  compara- tively weak  connection  is  required.  It  is  advisable  that  renewable 
bushes  should  be  provided  for  the  parts  gripping  the  rope,  as  all 
the  wear  takes  place  there. 
A   good   form   is  shown  in  FIG.  301. 
Fig.  301.  It  consists  of  a 
base  plate,  a,  bolted  to  the 
cage  by  two  pins,  b  6,  and 
has  cast-iron  bushes,  c, 
divided  into  halves,  these 
being  fixed  to  the  base  plate 
by  a  steel  strap,  d,  which 
encircles  them.  This  strap 
is  kept  in  position  by  two 
pins,  e  e,  also  bolted  to  the 
sides  of  the  cage.  By  taking  out  tlneze  two  latter  pins,  the  bushes 
can  be  changed  whenever  desired  without  removing  the  base  plate.. 
As  an  experiment,  the  author  tried  brass  bushes,  but  the  result 
was  by  no  means  satisfactory.  The  first  cost  was  much  more  than 
that  of  cast-iron  ones,  and  their  life  was  considerably  less.  If  the- guides  are  kept  well  lubricated  the  wear  is  slight. 
Quide  Troughs. — While  the  cage  is  travelling  in  the  shaft a  small  amount  of  oscillation  is  not  objectionable,  as  there  is- 
seldom  less  than  from  2  to  4  in.  clearance  at  the  corners,  but 
when  passing  through  the  timber  framing  at  the  top,  or  at  inter- 
mediate hanging-on  places,  where  the  clearance  space  is  small, 
additional  means  have  to  be  provided  to  prevent  the  cage  from 
deviating  from  a  definite  line.  With  rigid  guides  nothing  is 
necessary,  but  with  wire  ropes  the  general  plan 
is  to  place  a  trough  opposite  each  guide  at  the 
point  where  they  pass  through  the  frame.  The 
usual  construction  is  to  rivet  two  strips  of  angle 
iron  to  a  plate  at  the  back ;  the  angle  pieces  are 
belled  out  at  the  top  and  bottom  ends  of  the 
trough,  and  the  back  plate  is  bent  outwards  to 
avoid  any  chance  of  the  slipper  receiving  a  blow 
when  it  enters  the  trough  as  it  is  gradually  guided 
into  the  proper  groove.  The  troughs  are  held  in 
position  by  two  bolts  which  pass  through  the  timber 
framing. 
Where  the  banking  level  is  a  considerable  dis- 
tance above  the  ground,  it  is  by  no  means  a  rare 
occurrence,  when  storms  prevail,  for  the  guides 
to  be  blown  out  of  the  troughs,  and  if  this 
happens  during  winding  a  serious  accident  may 
result.  Mr.  A.  B.  Southall  has  designed  a  simple 
appliance,  which  entirely  gets  over  the  difficulty. 
A  sliding  block,  a  (Figs.  302  an4.  303),  with  a  projection  on  each. 
FIGS.  302 AND   303. 
c 
) 
I b 
\ 
CL 

--- Page Break ---
248  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
side,  is  placed  in  the  guide  trough,  5,  which  is  recessed  to 
receive  the  projection.  This  block  is  free  to  move  upwards, 
but  is  prevented  from  dropping  completely  out  of  the  trough 
by  a  stop-plate,  c,  placed  at  the  lower  end.  In  its  normal 
(position  it  rests  against  this  stop-plate,  and  the  guide  passes 
i.hi  ough  a  hole  in  the  centre,  and  is  always  locked  in  its  proper 
position  in  the  trough.  When  the  slipper  of  the  cage  reaches 
this  block,  it  lifts  it  upwards,  but  on  the  descent  of  the  cage  the 
block,  by  the  action  of  gravity,  drops  into  its  former  position. 
Engines. — For  winding  purposes  a  pair  of  engines,  with  the cranks  set  at  right  angles,  is  the  only  form  admissible.  There 
are,  however,  two  ways  of  placing  these  engines,  either  vertical 
-or  horizontal.  Vertical  engines  are  becoming  things  of  the  past. 
In  the  first  place  the  cost  of  foundations  is  great.  The  drum  of 
.a  winding  engine  may  weigh  anything  up  to  80  tons,  and  if  such 
a  mass  has  to  be  placed  30  to  40  ft.  above  the  ground,  and 
revolved  at  a  high  velocity,  the  structure  carrying  it  must  be 
correspondingly  large.  Vertical  engines  were  designed  to  reduce 
wear  in  the  pistons,  it  being  considered  that  if  a  large  cylinder 
was  placed  horizontally,  the  lower  half  would  wear  very  fast.  For 
the  same  reason,  with  horizontal  engines  it  was  usual  to  employ 
back  piston-rods,  but  both  in  this  case  and  in  the  former  one,  the 
-evil  has  been  proved  by  experience  to  be  more  imaginary  than  real, 
and  as  a  result,  both  vertical  engines  and  back  piston-rods  are 
being  abandoned.  At  Harris  Navigation  Colliery,  inverted  engines 
are  applied  at  one  pit — that  is  to  say,  the  drum  is  placed  below  and the  cylinders  above.  The  cost  of  foundations  is  reduced,  but  it 
would  appear  that  no  real  benefit  results,  as  the  second  pair  of 
engines  at  the  same  colliery  are  placed  horizontally. 
The  design  and  strengths  of  the  various  parts  is  more  a  matter 
for  the  mechanical  than  the  mining  engineer.  The  stroke  is 
usually  made  twice  the  diameter  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  connect- 
ing rod  three  times  the  length  of  the  stroke.  The  valves,  both 
steam  and  exhaust,  should  be  of  large  proportions.  In  winding, 
•everything  is  sacrificed  to  speed.  The  engine  should  be  simple, 
easily  handled,  and,  above  all,  over  its  work.  On  large  engines, 
•the  double  beat,  or  Cornish  valve,  has  until  recently  been  the  one generally  adopted,  owing  to  the  ease  with  which  it  is  capable  of 
being  moved,  but  modern  improvements  in  the  design  of  equili- brium slide  valves  have  largely  brought  such  class  into  favour. 
The  proper  size  of  engine  to  do  a  given  amount  of  work  may  be 
•easily  found  by  applying  a  very  elementary  formula  of  mechanics, 
but  simple  as  the  problem  is,  the  determination  of  the  required 
:size  is  often  more  a  matter  of  guess-work  than  of  reasoning.  In 
moving  a  load,  an  engine  has  to  do  two  things.  Every  one  is  aware 
that  a  greater  expenditure  of  force  is  required  to  move  a  load  than 
to  keep  that  load  in  motion  when  once  started.  The  greatest 
work  that  a  winding  engine  has  to  do,  is  to  get  a  given  mass  into  a 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  249 
•certain  velocity  uniformly  accelerated  from  rest,  and  to  raise  the 
load  the  distance  passed  over  during  the  time  this  velocity  is  being 
obtained.  Mr.  Robert  Wilson  *  suggests  a  formula,  based  on 
such  reasoning,  which,  if  followed,  will  be  found  to  be  satis- factory. 
"W  =  the  weight  to  be  set  in  motion  :  one  cage,  coal,  number  of  empty  tubs on  cage,  one  winding  rope  from  pit-head  gear  to  bottom,  one  rope from  bunk  level  to  bottom. 
v  =  greatest  velocity  obtained  uniformly  accelerated  from  rest. 
(j  =  gravity  =  32. 2. 
£  =  time  in  seconds  during  which  v  is  obtained. 
L  =  unbalanced  load  on  engine. R  — ratio  of  diameters  of  drum  and  crank  circles. 
P  =  average  pressure  of  steam  in  the  cylinders. 
N  =  number  oi  cylinders. 
S  =  space  passed  over  by  crank  pin  during  time  t. 
•C  =  |;  constant  to  reduce  angular  space  passed  through  by  crank,  to  the 
distance  passed  through  by  the  piston  during  the  time  t. 
A  =  area  of  one  cylinder. 
f  =  addition  for  friction,  &c.,  of  engines  varying  from  10  to  30  %  of  A. 
B  =  area  of  cylinders  with  margin  for  friction  allowed. 
D  =  diameter  of  cylinder  required. 
i.  Where  the  load  is  balanced  : 
r.  s.  N.  c. 
=B,  and  V  = 
v  .7854 
2.  Where  the  load  is  unbalanced. 
The  symbols  will  retain  their  significance,  and  the  formula  will 
remain  the  same  as  before,  with  the  addition  of  another  term  to 
:allow  for  the  variation  of  the  lengths  of  the  ascending  and 
•descending  ropes.  In  this  case : — 
7i,  ••  reduced  length  of  rope  in  t  attached  to  ascending  cage. 
7*2= increased  length  of  rope  in  t  attached  to  descending  cage. 
w  =  weight  of  rope  per  foot  in  Ibs. 
P.  S.  N.  C. 
eliminating  gives 
1J.  S.  N.  C. 
"T 
*  Ches.  Inst.  xi.  267. 

--- Page Break ---
250  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
To  show  how  this  formula  is  applied,  perhaps  the  best  way  will 
be  to  work  out  an  example,  assuming  that  1200  tons  are  to  be 
raised  from  a  depth  of  420  yds.  in  8  hours,  that  the  tubs  weigh  7 
cwt.  each,  and  carry  12  cwt.  of  coal,  that  four  tubs  are  raised  on 
each  cage,  which  weighs  30  cwt.,  and  that  the  pressure  of  steam 
will  be  70  Ibs.,  the  diam.  of  drum  18  ft.  and  the  stroke  5  ft. 
1  200  tons  in  8  hrs.  =  150  tons  an  hour,  and  as  each  journey 
carries  48  cwt.,  nearly  sixty-three  journeys  have  to  be  made  in  each hour,  and  each  journey  must  not  occupy  more  than  57  seconds. 
As  numerous  small  stoppages  always  occur,  it  would  be  best  to 
assume  that  winding  and  changing  has  to  take  place  in  50  seconds. 
If  changing  is  performed  in  8  seconds,  the  actual  time  of  winding 
will  be  42  seconds,  and,  as  the  shaft  is  1260  ft.  deep,  the  average 
speed  will  be  30  ft.  a  second.  The  maximum  velocity  will  be  at 
least  40  ft.  The  time  t,  in  which  this  velocity  is  obtained,  may 
safely  be  taken  as  yth  of  the  total  time  of  winding  =  6. 
The  rope  should  be  of  plough  steel  weighing  2^-  Ibs.  per  foot. 
If  the  load  is  balanced  L  =  48  cwt.  =5376  Ibs.  If  the  head-gear 
is  60  ft.  high,  W=  18,322  Ibs.  In  the  time  t,  the  drum  will 
probably  make  three  revolutions,  therefore  8  —  3x5x3.1416  = 
47.13.  R  =  3.6. 
70x47.13x2x1 
B-=  590.1  +f  (say  1  5%)  =  678.6 
676.6  . 
=  29.4,  say  30  inches. 
Position  of  Engine  House. — In  nearly  every  case  the  direc- 
tion of  the  inset  governs  the  position  of  the  winding  engine,  the 
drum  shaft  being  generally  at  right  angles  to  the  axis  of  the  inset 
and  cages.  The  choice,  therefore,  appears  to  be  limited  to  two 
positions,  either  A  or  B  (Fig.  304).  Such,  however,  is  not  the 
case  ;  the  cages  may  still  be  kept  in  the  same  line  by  placing  the 
pulleys  obliquely,  shown  by  dotted  lines,  and,  by  doing  so,  the 
engine-house  may  be  situated  at,  say,  either  C  or  O1,  or  practically 
anywhere ;  indeed,  by  putting  one  pulley  over  the  other,  the- engine  may  be  placed  at  right  angles,  D,  to  the  axis  of  the  inset. 
Drums. — The  winding  rope  is  coiled  on  a  drum,  which  may  be 
of  various  forms.  The  nrst  division  is  produced  by  the  type  of 
rope  adopted. 
The  ropes  are  flat  ones  and  coil  on  themselves;  the  drum  consists 
of  a  narrow  cylinder  of  small  diameter  fitted  with  horns  on  each 
side.  Its  weight  is  small  and  its  construction  simple. 
The  other  main  division  is  caused  by  the  employment  of  round 
ropes.  It  has  been  tried  to  make  round  ropes  coil  on  themselvesr 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 251 
FIG.  304. 
and  employ  a  drum  similar  to  that  used  for  a  flat  rope,  but  the 
experiment  did  not  meet  with  success.  Three  types  of  drums  for 
round  ropes  are  in  use :  (i)  The  ordinary  cylindrical  form, 
parallel  throughout;  (2)  The  conical ;  (3)  The  spiral. 
The  parallel  form  is  obviously  the  simplest,  cheapest,  and  least 
liable  to  accident.  Its  only  disad- 
vantage is  the  side  friction  resulting 
from  the  angling  of  the  rope.  The 
successive  coils  lie  side  by  side,  and  as 
they  lap  on  the  drum  are  constantly 
moving  relatively  to  the  centre  line 
of  the  pulley.  An  attempt  is  made 
to  equalise  this  strain,  by  placing  the 
drum  in  such  a  position  that  at  the 
commencement  of  a  wind  the  rope  is at  the  same  distance  on  one  side  of 
the  centre  line  as  it  is  on  the  other 
side  at  the  conclusion — that  is  to  say, the  centre  line  of  the  pulley  coincides with  the  centre  line  of  half  the  drum. 
The  result,  however,  is  that  at 
first  the  coils  do  not  lie  against  each 
other,  but  have  spaces  between,  as  the 
rope  tries  to  get  into  the  same  plane 
as  the  pulley,  but  after  the  central 
point  is  passed,  the  rope  still  tries  to 
keep  in  the  same  plane  as  the 
pulley,  and  the  successive  coils  not 
only  lie  very  close  against  each 
other,  but  a  grinding  action  is  set 
up  between  them. 
This  disadvantage  is  removed  in  some  cases  by  turning  shallow 
grooves  in  the  circumference  of  the  drum  for  the  rope  to  coil  in. 
It  then  winds  evenly  and  grinding  is  avoided.  A  far  cheaper 
plan,  and  an  equally  satisfactory  one,  is  to  make  the  drum 
slightly  conical,  instead  of  cylindrical,  a  slope  of  i  in  10  being 
sufficient.  The  tendency  of  the  rope  to  get  into  the  same  plane 
as  that  of  the  pulley,  is  thereby  counterbalanced  by  its  disinclina- 
tion to  climb  the  slope,  and  each  coil  winds  evenly  against  the 
other.  With  either  system,  and  a  cylindrical  drum,  it  is  impos- 
sible to  avoid  side  friction  altogether.  What  is  done  is  to  make 
the  side  friction  of  one  lap  equal  to  that  of  another,  and  not 
throw  all  the  grinding  action  upon  one  or  two  coils. 
To  obtain  the  advantage  of  counterbalancing,  which  is  dis- 
cussed further  on,  conical  drums  were  designed — that  is  to  say, the  rope  coils  on  a  cone  instead  of  a  cylinder.  The  amount 
of  counterbalancing  that  can  be  obtained  is  small,  as  the  slope  of 
the  cone  is  limited  by  the  fact  that  if  it  is  made  too  great,  the  rope 

--- Page Break ---
252  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
slips  off.  For  this  reason,  their  use  has  been  abandoned.  In 
their  place  spiral  drums  have  been  substituted,  which  consist  of  a 
combination  of  a  cone  and  a  cylinder.  The  cone  is  very  steep, 
and  on  its  side  is  arranged  a  spiral  groove,  usually  made  of  semi- 
circular iron  troughs.  The  rope  commences  to  coil  at  the  smal 
end  of  the  spiral,  and  gradually  ascends  the  cone,  finally  wrapping 
on  the  cylindrical  part,  the  latter  being  added  to  reduce  the  width 
of  the  drum  and  the  angling  of  the  rope.  As  each  groove  has  to 
be  placed  at  such  a  distance  from  the  one  immediately  above,  that 
the  rope  going  from  the  lower  spiral  misses  the  troughs  of  the 
upper  one,  a  considerable  amount  of  space  is  occupied,  and  unless 
several  of  the  coils  took  place  on  a  cylinder,  angling  would  be  very 
large,  and,  in  addition,  for  any  great  depth,  the  size  of  the  drum would  be  enormous. 
Several  objections  may  be  urged  against  spiral  drums :  (a)  As 
pointed  out  further  on,  counterbalancing  is  not  perfect ;  (b)  Their 
enormous  weight  and  cost ;  (c)  The  disadvantage  attending  bank- ing. The  cage  at  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  is  attached  to  the  rope 
coiling  on  the  smaller  diameter  of  the  drum,  whilst  that  at  the 
surface  is  connected  to  the  larger  diameter.  When  the  cages  are 
moved  to  change  the  decks,  the  drum  has  to  be  turned  sufficiently 
to  wind  up  on  its  smallest  diameter  an  amount  of  rope  equal  to 
the  height  of  a  deck,  whilst,  at  the  same  time,  the  cage  at  the 
surface  is  lowered  a  considerably  greater  distance,  because  the 
rope  to  which  it  is  attached  is  coiled  on  the  larger  diameter  of  the 
drum.  After  the  engineman  has  put  the  bottom  cage  in  position, 
he  has  to  lift  up  the  top  cage  again  to  discharge  its  contents,  the 
result  being  that  time  is  lost  in  banking. 
Brakes. — An  efficient  brake  on  a  winding  engine  is  an  abso- 
lute necessity.  In  cases  of  emergency,  very  powerful  ones  are 
required,  and  to  meet  the  case  the  brake-strap  is  connected 
through  a  lever  to  the  piston-rod  of  a  small  engine,  into  which 
steam  can  be  admitted.  Such  an  appliance  acts  on  the  "  all  or 
none  "  principle ;  full  power  has  either  to  be  exerted  or  not.  If steam  be  admitted  to  the  cylinder,  the  power  applied  to  the  brake 
is  due  to  the  area  of  the  piston  multiplied  by  the  pressure,  and  as 
neither  the  steam  pressure  nor  the  piston  area  can  be  varied,  the 
power  exerted  is  always  constant.  Immediately  steam  enters  the 
piston  such  power  is  applied f to  the  brate-strap,  the  result  being 
that  when  a  steam-brake  is  thrown  into  action  the  machinery  is 
subjected  to  very  severe  shocks,  and  consequently  such  appliances 
are  only  used  in  cases  of  emergency.  As  a  rule,  winding  engines 
are  provided  with  two  brakes,  one  applied  by  the  engineman's foot,  and  the  other  by  steam,  the  latter  only  being  used  on  rare 
occasions.  Several  devices  have  been  designed  to  increase  the 
power  and  leverage  of  foot  brakes,  and  to  do  away  with  those  cf steam. 
Burris  Brake. — The  brake-strap  does  not  encircle  the  drum, 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
253 
but  consists  of  a  block  of  wood  (B,  Fig.  305),  about  24  in.  long  by 
6  in.  broad,  in  which  a  series  of  holes  are  bored  and  filled  with 
sand.  This  block  of  wood  is  placed  at  one  end  of  a  long  leverr 
the  other  end  being  moved  up  and  down  by  a  rod  connected 
to  the  arm  of  another  lever  controlled  by  the  engineman.  The- block  being  small  in  area,  and  fitted  to  the  rim  of  the  drum,  only 
requires  a  very  small  movement  to  free  itself,  and  the  length  of 
the  lower  lever  being  nearly  equal  to  the  length  of  the  engines, 
it  follows  that  a  large  amount  of  power  can  be  applied.  At 
FIG.  305. 
T 
Bickershaw  Colliery,  Lancashire,  the  leverage  is  about  200  to  ir 
and  as  there  are  two  blocks  on  each  drum  the  power  exerted  by 
the  engineman  is  multiplied  to  a  great  extent.  The  action  of  the 
sand  in  the  holes  is  to  keep  the  brake  rim  free  from  grease.  By 
the  aid  of  an  adjusting  screw,  A,  the  brake  can  be  tightened 
in  a  few  minutes  and  any  wear  taken  up  in  the  blocks,  which 
are  usually  renewed  about  every  four  months. 
Tyldesley  Colliery. — A  pair  of  32  in.  cylinder  engines  are  here 
fitted  with  a  powerful  strap-brake,  moved  by  a  toggle-joint  lever. 
The  engineman  exerts  pressure 
through    his    foot-treadle    in  FIG.  306. the  direction  of  the  arrow  W 
(Fig.  306),  pulls  down  the bell  crank  lever,  ABC, 
moves  the  toggle-joint,  D  E  F, and  gives  motion  to  the  lever,  A 
F  G  H,  working  about  the 
centre,  G,  the  end,  H,  being    H     <»  B attached   to   the  strap   going 
half  round  the  brake-ring  on  the  drum.  The  direction  of  motion 
in  each  part  is  shown  by  the  arrows,  and  as  the  engineman  puts 
on  the  brake,  the  toggle-joint,  D  E  F,  forms  a  straight  line.  At 
the  instant  this  takes  place  the  pressure  exerted  becomes  infi- nitely large.  B,  D  and  G  are  the  only  fixed  points. 
Pasfteld's  Brake. — To  obtain  the  power  of  a  steam -brake,  and 
yet  remove  the  difficulties  previously  referred  to,  Mr.  T.  Pasfield  *"' 
*  So.  Staff.  Inst.  ii.  112. 

--- Page Break ---
2  54 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
has  designed  a  special  valve  and  gearing  (Fig.  307),  which  allows 
any  variation  of  power  to  be  applied,  as  the  pressure  of  steam  in 
the  brake-cylinder  is  made FIG.  307.  to  increase  and  decrease  in 
proportion  to  the  amount of  force  exerted  by  the 
engineman  on  the  con- 
trolling treadle.  The  pas- 
sage, /,  leads  into  the 
cvlinderof  the  steam-brake, 
which  is  fitted  with  a  piston 
and  piston-rod,  the  latter 
£  being  connected  by  a  link to  the  lever  applying  the 
brake.  Steam  is  admitted 
on  one  side  of  the  piston 
only,  and  enters  and  leaves 
the  cylinder  by  the  same 
passage.  The  valve-box. a,  is  fitted  with  two  valves, 
b  and  c,  both  connected 
by  gearing  to  the  lever  to which  the  foot-treadle,  f^ 
is  attached,  and  controlled  by  the  link,  e.  The  valve,  b,  which 
admits  steam  through  the  passage,  g,  is  kept  closed  by  a  spring,  d, 
which  just  balances  it  against  the  steam  in  the  boiler.  The  relief 
valve,  c,  unless  the  brake  is  in  action,  is  in  equilibrium,  free  to 
open  or  shut. 
When  the  treadle  is  pressed  down,  the  steam-valve  is  relieved  of 
some  of  the  pressure  which  keeps  it  closed,  and  steam  enters  the 
cylinder  until  its  pressure  is  sufficient  to  again  close  the  valve 
against  the  force  exerted  by  the  treadle,  so  that  the  greater  the 
force  exerted  on  the  treadle,  the  greater  the  pressure  must  the 
steam  reach  before  it  closes  the  steam-valve.  At  the  same  time, 
as  the  treadle  relieves  the  steam-valve  of  some  of  the  spring 
pressure  which  tends  to  close  it,  it  brings  an  equal  force  to  bear 
on  the  relief-valve,  c,  to  keep  it  closed  ;  any  increase  of  steam 
pressure  in  the  cylinder  beyond  that  intended  at  once  escapes 
through  the  relief- valve.  Thus,  if  the  force  exerted  by  the  treadle 
to  relieve  the  steam-valve,  is  to  the  extent  of  what  amounts  to 
one  or  two  Ibs.  per  sq.  in.,  the  steam-valve  admits  steam  into 
the  cylinder  until  the  pressure  there  is  one  or  two  Ibs.  per  sq. 
in.,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  then  closes.  The  treadle  at  the  same 
time  exerts  sufficient  force  to  keep  the  relief-valve  closed  until 
the  steam  in  the  cylinder  has  reached  the  one  or  two  Ibs.  pressure, 
and  then  allows  anything  beyond  that  to  escape. 
Counterbalancing.  —  With  an  ordinary  cylindrical  drum, 
unless  some  means  are  taken  to  counterbalance  the  weight  of  the 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  255 
rope  hanging  in  the  shaft,  the  engine  is  subjected  to  an  enormous 
variation  in  the  load,  especially  in  deep  shafts.     If 
w  =  weight  of  cage  anrl  empty  tubs  =  6270  Ibs. 
c  =  weight  of  coal  =  4480  Ibs. 
r  =  weight  of  rope  hanging  down  pit  =  6000  Ibs. 
At  the  commencement,  when  the  empty  cage  is  at  the  top  of 
the  pit,  the  weight  to  be  lifted  will  be : 
w  +  c  +  r-w  or  10,480  Ibs. 
In  the  centre  of  the  run,  half  r  would  have  been  added  to  the 
descending  load  and  subtracted  from  the  ascending  one  \  the  weight 
on  the  engine  is,  therefore : 
(w  +  c  +  r  +  -)  -(u>  +  -)  or  4480  Ibs. 
At  the  end  of  the  wind  all  the  rope  is  acting  in  favour  of  the 
descending  cage,  and  the  weight  on  the  engine  becomes : 
(iv  +  c}-(w  +  r}  or  -  1520  Ibs. 
During  the  complete  operation  the  load  varies  from  10,480  Ibs. 
against  the  engine  to  1520  Ibs.  in  favour  of  it.  At  the  commence- 
ment of  winding  the  engine  wastes  a  great  deal  of  energy  in 
setting  this  mass  into  motion,  and  as  speed  is  the  main  object,  the 
engineman  cannot  cut  off  steam  when  most  desirable,  but  must  go 
on,  and  finally  has  to  reverse  the  engines  in  order  to  bring  them 
to  rest.  An  enormous  amount  of  energy  is  therefore  lost  in  the 
latter  part  of  the  run,  and  such  loss  obviously  increases  with  the 
depth  of  the  pit. 
Supposing,  now,  that  by  one  of  the  methods  of  counter- 
balancing, the  weight  of  the  rope  hanging  down  the  shaft  was 
balanced.  If  this  new  factor  be  denoted  by  r',  the  weight  to  be lifted  at  the  commencement  of  the  run  will  be : 
(w  +  c  +  r)  -  (w  +  r'}  or  4480  Ibs. 
in  the  centre  of  the  wind  it  will  be  : 
(w+c+2 +  —)-(»+-+-)  or  4480  Ibs. 
and  finally 
(w  +  c  +  r'}  -  (w  +  r)  or  4480  Ibs. 
The  weight  thus  not  only  remains  constant,  but  is  considerably 
smaller  at  the  beginning  than  in  the  other  case.  This  reasoning 
will  be  clearly  understood  if  it  is  remembered  that  for  every 
decrement  in  r,  an  equal  increment  of  r'  is  added,  and  as  these 

--- Page Break ---
256  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
two  forces  are  equal  and  opposite  at  the  beginning,  they  wilF 
necessarily  be  so  at  the  conclusion. 
Having  thus  proved  the  great  advantage  of  counterbalancing, 
the  means  by  which  such  is  secured  may  now  be  considered. 
Tapering  Ropes. — A  tapering  rope  enables  winding  to  take place  from  greater  depths  than  is  possible  with  ropes  of  uniform 
section  ;  the  theory  of  taper  ropes  is  to  obtain  uniform  strength 
throughout,  thinner  at  the  cage  end  where  the  weight  is  least, 
and  thicker  at  the  drum  end  where  it  is  greatest.  Their  thickness 
is  such  that  the  section  at  any  part  is  capable  of  safely  bearing 
the  load  on  it  at  such  point.  With  tapering  ropes,  a  smaller 
initial  dead  weight  is  thrown  on  the  engine,  as  their  section 
at  the  largest  point  will  be  less  than  that  of  a  rope  of  uniform 
section  throughout,  because  a  smaller  weight  has  to  be  supported. 
The  difference  between  the  initial  and  final  load  is  also  smaller, 
but  it  increases  more  rapidly,  because  the  larger  diameter  is 
wound  on  the  drum  in  the  ascending  portion,  while  in  the 
descending  portion  the  larger  section  is  being  unwound.  These 
ropes  cost  more  than  ordinary  ones,  and  owing  to  the  difficulty  of 
manufacture  cannot  be  made  so  perfect. 
Flat  Ropes. — This  means  of  winding  allows  of  a  certain  equali- 
sation, for  the  radius  of  the  coil  of  the  ascending  rope  continues  to 
increase,  while  that  of  the  descending  rope  diminishes;  conse- 
quently, as  the  resistance  decreases  in  the  ascending  load,  the  lever- 
age increases,  and  as  the  power  increases  in  the  other,  the  leverage 
diminishes.  The  variation  in  the  leverage  is  a  constant  quantity, 
and  is  equal  to  the  thickness  of  the  rope.  If  the  diameter  of  the 
drum  be  made  small  enough  at  the  commencement,  a  remarkable 
uniformity  in  the  load  may  be  obtained,  the  only  objection  being 
the  use  of  flat  ropes. 
Conical  and  Spiral  Drums. — Results  analogous  to  the  pre- 
ceding may  be  obtained  by  using  round  ropes  coiling  on  conical 
drums.  They  may  be  either  smooth,  the  successive  coils  lying  side 
by  side,  or  may  be  provided  with  a  spiral  groove.  If  a  conical  drum 
was  constructed  to  give  perfect  equalisation,  the  sides  would  be  so 
steep  that  the  rope  would  slip  off.  For  such  reason  scroll  drums 
were  designed,  which  are  open  to  the  objections  already  stated. 
In  addition,  the  load  is  seldom  perfectly  counterbalanced.  To 
obtain  satisfactory  wear  from  a  round  rope,  it  must  be  coiled  on  a 
drum  of  large  diameter.  Such  condition  limits  the  size  of  the 
smaller  diameter,  which  is  usually  made  so  large  that  if  the  final 
diameter  was  of  the  proper  dimensions  to  give  perfect  counter- 
balancing, the  size  of  the  drum  would  be  enormous/  For  this 
reason,  and  to  prevent  the  great  lateral  displacement  of  the 
winding  rope  from  the  centre  line  of  pulley,  owing  to  their 
necessarily  large  width,  such  drums  are  usually  made  for  several 
coils  to  take  place  on  the  spiral,  and  the  remainder  on  the  flat. 
'  Tail  Rope  beneath  Cages. — With  cylindrical  drums,  perfect 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
257 
counterbalancing  can  be  secured  by  several  methods,  but  all  have 
given  way  to  the  endless  rope  system,  which  is  preferable  to  all 
others  if  the  shaft  is  free  from  cross- timbers.  It  consists  of 
placing  beneath  the  cages  a  tail  rope,  equal  in  diameter  to  the 
winding  rope,  and  after  conveying  this  down  the  pit  into  the 
sump,  where  it  forms  a  loop,  it  is  returned  and  attached  beneath 
the  other  cage.  When  first  introduced,  it  was  considered  that 
a  pulley  must  be  placed  in  the  sump  for  the  tail  rope  to  pass 
round,  such  pulley  remaining  stationary  under  ordinary  con- 
ditions, but  free  to  move  between  guides  and  be  lifted  out  of  its 
bearings  in  case  of  accidents.  In  the  majority  of  cases  no  pulley 
whatever  is  used.  All  that  has  to  be  done  to  keep  the  tail  rope 
from  twisting,  is  to  fix  two  beams  side  by  side  across  the  pit  in 
the  sump,  between  which  the  tail  rope  passes,  and  another  one 
below  put  across  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  latter  passing 
through  the  loop  in  the  rope. 
It  is  perhaps  preferable  to  use  a  guide  pulley  in  the  sump,  as 
old  winding  ropes  can  then  be  used,  otherwise  a  special  rope  has 
to  be  employed,  as  old  winding  ropes  are  not  sufficiently  flexible. 
The  balance  rope  is  connected  to  the  bottom  of  the  cage  by  an 
ordinary  capping  and  bolt  passing  through  a  cross-bearer. 
By  this  system  perfect  counterbalancing  is  obtained,  as  a  factor 
is  introduced  equal  and  opposite  to  the  winding  rope,  and  gives 
equality  at  the  beginning  and  the  end.  The  one  solitary 
objection  urged  against  it,  is  that  a  greater  weight  is  put  on  a 
tender  part  of  the  winding  rope — viz.,  the  capping,  but  if 
properly  constructed  and  put  on,  the  capping  is  quite  as  strong  as 
the  winding  rope  itself. 
Meinicke's  System.* — A  balance  rope  is  employed  in  this method,  but  instead  of  attaching  it  beneath  the  cage  it  is  connected 
to  two  auxiliary  ropes,  which  may  either  be  coiled  on  the  same 
drum  as  the  winding  rope,  or  on  auxiliary  ones.  The  auxiliary 
rope  passes  over  separate  pulleys  on  the  head-gear,  and  the  balance 
rope  is  equal  to  the  weight  of  both  the  winding  and  auxiliary 
ropes.  Perfect  counterbalancing  results,  and  no  additional 
weight  is  thrown  on  the  capping  of  the  winding  rope.  This,  in 
conjunction  with  the  fact  that  the  balance  rope  may  be  led  into 
any  position  in  the  shaft  and  boxed  off,  are  the  advantages,  but 
as  it  is  much  more  complicated  than  a  tail  rope  beneath  the  cages, 
the  latter  seems  preferable. 
Expansion. — For  economical  working  steam  must  be  used 
expansively.  With  a  continuously  running  engine  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  doing  so,  but  in  the  case  of  an  intermittently  running 
engine,  working  under  the  conditions  which  exist  in  winding, 
the  problem  is  not  so  easy.  As  before  remarked,  everything  is 
sacrificed  to  speed.  It  is  essential  that  the  engine  should  start 
*  On  Counterbalancing  the  Weight  of  Winding  Ropes.  C.  Meinicke. Ches.  Inst.  xiii.  336. 

--- Page Break ---
258  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
quickly,  should  travel  at  a  high  velocity,  and  be  quickly  brought 
to  rest ;  it  is  also  essential  that  the  engineman  should  be  capable 
of  putting  either  full  steam  on  or  against  the  engine,  whenever 
required,  and,  above  all,  the  machine  should  be  simple.  Under 
these  conditions,  regular  expansion  is  quite  out  of  the  question. 
Of  late  years  several  most  ingenious  automatic  variable  expansion 
gears  have  been  designed,  which  give  satisfactory  results.  They 
are  so  arranged  that  at  the  beginning  of  a  wind  the  engine 
takes  full  steam,  and  they  only  come  into  operation  when  the 
machinery  has  attained  its  maximum  speed.  The  general  type 
consist  of  "  trip  gears,"  that  is  to  say,  by  some  arrangement  the 
FIG.  308. 
valve  is  made  to  trip  off  the  lifting  lever,  and  close  before  the 
completion  of  the  stroke. 
Musgrave  Gear. — In  Fig.  308,  A  is  the  spindle  of  an  ordinary 
Cornish  valve  fittod  with  a  dash-pot,  O,  at  its  upper  end.  With 
ordinary  gear,  the  valve  would  be  lifted  by  the  lever  B  catching 
the  projection  C,  but  here  a  bell  crank  lever,  D  E,  capable  of  turn- 
ing about  the  centre,  F,  is  interposed  between  the  two  pieces. 
Fastened  to  the  upper  end  of  the  frame  carrying  the  valve  is  a  pin, 
G,  and  spindle,  H,  on  which  is  keyed  an  eccentric,  K.  By  means 
of  the  link,  L,  and  the  rod,  M,  a  rotary  motion  can  be  given  to  the 
eccentric  about  its  axis,  H.  At  the  beginning  of  a  wind,  the 
lever  B  (moved  by  the  eccentrics  of  the  engine  in  the  ordinary 
manner)  raises  the  valve  through  the  bell  crank,  the  spindles 
rising  and  falling  with  the  lifter,  as  if  no  expansion  gear  was 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
259 
present.  As  speed  increases,  the  rod,  M,  which  is  in  connection 
with  the  governor,  is  moved  in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow, 
turns  round  the  eccentric,  K,  and  depresses  the  end,  I),  of  the  bell 
crank.  The  lifter,  B,  then  trips  off  the  other  end,  E,  of  the  bell 
crank,  and  allows  the  valve  to  close  suddenly,  any  injurious  shock 
being  prevented  by  the  dash-pot,  O.  The  lifter,  B,  continues  its upward  journey  without  the  valve,  and  on  its  return,  the  spring,  N, 
pushes  the  bell  crank  into  gear  again.  Fig.  309  shows  the  attach- 
ment of  the  gear  to  the  engines.  It  is  worked  by  a  dead 
weight  governor,  a,  driven  by  a  strap,  6,  from  the  drum  shaft,  c. 
In  the  case  of  a  new  installation,  it  is  only  necessary  that  the 
maximum  speed  at  which  the  engines  are  to  run  shall  be 
determined,  and  then  by  a  proper  relation  between  the  pulley  on 
the  drum  shaft,  and  the  pulley  on  the  governor,  the  point  of  cut- 
off can  be  readily  fixed.  This  gear  has  been  applied  in  numerous 
instances  to  winding  engines,  and  the  author  has  inspected  its 
working  on  several  occasions.  At  Tyldesley  Colliery,  Lancashire, 
FIG.  309. 
the  drum  makes  twenty  revolutions,  and  a  cut-off  of  Jth  com- mences at  the  fourth  revolution.  The  gear  does  not  come  into 
operation  until  the  maximum  speed  is  obtained,  and  is  thrown  out 
of  action  by  the  governor  towards  the  end  of  the  wind,  when  speed 
falls.  Its  advantages  are,  that  it  has  no  complicated  parts,  is  out 
of  the  engixieman's  way,  and  comes  in  and  goes  out  of  action  with- out interfering  with  any  of  the  parts  handled  by  him,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  allows  full  pressure  of  steam  at  the  beginning 
and  end  of  a  wind,  or  at  any  other  desired  point  during  the  ascent 
or  descent  of  the  cage  ;  indeed,  so  far  as  the  engineman  is  concerned, 
he  is  in  just  the  same  condition  as  if  the  gear  were  absent. 
Grange  Gear. — A  gear  is  applied  by  the  Grange  Iron  Co.,  which 
is  similar  both  in  principle  and  action  to  the  one  just  described, 
and  gives  the  same  results.  The  only  difference  is  in  the  arrange- 
ment of  the  parts.  The  lifter  raises  the  valve  through  a  curved 
rocking  lever,  under  one  end  of  which  a  sliding  wedge  is  either 
pushed  or  withdrawn  by  a  combination  of  levers  moved  by  a 
governor.  When  the  wedge  is  pushed  under  one  end  of  the 
rocking  lever  (which  takes  place  when  the  maximum  speed  is 
obtained),  the  lifter  drops  off  the  other  end,  and  allows  the  valve 
>to  close  at  some  intermediate  point  in  the  length  of  the  stroke. 

--- Page Break ---
260  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
Sulzer  Gear. — This  arrangement  has  been  applied  to  many 
engines  on  the  Continent,  and  is  most  ingenious,  although  rather 
complicated.  Fig.  310  is  a  diagrammatic  sketch.  The  shaft, «,  is 
driven  by  bevel  gearing  from  the  crank  shaft,  and  revolves  at  the 
same  speed.  On  it  are  keyed  two- 
eccentrics,  only  one,  that  working 
the  steam  valve,  being  shown  in 
the  sketch.  By  the  revolution  of 
the  spindle,  a,  a  motion  to  and 
fro  in  the  direction  of  its  length 
is  given  to  the  eccentric  rod,  b  c. 
As  this  falls,  it  catches  a  projec- 
tion, d,  on  the  bell  crank  lever, 
efgk,  the  fixed  points  of  which 
are  e  and  h,  and  the  valve  spindle 
is  lifted.  On  a  second  shaft,  k, 
is  fixed  an  eccentric,  which  can 
be  rotated  by  the  governor  in  the- direction  indicated  by  the  arrow.  The  rod  of  this  eccentric  is 
connected  by  a  screw  to  b  c.  In  ordinary  working,  the  apparatus 
stands  as  shown  in  the  sketch,  and  the  valve  is  regularly  closed  and 
opened.  When  speed  increases,  the  spindle,  k,  and  its  eccentric  is 
rotated,  and  the  bar,  b  c,  pushed  outward,  with  the  result  that  the 
projection  c  trips  off  d,  and  expansion  results. 
Condensation. — Expansion  to  obtain  the  best  results  must 
be  in  combination  with  condensation,  except  where  very  high 
pressures  are  used.  Unless  condensation  is  employed  the  ratio  of 
expansion  can  only  be  small,  because  the  exhaust  steam  must 
have  a  pressure  greater  than  the  atmosphere.  No  satisfactory 
solution  of  the  problem  was  obtained  owing  to  the  complication 
resulting,  until  the  idea  of  using  independent  condensers  was 
applied. An  independent  condenser,  as  its  name  implies,  is  not  fixed  to, 
or  moved  by,  the  engine  or  engines  whose  steam  it  condenses,  but 
is  worked  entirely  by  an  engine  of  its  own.  To  be  a  success,  it 
should  take  steam  from  several  engines,  and  run  continuously. 
With  it  a  constant  vacuum  is  always  retained.  Many  such  appli- 
ances are  in  use,  but  it  can  scarcely  be  said  that  any  are  working 
perfectly  satisfactorily,  although  many  are  giving  good  results. 
The  chief  difficulty  seems  to  be  to  deal  with  the  enormous  volume 
of  steam  which  comes  from  the  winding  engine  at  intermittent 
times.  Winding  engines  are  necessarily  large,  and  run  rapidly, 
so  that  when  they  are  moving,  especially  if  expansion  is  not  used, 
the  volume  of  steam  discharged  is  very  large,  far  more  so  than  is 
general  with  continuously  running  engines.  The  condenser,  there- fore, has  a  difficulty  in  dealing  with  these  sudden  rushes.  Another 
point  is,  that  either  a  large  quantity  of  water  must  be  available, 
or  some  means  introduced  for  cooling  it.  At  Anzin  Colliery  the 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  261 
hot  water  from  the  condenser  is  cooled  by  being  pumped  to  the 
top  of  a  wooden  frame  and  then  allowed  to  fall  through  the  air. 
A  series  of  horizontal  trays  composed  of  brushwood  are  arranged 
beneath  each  other,  and  the  water  in  falling  from  one  to  the 
other  is  split  up  into  small  drops,  thereby  largely  increasing  the 
cooling  surface. 
An  instance  of  the  work  such  an  apparatus  may  do  is  supplied 
by  an  independent  condenser  and  air-pump  at  Bickershaw  Colliery, 
which  is  kept  continuously  working  by  a  subsidiary  engine.  It 
takes  steam  from  two  pairs  of  hauling  engines,  having  16  in.  cyl. 
by  3  ft.  stroke,  from  a  fan  engine  with  20  in.  cyl.  by  5  ft.  stroke, 
and  from  a  pair  of  30  in.  cyl.  by  6  ft.  stroke  winding  engines,  and maintains  a  constant  vacuum  of  10  Ibs. 
Compound  Engines. — Most  economical  results  are  obtained  by 
what  is  known  as  compounding  engines — that  is  to  say,  the  engine 
is  supplied  with  a  high  and  a  low  pressure  cylinder,  and  expansion 
takes  place  in  each.  The  steam  from  the  high  pressure  cylinder 
passes  into  the  low  pressure  one.  The  object  of  using  two  cylin- ders is  to  obtain  a  higher  degree  of  expansion  than  could  take 
place  in  a  single  cylinder,  with  good  results,  as  the  difference 
between  the  initial  and  final  temperature  of  the  steam  would  be 
too  great.  A  pair  of  compound  engines  would,  therefore,  contain 
four  cylinders,  and  as  simplicity  is  essential  in  winding  machinery, 
such  type  has  never  met  with  favour. 
Quite  recently,  however,  it  has  been  suggested  that  winding 
engines  should  be  constructed  in  pairs  as  before,  but  instead  of 
both  cylinders  being  high  pressure  ones,  one  should  be  high 
pressure  and  the  other  low  pressure,  steam  passing  from  the 
former  into  the  latter.  This  is  the  type  known  as  the  twin 
compound,  but  the  difficulty  encountered  with  it  was  that  some- times it  could  not  be  got  to  start.  Such  failing  was  fatal  to  any 
application  for  winding  purposes,  as  engines  of  such  description 
are  practically  doing  nothing  else  but  starting  and  stopping. 
The  first  solution  of  the  question  was  obtained  by  Mr.  Wm. 
Galloway  at  Llanbradach  Colliery.*  Successful  working  followed on  the  introduction  of  a  reducing  valve  between  the  steam  pipe 
leading  from  the  boiler  to  the  high  pressure  cylinder  and  the  pipe 
connecting  the  high  and  low  pressure  cylinders,  regulated  in  such 
a  manner  as  to  maintain  the  pressure  in  the  intermediate  pipe, 
when  the  engine  was  not  at  work,  as  nearly  as  possible  at  the  same 
average  as  the  steam  in  that  passage  would  naturally  assume 
when  the  engine  was  working.  In  order  to  limit  the  quantity  of 
steam  passing  through  the  reducing  valve  to  the  smallest 
quantity  necessary  to  accomplish  the  object  in  view,  a  screw  stop- valve  was  introduced  in  the  pipe  connecting  the  reducing  valve 
with  the  high  pressure  steam  pipe,  and  a  steam  pressure  gauge  on 
*  So.  Wales.  Inst.  xvi.  in. 

--- Page Break ---
262 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS. 311  AND   312. 
w 
the  intermediate  pipe  itself,  for  the  purpose   of   enabling   the 
reducing  valve  to  be  properly  regulated. 
Special  Methods. — Blanchet's  Pneumatic  System* — The  em- ployment of  round  ropes  is  limited  to  a  certain  depth,  as  a  point 
is  reached  beyond  which  they  will  not  support  their  own  weight. 
Taper  ropes  have  theoretically  no  such  limit,  but  practically  they 
have,  owing  to  the  method  of  construction.  To  dispense  with 
ropes  altogether,  Mr.  Blanchet  successfully  applied  at  Epinac, 
France,  the  principle  of  the  pneumatic  tube. 
The  Hottinguer  shaft  was  intended  to  reach  noo  yds.,  but, 
unfortunately,  after  attaining  711  yds.  no  workable  coal  was 
found,  and,  although  the  pneumatic  system  has  been  used  for 
winding  on  a  small  scale,  it  was  never  carried  out  in  its  entirety ; 
but  sufficient  experience  was  gained  to  prove  that  the  idea  could 
be  a  practical  success.  At  the  same  time,  the  results  did  not 
show  that  it  was  superior  in  economy  to  the  system  of  employing 
ropes,  if  counterbalancing  be  adopted.  The  expense  of  the 
installation  was  enormous.  One  tube  63  inches  diam.  and  about 
T5F  in.  thick  was  placed  in  the  shaft. It  was  made  up  in  about  20  ft. 
lengths  riveted  together  with  butt- 
joints  and  counter-sunk  rivets.  At first,  it  was  thought  that  the  tube 
would  have  to  be  bored,  but  such 
was  found  to  be  unnecessary, 
although  each  length  was  ham- 
mered to  a  perfectly  cylindrical 
form  upon  a  mandril.  A  diagram- 
matic representation  of  the  scheme 
is  given  in  Figs.  311  and  312,  the 
former  showing  the  cage  at  the 
bottom  of  the  shaft,  and  the  latter at  bank. 
The  piston  is  made  in  two  parts, 
one  at  the  top  of  the  cage  and  the 
other  at  the  bottom,  while  the  former 
is  subdivided  into  two  portions, 
placed  at  such  a  distance  apart  that 
in  passing  the  doors  through  which 
the  tubs  are  changed,  one  of  them 
shall  always  be  in  an  uncut  position 
of  the  tube ;  this  ensures  the  pres- 
sure remaining  constant  when  the  piston  passes  the  doors.  The  lower 
part  of  the  piston  below  the  cage  carries  a  parachute,  p.  The 
cage  holds  9  tubs,  one  above  the  other ;  the  load  of  coal  carried  is 
*  Tube  atmospheric  du  puits  Hottinguer.  Z.  Blanchet.  Soc.  Ind.  Min. 
(2e  Serie),  iv.  557  and  vii.  273;  T.  W.  Bunning,  N.  E.  I.  xxiii.  8l. Pneumatic  Hoisting.  H.  A.  Wheeler.  Amer.  Inst.  M.E.  xix.  107. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  263 
nearly  5  tons  ;  and  the  total  weight  of  the  piston,  cage,  tubs,  and coal  is  about  1 2  tons. 
When  the  air  is  exhausted  above  the  piston,  the  latter  commences 
to  ascend,  while  for  descent,  exhaustion  is  stopped,  its  connection 
with  the  exhaust  engine  severed  by  means  of  doors  at  C,  and  air- allowed  to  pass  upon  the  top  of  the  piston  through  the  regulator, 
c.  To  remove  the  tubs  from  the  cage  three  double  doors,  /,  are 
provided  in  the  tube,  both  at  the  top  and  the  bottom,  these  cor- 
responding to  three  levels  of  the  heapstead.  Three  movements  of 
the  cage  take  place  to  change  the  nine  tubs,  and  to  keep  it  steady 
while  such  is  proceeding,  three  double  sets  of  stops,  sl  s2  s3,  are introduced,  and  can  be  thrust  into  the  tube  or  withdrawn  by 
means  of  one  lever.  When  the  cage  is  confined  between  stops  s3 of  the  two  sets,  decks  i,  4,  and  7  can  be  handled,  while  if  the  cage 
be  confined  by  stops  s1  of  each  set,  tubs  3,  6,  and  9  are  discharged At  the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  the  equilibrium  pipe,  E,  goes  from 
the  bottom  of  the  tube  to  a  point  sufficiently  high  to  be  above  the 
piston  during  the  whole  time  the  tubs  are  being  changed.  When 
the  cock,  <7,  in  this  pipe  is  closed,  the  pressure  of  air  on  the  bottom 
keeps  the  piston  up  against  the  top  stops,  and  when  the  cock  is 
opened,  and  the  main  inlet  and  outlet  valves,  k  and  e,  shut,  the 
air  below  is  ratified,  and  the  cage  falls  on  to  the  bottom  stops. 
At  the  pit  top,  the  two  pipes,  A  and  B,  are  provided  with  stop- cocks, c  and  i  \  the  first  is  in  connection  with  the  atmosphere,  to 
allow  the  cage  to  descend,  while  the  latter  is  in  connection  with 
the  exhausting  engines,  and  is  used  to  move  the  cage  if  required 
while  banking  is  being  performed. 
When  the  cage  ascends,  the  doors,/, /and  e,  are  shut,  but  when 
it  arrives  at  the  top,  it  is  made  to  stop,  first,  by  automatically 
shutting  at  k  the  connection  with  the  exhausting  engine  at  C, 
secondly,  by  moving  the  valve  I,  and  admitting  some  air  from  the 
atmosphere,  while  if  the  ascent  still  continues,  the  valve  n  is  lifted 
and  the  tube  opened  to  the  atmosphere.  To  avoid  all  shock  when 
opening  these  valves,  the  top  part  of  the  piston  carries  a  spring 
buffer,  a.  In  the  descent,  when  the  cage  arrives  near  the  point 
where  it  has  to  stop,  it  automatically  closes  the  escape  valve  at  n. 
The  apparatus  also  serves  to  ventilate  the  mine.  During  the 
descent  of  the  piston,  the  valve  h  is  shut  and  e  opened,  and  all  the 
air  contained  in  the  tube  is  forced  to  bank,  but  during  the  ascent 
of  the  piston  the  valve  e  is  shut  and  h  opened,  so  that  an  amount 
of  air  equal  to  the  contents  of  the  tube  is  exhausted  from  the 
mine  to  be  discharged  into  the  atmosphere  when  the  piston descends. 
Koepe  System. — In  its  lightest  form  a  drum  requires  a  large 
amount  of  energy  to  set  it  in  motion,  and  an  equal  amount  to 
stop  it.  In  addition,  for  deep  shafts  the  angling  of  the  rope  with 
the  pulley  is  not  only  a  disadvantage  and  a  possible  cause  of  acci- 
dent, but  a  source  of  wear.  To  reduce  this  angling,  and  yet  keep 

--- Page Break ---
264 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  drum  relatively  small  in  diameter  and  in  width,  the  ascending 
rope  is  sometimes  arranged  to  coil  on  the  space  from  which  the 
descending  rope  has  been  uncoiled.  This  is  not  often  employed. 
It  is  inconvenient  when  repairs  have  to  be  made  in  the  shaft  and 
only  one  rope  used  ;  in  ordinary  cases  the  second  rope  is  coiled  on 
the  drum,  here  it  cannot  be,  as  there  is  only  space  for  one.  In 
addition,  the  wear  on  the  laggings  is  also  great,  and  the  centre 
part  of  the  drum  is  soon  cut  into  a  deep  groove. 
To  remove  the  objection  to  the  weight,  &c.,  of  large  drums.  Mr. 
Fredk.  Koepe  designed  the  system  where  they  are  dispensed  with 
altogether.  The  first  application  was  made  at  Hanover  Colliery, 
in  Westphalia,  and  may  briefly  be  said  to  consist  in  the  substi- 
tution of  a  single  grooved  pulley  in  place  of  the  ordinary  drum. 
The  winding  rope  passes  from 
FIGS.  313  AND  314.  one   cage    over    its    head-gear 
pulley,  round  the  "  drum,"  and, after   passing   over   the    other 
head-gear  pulley,  is  connected with    the    second   cage   (Figs. 
313    and    314).     The   winding 
rope  simply  encircles  about  half 
the  periphery  of  the  drum,  in  the  same  manner 
as  a  driving  belt  on  an  ordinary  pulley.     There 
is  a  balance  rope  beneath  the  cages,  so  that  the 
arrangement  may  be  likened  to  an  endless  rope, 
the  two   cages  being  simply  points  of  attach- ment.    The  drum  pulley  usually  consists  of  the 
two  outside  cases  of  an  ordinary  cylindrical  drum, 
bolted  together  and  securing  between  them  a 
band  of  hard  wood  in  which  a  groove  is  made  to 
receive  the   winding   rope,  the   depth   of   this 
groove  being  generally  equal  to  twice  the  dia- meter of   the  rope.     Instead   of   being   placed 
parallel,    the    head-gear    pulleys    are     angled 
towards    each   other,   with   the    object   of   re- 
ducing side  friction. 
The  system  has  been  in  successful  operation  since  1877,  and 
results  show  that  the  single  winding  rope  lasts  more  than  twice 
as  long  as  the  two  ropes  formerly  adopted.  Experiments  made 
have  determined  that  with  a  rope  passing  only  one-half-turn 
round  the  driving  pulley,  the  co-efficient  of  adhesion  between 
steel  ropes  and  wood  rim  is  in  practice  30  per  cent.,  which  would 
admit  of  an  excess  of  105  cwt.  being  placed  on  the  present  ascend- 
ing load  at  Hanover  Colliery  before  any  slip  can  occur.  The  first 
application  of  this  system  in  England  was  at  Bestwood  Colliery, 
Nottingham,*  but  after  seven  years'  working  it  was  abandoned  (in 
*  Ches.  Inst.  xi.  267. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  265 
1890)  owing  to  the  slip  which  took  place  when  the  winding  ropes 
were  oiled.  At  this  colliery  such  slip  was  most  objectionable, 
because  winding  took  place  at  an  up-cast  shaft  which  was  cased 
in  all  round.  The  engineman  could  not  see  his  cages,  but  had  to 
rely  entirely  on  the  indicator.  On  the  other  hand,  at  Sneyd 
Colliery,  North  Staffordshire,  where  the  second  application  of  this 
system  in  this  country  was  put  down,  its  working  has  been,  and 
is,  most  satisfactory. 
The  merits  and  demerits  of  the  system  are  fully  explained  in 
an  elaborate  inquiry  by  Mr.  L.  Trasenster,*  and  later  particulars of  the  results  obtained  at  Hanover  Colliery  are  given  by  Messrs. 
Mahlet  de  Gournay,  and  Suisse.f 
When  the  cages  reach  the  landing-place  and  rest  on  the  stops, the  weight  is  removed  from  the  rope,  and  sufficient  adhesive 
power  does  not  exist  on  the  rim  of  the  motive  pulley  to  enable 
the  load  to  be  re-started.  This  can  be  guarded  against,  either  by 
dispensing  with  stops  at  the  top,  as  is  done  at  Sneyd  Colliery,  or 
by  continuing  the  rope  past  the  cages  by  means  of  cross-heads, 
above  and  below  each  cage,  connected  together  by  cross-pieces 
passing  outside ;  the  bridle  chains  are  hung  from  the  top  cross- 
head,  and  when  the  cage  rests  on  the  stops  the  weight  of  the 
winding  and  tail  rope  still  remains  on  the  motive  pulley.  This 
was  the  arrangement  used  at  Best  wood. 
The  great  objection  to  the  Koepe  system,  and  the  cause  of 
its  abandonment  in  a  few  instances,  is  the  probability  that  if 
one  rope  broke  both  cages  would  be  precipitated  to  the  bottom. 
In  Germany  a  brake  block  has  been  placed  over  the  pulley,  which, 
in  case  of  the  rope  breaking,  is  automatically  wedged  against  the 
pulley,  and  prevents  the  rope  from  slipping. 
A  recent  installation  in  Belgium  entirely  removes  this  objection. 
Instead  of  one  rope,  two  are  employed.  The  drum  has  two 
grooves,  and  there  are  four  head-gear  pulleys.  Each  rope  passes 
from  one  cage,  over  its  head-gear  pulley,  round  one  groove  in  the 
drum,  over  the  other  head-gear  pulley,  and  back  to  the  other 
cage.  Each  rope  passes  half  round  the  drum — in  fact,  the  arrange- 
ment simply  consists  of  duplicating  the  Koepe  system.  The  only 
difference  is  in  the  attachment  of  the  ropes  to  the  cage.  It  is 
obvious  that  it  would  be  a  very  difficult  matter  to  keep  both  ropes 
exactly  of  the  same  length,  while,  if  they  varied,  and  one  became 
longer  than  the  other,  the  shorter  rope  would  have  all  the  weight, 
and  the  longer  one  would  in  all  probability  be  thrown  out  of  the 
groove  on  the  pulley,  and  might  cause  a  serious  accident.  To 
prevent  this,  the  ropes,  instead  of  being  attached  directly,  are  con- 
nected to  a  tension  apparatus  which  distributes  the  weight  and 
puts  an  equal  quantity  on  each.  The  two  ropes,  a  a  (Fig.  315) 
*  Kev.  Univ.  (1879),  v.  85. 
t  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (3°  Serie),  i.  65  and  389. 

--- Page Break ---
266 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
are  terminated  by  an  ordinary  capping,  b  5,  through  which  is 
passed  an  ordinary  chain,  c.  This  chain  is  endless  and  passes 
round  a  polygonal  drum,  d,  on  the  top  of  the  cage,  but  the  sides  of 
the  polygon  are  rounded  to  fit  the  links  of  the  chain  (Fig.  316). 
This  pulley  can  turn  on  an  axis,  and  readily  permits  the  chain 
to  adjust  itself  to  any  variation  in  the  length  of  the  ropes. 
Two  small  cross  chains,  e  e,  connect  the  main  chains,  a  a,  so  that  in 
case  of  the  breakage  of  either  of  the  ropes  the  other  one  holds  the 
load ;  and,  finally,  in  case  the  chains,  a  a,  should  break,  the  cage  is 
supported  by  a  flat  metal  rope,  having  one  extremity  attached  to 
the  capping  on  the  winding  rope,  while  the  other  is  connected  to 
the  cage.  Instead  of  employing  round  balance  ropes  beneath  the 
FIGS.  315  AND  316. 
cages,  two  flat  ones  are  employed,  the  strands  of  each  being  laid 
in  alternate  directions.  By  doing  this,  it  is  claimed  that  any 
tendency  to  twist  is  entirely  removed. 
Prevention  of  Overwinding. — Unfortunately,  overwinding 
sometimes  takes  place,  and  the  cage  and  its  contents  are  lifted  too 
far,  and  dashed  violently  against  the  timber  at  the  top  of  the  pit 
frame.  To  prevent  the  rope  being  broken,  and  the  cage  dropped 
back  again  down  the  shaft,  detaching  hooks  are  employed.  These 
may  be  divided  into  two  classes ;  those  which  simply  detach  the 
rope  from  the  cage,  and  those  which  detach  the  rope,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  prevent  the  cage  from  falling.  The  former  were  first 
employed,  but  as  additional  means  had  to  be  provided  for  holding 
the  cage  when  released,  which  involved  the  introduction  of 
another  complication,  they  have  entirely  given  way  to  the  latter, 
where  one  instrument  serves  both  purposes. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
267 
There  are  many  efficient  disengaging  appliances  in  use,  all  of 
which  perform  their  work  well,  and  only  differ  from  each  other 
in  matters  of  detail.  Perhaps  the  best  known  ones  are  King's, 
Ormerod's,  and  Walker's.  In  all  of  them,  detachment  is  effected by  passing  the  rope  through  a  circular  hole  in  an  iron  plate,  or 
through  an  iron  cylinder,  the  size  of  which  is  sufficient  to  allow  a 
portion  of  the  hook  to  pass  through  in  its  working  state,  but  not 
to  allow  it  to  fall  back  again  when  disengagement  has  taken  place. 
King's  hook  consists  of  two  outside  fixed  plates,  enclosing between  them  two  inner  movable  ones,  which  can  oscillate  about 
a  strong  pin  passing  through  both  plates  and  framework.  The 
upper  end  of  both  these  plates  is  made  of  uniform  width,  except 
near  the  bottom,  where  two  projections  (a  a,  Fig.  317)  are  fixed, 
TIGS.  317  AND  318. 
which  prevent  the'  hook  from  passing  entirely  through  the  hole in  the  disengaging  plate.  The  winding  rope  is  attached  to  the 
top  shackle,  d,  and  the  cage  to  the  lower  one,  e.  When  the  two 
movable  plates  are  placed  on  the  central  bolt,  6,  their  upper  parts 
close  in  opposite  directions  upon  the  connecting  pin  of  the 
winding  rope  shackle,  and  entirely  overlap  it,  and  in  such  position 
are  secured  by  a  copper  pin,  c.  In  case  of  overwinding,  when  the 
hook  passes  into  the  ring  of  the  disengaging  plate,  the  two  pro- 
jecting pieces,  a  a,  are  forced  inwards,  the  copper  pin  sheared,  and 
the  jaws  at  the  top  forcibly  separated  from  each  other,  releasing 
the  shackle  pin,  d  ;  at  the  same  time  the  two  projecting  pieces  are 
forced  outwards,  f  ft  and  prevent  the  cage  dropping  back  (Fig. 
Ormerod's  hook  is  very  similar  to  the  foregoing  one.  The  only objection  that  can  be  raised  against  either  of  them  is  that,  being 
constructed  of  plates,  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  side 

--- Page Break ---
268  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
friction,  and  unless  they  are  regularly  taken  apart  and  oiled, 
there  is  a  probability  that  the  plates  will  firmly  rust  together. 
Walker's  hook  acts  on  an  entirely  different  principle.  In those  just  described,  the  weight  is  utilised  to  prevent  displace- 
ment, while  here  the  load  is  always  endeavouring  to  cause  detach- 
ment, but  prevented  from  doing  so  by  a  hoop  encircling  the  hook. Its   construction  will   be 
FIGS.  319  AND  320.     ^  understood  from  Fig.  319. Two  levers,  a  a,  are  pivoted 
about  the  centre,  6,  and 
kept  from  opening  under 
ordinary  conditions  by  the 
collar,  c,  held  in  position 
by  the  copper  rivets,  d, 
which  also  secure  an  addi- 
tional safeguard,  consisting 
of  a  tongue  passing  from  one  jaw  to  the  other.  When  the  hook 
enters  the  plate,  the  collar  is  pushed  downwards,  and  the  two 
rivets  sheared ;  the  upper  part  of  the  jaws  open,  release  the 
winding  shackle,  and  lock  the  suspension  jaws  on  the  disengaging 
plate  (Fig.  320). 
Safety  Cages. — The  apparatus  just  described  do  not  safeguard 
the  cage  in  the  event  of  the  rope  breaking.  To  perform  this 
operation,  innumerable  devices  have  been  designed,  none  of  which 
have,  however,  met  with  permanent  success  in  this  country, 
although  many  are  working  on  the  Continent.  These  safety 
.cages  usually  depend  on  the  action  of  a  grip,  which  is  kept  away 
from  the  guides  so  long  as  the  weight  of  the  cage  is  borne  by 
the  rope,  but  immediately  fracture  occurs,  a  spring,  which  has 
been  kept  in  compression,  is  released,  and  the  grips  clutch  the 
guides  and  prevent  falling.  The  objections  to  such  appliances 
are  numerous.  At  modern  collieries,  the  velocity  of  the  descending 
cage  approaches  that  of  a  falling  body,  and  there  is  always  a 
danger  of  such  appliances  coming  into  action  when  not  wanted. 
Then  again,  the  result  of  suddenly  stopping  a  cage  travelling 
at  such  a  speed  would  be  that,  unless  the  safety  apparatus  was 
exceedingly  strong,  in  all  probability  it  would  break  and  release 
the  cage,  while  if  it  was  strong  enough,  perhaps  the  guide 
ropes  would  be  broken.  In  either  case,  if  men  were  travelling 
in  the  cage,  the  probabilities  are  that  the  shock  would  be  so 
great  that  they  would  be  thrown  out;  indeed,  instances  are  on 
record  where  with  a  detaching  hook  the  velocity  of  the  ascending 
cage  has  been  so  great,  when  detachment  has  taken  place,  that  men 
have  continued  on  in  obedience  to  Newton's  first  law  of  motion, and  have  been  seriously  injured  by  being  dashed  violently  against 
the  top  of  the  cage,  even  after  the  latter  had  stopped.  The  best 
safeguard  against  ropes  breaking  is  to  employ  none  but  those  of 
the  very  best  quality,  and  to  give  them  careful  treatment  and 
regular  and  efficient  inspection. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
269 
Automatic  Contrivances. — Detaching  hooks  do  not  prevent 
overwinding;  they  only  reduce  the  damage  done,  and  often 
prevent  loss  of  life.  In  addition,  they  do  not  safeguard  the 
descending  cage.  Two  classes  of  automatic  contrivances  are  used. 
In  one,  some  projecting  lever  is  fixed  above  the  pit's  mouth, which  when  struck  by  the  cage,  puts  on  a  brake ;  these  are  not 
any  more  effective  than  disengaging  hooks,  as  they  come  into 
operation  too  late.  In  the  other  type,  an  instrument  is  so 
arranged  that,  providing  the  engineman  shuts  off  steam  at  the 
proper  moment,  he  is  in  exactly  the  same  position  as  if  no  such 
appliance  existed,  as  it  does  not  come  into  action ;  but  if  at  a 
determined  point  in  the  wind  the  speed  is  greater  than  it  should 
be  at  that  point,  the  steam 
is  cut  off  from  the  engine, 
and  a  brake  applied. 
The  Visor. — In  this  appli- ance, which  has  been  in  use 
by  the  Wigan  Coal  and  Iron 
Co.  for  some  time,  a  shaft, 
E  (Fig.  321),  carrying  two 
beaked  cams,  E1,  performs one  revolution  to  each  wind, 
such  motion  being  obtained 
by  the  bevel  gearing  and 
endless  screw,  shown  at  D 
and  D4.  At  each  side  of 
this  cam  is  a  tappet,  F, 
which  is  engaged  by  one  of 
the  beaks,  if  the  engines 
are  going  beyond  the  proper 
speed,  such  engagement 
being  performed  by  the  aid  of  the  governor  and  levers,  H  and  G3. Usually  two  governors  are  provided,  weighted  for  different  speeds. 
What  takes  place  is  as  follows  :  when  the  engine  is  travelling  at 
high  speed,  the  rise  of  the  governor  lifts  up  the  lever,  H,  and  throws 
the  two  tappets,  F,  into  the  path  of  the  beaks,  E1,  on  the  revolving shaft,  E.  If  the  speed  decreases  at  the  proper  moment  towards 
the  end  of  the  wind,  the  governor  falls  and  throws  back  the 
tappets,  F,  consequently  the  appliance  does  not  come  into  action, 
but  if  the  engines  are  travelling  above  their  proper  speed,  one  of 
the  beaked  cams  catches  the  tappet,  F,  and  raises  it ;  the  arms,  F1, 
cross  head,  F2,  and  bar,  F3,  are  raised  also,  and  the  pawl,  C,  dis- 
engaged from  the  catch  bar,  B1.  Immediately  this  takes  place, the  brake  is  applied  and  steam  shut  off.  A  somewhat  similar 
appliance  has  been  designed  by  Mr.  C.  H.  Cobbold,*  which  also acts  through  a  governor. 
Grimmitfs  Apparatus.^ — Both  the  appliances  just  described  are 
Fed.  Inst.  i.  61. IUd.t  ii.  243. 

--- Page Break ---
270 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
open  to  the  objection  that  the  engine  receives  a  great  shock  by  the 
sudden  application  of  the  brake.  In  Grimmitt's  appliance,  which has  been  very  recently  introduced,  this  difficulty  has  been  over- 
come by  employing  a  pneumatic  arrangement,  which  buoys  up the  brake  lever  for  a  few  seconds  after  such  has  been  cast  loose 
by  the  apparatus.  As  air  escapes  from  a  regulating  tap,  the  air- vessel  and  lever  sink  lower  and  lower,  gradually  increasing  the 
pressure  of  the  curbs  on  the  brake  wheel. 
Catches  at  Pit  Top. — At  the  great  majority  of  collieries, 
some  appliance  is  used  to  hold  the  cage  while  the  changing  of 
the  tubs  takes  place. 
Keps. — The  common  form  consists  of  a  series  of  legs,  usually 
four,  arranged  in  pairs  on  two  sides  of  the  cage.  They  are 
pivoted  on  a  shaft,  and  are  readily  pushed  aside  by  the  cage  on 
its  upward  journey,  but  have  to  be  moved  out  of  the  way  again 
to  allow  the  cage  to  descend.  Such  form  is  shown  at  d,  Fig.  334. 
In  another  form,  a  series  of  projecting  bolts  are  arranged  in  the 
main  timbers  at  the  top,  which  are  pressed  outwards  by  springs, 
and  can  be  moved  back  by  levers.  Such  type  is  not  so  suitable 
for  heavy  loads  as  ordinary  legs,  as  the  wear  is  considerable,  and 
a  greater  strain  is  thrown  on  the  framing  at  the  pit  top. 
Hydraulic  Keps. — With  the  ordinary  form  of  legs,  if  the  cage is  at  bank,  it  cannot  descend  without  being  lifted  off  the  props, 
as  the  banksman  cannot  withdraw  these  while  the  weight  is  on. 
If  a  three-deck  cage 
FIGS.  322,  323,  AND  324.  is  used,  and  each  deck 
changed  indepen- 
dently, seven  rever- sals of  the  engines 
have  to  take  place, 
each  deck  requiring 
two,  and  the  final 
lowering  of  the  cage 
another.  This  not 
only  occupies  time, which  is  so  valuable 
in  winding,  but  causes considerable  wear 
and  tear  of  the  ma- 
chineryand  consumes steam.  In  addition, 
slack  rope  is  payed 
out  on  to  the  bottom 
cage,  and  as  this  is 
usually  quickly  drawn 
up,  a  very  injurious shock  is  given  to  the  rope.  Several  devices,  all  coming  from  the 
Continent,  have  been  designed  with  a  view  of  securing  the  cage 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 271 
firmly  while  changing  is  going  on,  but  to  release  it  again  for 
descent  into  the  shaft,  without  the  preliminary  lift  of  a  foot  or 
so,  and  consequent  reversal  of  the  engine. 
Frantz's*  appliance  used  at  Camphausen  Colliery,  Saarbrlicken, consists  of  four  plunger  cylinders,  e  (Fig.  322),  provided  with 
stuffing  boxes  and  pistons,  joined  together  by  wrought-iron  tubes. 
Each  plunger  is  provided  with  a  double  lever,  g,  having  its  turn- 
ing point  on  the  piston  itself.  One  end  of  this  lever  projects 
under  a  fixed  pin,  i,  while  the  other  serves  as  a  support  to  the 
bottom  of  the  cage.  The  rise  of  the  piston  and  double  lever  is 
caused  by  water  in  the  accumulator,  K.  The  ascending  cage,  B, 
lifts  the  front  end  of  the  lever,  g,  upwards  (Fig.  323),  which  by 
reason  of  its  own  weight  falls  back  into  the  horizontal  position 
immediately  the  cage  has  passed.  "When  the  cage  rests  on  the legs,  it  is  supported  by  the  water  in  the  piston,  connection  be- 
tween the  plunger  cylinder  and  accumulator  being  cut  off  by  a 
tap.  When  the  cage  has  to  be  lowered,  this  tap  is  opened,  and 
the  weight  of  the  tubs  and  contents  presses  down  the  plunger, 
drives  back  the  water  in  the  accumulator  until  the  lever,  #,  takes 
the  position  shown  in  Fig.  324.  As  soon  as  the  cage  has  passed 
through,  the  accumulator  again  forces  the  piston  and  lever  into 
the  higher  position,  and  the  tap  above  referred  to  is  closed. 
At  Camphausen  I  Shaft,  a  somewhat 
different  arrangement  is  in  use.  The 
four  pistons,  p,  stand  obliquely  and 
have  at  the  top  an  end,  c  (Fig.  325), 
turning  round  a  bolt.  When  the  hy- draulic apparatus  is  not  required,  these 
legs,  by  means  of  the  lever,  k,  and  the 
connecting  rod,  z,  can  be  pushed  back- 
wards and  forwards  just  as  in  the  ordi- 
nary way.     A  still  greater  variation 
consists  in   using   an   air  vessel,   W, instead  of  an  accumulator.    This  vessel 
is  filled  with  water  up  to  the  middle, 
the  upper  space  containing  air  at  a 
pressure   of  two  atmospheres,   which 
serves     the     same     purpose    as    the 
weight   of    the  accumulator,   but  by 
reason  of  its  elasticity  works  more  advantageously. 
The  disadvantage  of  such  apparatus  is  its  complicated  nature, 
liability  to  get  out  of  order,  and  the  fact  that  in  cold  weather  the 
water   freezes.      The   latter  has   been   overcome   by   employing 
glycerine  in  the  rams  and  accumulators. 
Stauss  Props.  —  These  are  an  ingenious  arrangement  of  levers, 
without  any  complicated  parts,  designed  to  secure  the  same  object. 
*  Lehrluck  der  Berglaukunde.     G.  Kdhler,  1884,  p.  386. 

--- Page Break ---
272 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
With  them  only  one  reversal  of  the  engine  takes  place,  that  is 
immediately  the  cage  is  brought  to  bank,  the  direction  of  move- 
ment being  always  afterwards  a  lowering  one.  The  apparatus 
consists  of  two  shafts,  a  and  b  (Figs.  326-328),  fixed  in  bear- ings; the  legs,  c, 
FIGS.  326  AND  327.  upon  which  the  cage 
rests,  are  threaded on  another  shaft, 
d,  which  can  swing 
about,  but  is  at- tached by  a  link  to 
the  shaft,  a.  The 
shaft,rf,is  connected 
to  b  by  a  toggle-joint 
lever,  e and/.  As  shown  in  Fig.  326,  it  is  impossible  for  the  props,  c, 
to  slide  in  a  horizontal  direction,  as  the  two  levers,  e  and/,  prevent 
such  motion,  but  they  allow  the  cage  to  pass  through  when  coming 
to  bank,  for,  being  loose  on  the  shaft  d,  they  rotate  about  their 
axis,  and  take  the  position  shown  by  the  clotted  lines,  dropping  back 
on  to  their  seating  as  soon  as  the  cage  has  passed.  When  lowering 
is  desired,  the  banksman  pulls  over  a  lever,  moves  the  link  g  in 
the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow,  and  rotates  the  shaft  b.  This 
lifts  up/  until  the  point  h  is  a  little  above  the  straight  line  join- 
ing d  and  b.  Immediately  this  takes  place  the  weight  of  the  cage 
does  the  rest,  as  the 
FIG.  328.  props,  c,  slide  on  an inclined  plane,  ir 
having  a  slope  of 
about  9°.  The  whole 
apparatus  takes  the 
position  shown  in 
Fig.  327.  The  sim- plicity of  the  appli- ance is  its  chief 
recommendation,  while  its  cost  is  not  more  than  the  ordinary 
form  of  legs.  Its  wear  should  be  unlimited,  as  there  is  nothing 
to  get  out  of  order.  The  author  has  recently  applied  the  only 
one  in  use  in  this  country.  The  colliery,  however,  is  only  being 
opened,  and  no  results  can  be  given  of  its  performances,  but  at 
Bascoup,  where  he  first  saw  it  in  operation,  it  is  claimed  to  effect 
a  saving  in  time  of  15  per  cent.  With  it,  78  to  88  cages  per  hour 
have  been  drawn  up,  and  the  three  decks  changed,  from  a  depth 
of  268  yards. 
Changing  Tubs. — In  order  to  avoid  moving  the  cage  so  many 
times,  it  is  usual,  when  it  has  several  decks,  to  change  two  of  these 
at  the  same  time.  Supposing  the  cage  has  four  platforms,  the 
first  and  third  will  be  changed  at  one  operation,  the  cage  will  then 
be  moved  and  the  second  and  fourth  decks  changed.  By  doing 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
273 
this,  the  cage  is  only  moved  once,  where  otherwise  it  would  have 
to  be  moved  three  times.  It  means  more  labour,  because  with 
only  one  landing,  one  set  of  men  will  do  the  work ;  with  several 
landings,  a  set  of  men  will  have  to  be  employed  in  each. 
Hilda  Colliery. — The  general  method  of  caging  two  decks  at once  is  well  illustrated  at  Hilda  Colliery,  South  Shields,  where  the 
details  have  been  carefully  thought  out.  The  inset  is  divided  into 
two  stages,  and  all  the  tubs  from  the  workings  arrive  at  the  top 
level  and  run  down  a  gradient  of  J  in.  to  the  yard,  either  to  the 
shaft  to  supply  the  top  platform,  or  to  a  drop  cage,  by  means  of 
which  they  are  lowered  to  the  bottom  level  to  supply  the  bottom 
deck.  A  plan  of  the  arrangement  of  the  rails  is  given  in  Fig.  329. 
The  empty  tubs  from  the  top  deck  gravitate  down  an  inclination  of 
3  Jin.  to  the  yard  to  the  point,  a,  and  are  carried  by  the  momen- 
tum they  have  attained  for  a  short  distance  along  a  6,  and  up  a 
FIG.  329. 
slight  gradient,  b  c,  sufficiently  far  to  clear  the  points,  b.  Their 
direction  of  motion  is  reversed,  and  they  then  run  along  the  line 
marked  "empty  tubs,"  indicated  by  the  arrow,  and  deliver  them- selves to  the  point,  d,  where  they  are  made  up  into  sete  and  hauled 
away  to  the  workings.  The  full  tubs  for  the  lower  decks,  after 
being  dropped  by  the  cage,  e,  gravitate  to  the  shaft,  and  the  empty 
ones  towards  the  cage,  ft  which  is  connected  by  a  rope  to  the  drop 
cage,  e.  As  the  weight  of  the  latter  and  the  full  tubs  is  heavier 
than  that  of  cage /and  its  empty  tubs,  when  e  is  lowered  it  lifts 
up  f  and  the  empty  tubs  to  the  top  level,  where  they  are  auto- matically released  from  the  cage,  and  gravitate  away  to  join  those 
at  d,  which  have  already  come  from  the  top  deck. 
The  following  automatic  catches  are  used  for  keeping  the  tubs 
on  the  cages  during  their  ascent  or  descent :  (a)  During  lowering, 
the  tubs  run  in  from  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow  (Fig.  330), 
the  axles  being  caught  by  the  catch,  c,  maintained  in  position  by 
the  weight,  w.  On  reaching  the  bottom  the  weight  strikes  the  floor 
and  lowers  the  catch,  allowing  the  tubs  to  run  off  (Fig.  331). 
(b)  When  raising  tubs ;  the  position  at  the  bottom  is  shown  by 

--- Page Break ---
274 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Fig.  332  ;  on  reaching  the  top  the  cranked  lever  a  strikes  a  buffer 
at  the  side  which  liberates  the  tub  (Fig.  333). 
FIGS.  330,  331,  332  AND  333. 
X-  ower'i  ng   Tit  bs. 
9 Maor    o£ 
rait'. 
iSectwn/. flail,. 
Cltfton  Colliery. — Mr.  Henry  Fisher  *  has  designed  an  arrange- 
ment in  which  the  rails  (a,  Fig.  334),  are  pivoted  about  a  point,  ct7, 
FIGS.  334  AXD  335. 
s 
fastened  to  the  bottom  of  the  cage.  In  the  illustrations,  only 
the  bottom  part  of  the  cage  is  shown,  the  vertical  side-pieces  and 
diagonal  struts  being  omitted  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  At  one 
*  Ches.  Inst.  xi.  212. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
275 
end  of  the  rails  are  two  feet,  c,  and  at  the  other,  two  levers,  c',  pro- jecting below  the  bottom  of  the  cage  when  it  is  suspended.  When 
tne  cage  is  lowered,  the  feet  c  rest  on  the  props,  d,  and  raise  the 
rails  at  that  end  of  the  cage,  while  at  the  same  time  the  lever,  c', 
rests  on  the  props,  d',  and  lowers  the  rails  at  the  other  end,  the result  being  that  the  tubs  gravitate  away.  Before  the  rails  are 
inclined,  the  tubs  are  held  on  the  rails  by  the  stops,  e  e,  which 
press  against  the  axles,  but  simultaneously  with  the  rails,  «,  being 
inclined,  a  foot,/,  attached  to  the  stop,  e',  rests  on  the  prop,  g,  and raises  it  to  the  position  shown  in  Fig.  335,  and  allows  the  loaded 
trams  to  run  away.  The  prop  g  is  pivoted  about  a  shaft,  u,  and 
is  connected  by  a  rod,  n,  to  a  lever,  q.  When  the  axle  of  the  first 
loaded  tram  presses  against  this  lever  q,  the  prop  g  is  withdrawn 
from  under  the  foot/,  and  the  stop  e'  takes  the  position  drawn  in Fig.  334,  in  time  to  prevent  the  empty  tubs  running  through  the 
cage. 
In  addition  to  the  tub -releasing  gear,  the  empty  trams  are  run on  the  cage  by  the  aid  of  a  movable  platform,  A,  connected  with 
an  oscillating  cylinder,  k,  to  which  air  or  steam  is  admitted  by  an 
ordinary  three-way  cock,  r.  Simultaneously  with  the  inclining  of 
the  rails  on  the  cage,  the  foot  c  presses  down  the  tappet  rod,  s,  and 
gives  motion  through  the  crank  lever,  I,  to  the  connecting  rod,  m, 
which  opens  the  tap,  r,  and  admits  steam  to  the  cylinder,  when  the 
platform,  h,  is  raised  to  the  same  inclination  as  the  rails  on  the 
cage  (Fig.  335).  As  soon as  the  cage  is  lifted  from  ,,  , ,.  rlG.  33"- 
the  props,  steam  is  dis- charged from  the  cylinder, 
.and  the  platform,  k,  falls 
to  the  horizontal  position. 
The  oscillating  platform 
seems  to  be  an  unnecessary 
complication,  as  the  rails 
might  easily  be  arranged 
on  a  permanent  incline. 
fowler's  Apparatus. — At several  of  the  collieries  in 
the  Nottingham  district, 
Fowler's  apparatus  is  used for  simultaneously  changing 
all  the  decks  of  the  cage. 
Fig.  336  shows  the  appa- ratus in  the  position  when 
the  cage  has  just  arrived at  bank  with  its  load  of 
full  tubs;  the  platforms  aaa 
contain  the  empty  tubs, 
while  b  b  b  are  ready  to  receive  the  full  ones.  The  tubs  on  tlic 

--- Page Break ---
276 TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
lower  platform  are  pushed  off  by  manual  labour;  simultaneously 
with  this,  the  empty  tubs  on  the  two  upper  decks  are  thrust  for- 
ward by  the  hydraulic  rams,  c  c,  and  displace  the  loaded  ones  on 
the  cage.  The  catches  for  retaining  the  empty  tubs  are  then  put 
into  position  by  the  movement  of  one  rod  (riot  shown)  and  the 
cage  is  ready  to  proceed  on  its  downward  journey,  the  time 
occupied  in  changing  being  exactly  the  same  as  if  only  one  deck 
was  in  use.  The  two  platforms,  a  and  b,  are  then  allowed  by  the 
hoists,  c  and  d,  to  sink ;  a  is  ready  to  receive  empties,  its  decks 
being  successively  brought  by  the  hoist  to  the  bank  level,  and  6, 
having  been  allowed  by  similar  means  to  bring  its  middle  deck  to- the  bank  level,  can  be  further  lowered  for  the  removal  of  its 
uppermost  loaded  tub.  As  soon  as  this  is  done,  the  counterbalance 
weights  W,  bring  it  back  into  position  ready  to  receive  the  full 
tubs  again.  Time  is  saved  in  changing  the  tubs  on  the  cage, 
because  the  operations  of  taking  off  the  full  tubs  and  putting  the 
empty  ones  on  the  hoist  is  performed  while  the  wind  is  taking 
place.  At  Denaby  Main  Colliery,  Yorkshire,  where  the  author 
saw  the  appliance  in  operation,  six  tubs  were  changed  on  three 
decks  in  ten  seconds.  Everything  worked  well  and  successfully, 
but  seemed  to  require  a  lot  of  labour. 
Harris  Navigation  Colliery. — At  the  downcast  pit,  two  decks  are 
changed  at  once.  The  full  tubs  run  off  the  top  deck,  in  the  opposite 
direction  to  those  going  off  the  bottom  deck,  and  proceed  round  a 
circular  platform,  having  a  gradient  of  about  i  in  40,  to  the  other 
side  of  the  pit,  where  they  join  the  loaded  tubs  from  the  bottom 
deck,  the  whole  lot  then 
going  to  the  screens.  The 
empty  tubs  to  change  both 
decks  are  raised  by  a  steam 
hoist  to  a  platform  about 
6  ft.  6  in.  high ;  part  of 
them  run  straight  to  the 
shaft  (to  change  the  tcf 
deck),  while  the  other  parf run  round  a  second  circular 
platform  with  a  descending 
gradient,  and  reach  the 
opposite  side  of  the  shaft, 
where  they  are  placed  on 
the  lower  deck  of  the  cage 
(Fig-  337). 
The  steam  hoist  discharges 
its  tubs  automatically,  as  a 
stop  is  placed  in  the  guides  which  tilts  up  the  bottom.  The  cages 
are  also  provided  with  a  loose  bottom,  pivoted  about  a  pin.  By  an 
arrangement  of  projecting  pieces  and  tub  stops,  similar  to  those 
in  use  at  Clifton,  the  tubs  automatically  discharge  themselves  as- 
soon  as  the  cage  is  lowered  on  to  the  keps. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 
277 
FIG.  338. 
Bell  End  Colliery. — At  Bell  End  Pit,  where  the  shaft  only  con- tains one  cage,  the  author  is  employing  a  combination  of  several 
.arrangements.  The  cage  is  double-decked,  and  each  is  charged independently.  The  rails  are  set  at  a  permanent  inclination,  and 
the  tubs  are  kept  on  by  a  hinged  arm,  but  at  the  landing-place are  released  by  an  automatic  arrangement  described  a  little  later 
•on.  At  the  bottom,  the  lower  deck  is  received  on  a  set  of  Stauss 
props,  the  tub  is  released  and  gravitates  away  to  a  platform.  The 
•cage  is  then  lowered  without  reversing  the  engine,  and  the  top 
deck  tub  release^,  which  then  runs  to  the  same  platform.  The full  tubs  are  now  on  the 
cage,  which  starts  away  to bank. 
The  platform  referred  to 
is  attached  to  a  hydraulic 
ram  and  pivoted  about  a 
point  slightly  away  from 
its  centre  (Fig.  338).  When 
the  tubs  are  on,  it  there- fore takes  a  certain  inclina- 
tion limited  by  a  stop.  The 
•curved  guard,  6,  prevents 
the  tubs  running  through, and  the  inclined  surface 
will  not  allow  them  to  pass 
out  during  the  lift.  The 
hanger-on  pulls  the  lever, 
«,  the  platform  and  its contents  rise  a  distance  of 
about  6  feet.  On  arriving 
.at  the  top  the  platform 
automatically  stops  through 
catching  the  lever,  d,  and 
cutting  off  the  pressure, 
.and  is  tilted  in  the  opposite 
direction,  when  the  tubs  run 
away  on  the  top  landing,  c,  and  gravitate  to  the  point  where  they 
.are  attached  to  the  haulage  ropes  ;  the  platform  then  descends, 
ready  to  receive  another  consignment  of  empty  tubs. 
The  releasing  gear  employed  is  that  designed  by  Mr.  W.  R. 
Wills.*  The  inclination  of  the  rails  is  such  that  the  tubs  will 
only  run  forwards,  and  these  are  held  on  and  released  from  the 
cage  by  the  mechanism  shown  in  Figs.  339,  340  and  341.  The  L 
arms,  a  a,  revolve  in  suitable  bearings  fixed  to  the  side  of  the  cage, 
and  the  angle  pieces  rest  against  the  front  end  of  the  tub,  but  are 
prevented  from  rising  too  high  by  a  stop  (not  shown  in  illus- 
*  So.  Staff.  Inst.  iv.  31. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK    OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  339,  340  AND  341. 
t rations),  while  they  are  kept  in  their  proper  place  by  a  spiral 
spring,  b,  attached  to  levers,  c  c,  projecting  outwards.  On  the- cage  being  drawn  out  of  the  shaft  these  levers  strike  against  and 
lift  two  catches,  d  (Fig.  339),  which  fall  back  into  place  again, 
and  on  the  return  of  the  cage  push  the  levers,  c,  into  the  position 
shown  by  the  dotted  line  in  Fig.  341,  and  release  the  tub.  By 
the  time,  however,  that  the  cage  rests  on  the  legs  the  levers,  c, 
have  completely  passed  the  catches, 
d,  and  the  arms,  a,  would  be  closed 
by  the  springs,  b,  but  by  such  time- the  L  parts  of  the  arms  are  locked 
beneath  the  bottom  of  the  tub,  and 
remain  there,  until  it  has  passed  out, 
when  they  immediately  close  and  pre- 
vent the  further  passage  of  the  second 
tub. 
At  the  surface,  the  cage  is  lifted until  its  bottom  deck  rests  on  the 
Stauss  props,  and  the  motion  after- 
wards is  always  a  lowering  one.  The- tubs  are  automatically  released  by  a 
similar  apparatus  to  the  one  at  the- bottom. 
Bascoup  Colliery. — At  No.  5  Pit  the- changing  operations  are  performed 
with  extreme  rapidity ;  at  the  bottom 
with  the  aid  of  a  balance  platform, 
and  at  the  top  with  Stauss  keps ; 
and,  by  the  peculiar  arrangement 
existing  there,  both  are  carried  on  independently  of  each other. 
When  the  cage  reaches  the  bottom  it  is  received  upon  a  plat- 
form, p  (Fig.  342),  counter-balanced  with  a  weight,  w,  equal  to- that  of  the  empty  tubs  and  the  cage.  The  two  empty  tubs  on  the 
bottom  deck  are  then  replaced  by  full  ones,  and  the  extra  weight 
of  the  load  they  contain  causes  the  cage  to  descend  with  the  plat- form, until  the  second  deck  is  level  with  the  inset.  The  tubs  on 
this  deck  are  then  changed,  and  the  platform  and  cage  descend 
again,  until  the  top  deck  is  level  with  the  inset,  when  the  empty 
tubs  are  replaced  by  full  ones.  The  descent  of  the  platform  is 
governed  by  a  brake,  a,  regulated  by  a  hand-wheel,  b.  A  catch, c,  is  also  provided,  which  locks  the  platform  at  the  proper  levels, 
by  engaging  with  the  stops,  e.  This  catch  can  be  lifted  off  by  an 
arm,  d.  It  will  allow  the  platform  to  ascend,  but  not  to  descend 
until  released.  Immediately  the  cage  containing  the  full  tubs  is 
lifted  by  the  winding  engine,  the  counter-balance  brings  back  the platform  to  the  level  of  the  inset,  ready  to  receive  the  other  cage. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING 
279 
FTG. 
The  changing  at  the  surface  is  carried  out  as  follows.     The 
bridle-chains  are  made  very  long,  and  before  the  top  cage  comes 
to  bank,  the  bottom  cage  reaches  the  balance  platform  just  de- 
scribed.    At  this  point  the  engine  is  steadied,  and  the  top  cage  is 
lifted  until  its  lower  deck  rests  on  the  Stauss  props.     An  amount 
of  slack  rope  is,  therefore,  payed  out  on  the  cage  at  the  bottom 
by  such  operation,  but  through  the  bridle-chains  being  long  the 
rope  itself  is  kept  straight,  and  does  not  "  kink  "  ;  indeed,  not  so- much  is  let  out  as  would  be 
expected,  for  before  the  top 
cage   is   actually   raised   to 
bank,   the  empty   tubs  on 
the    bottom   deck    of    the 
cage  below  ground  will  be 
replaced   by  full  ones,  and 
the  platform  lowered,  thus 
taking  up  a  length  equal  to 
the  height  of  one  deck.    At 
the  surface  the  bottom  deck 
is    also   changed   first,   the 
cage  lowered  by  moving  the 
Stauss  props,  the  full  tubs 
on  the  second  deck  replaced 
by   empty   ones,   the    cage 
again  lowered  and  the  top 
deck  changed.     The  engine- 
man  has  only  to  attend  to 
the  operations  at  the  surface, 
the  tubs  at  the  bottom  being 
changed    with  the  balance 
platform,  and  by  the  time 
the  top  deck  is  changed  at 
the    surface,   all   the   slack 
chain    and   rope   has   been 
taken  up,   and   the  engine 
starts  away  upon  receiving 
the  signal  from  the  bottom. 
At  Anzin  Colliery  a  balance  platform  is  also  employed,  but  to 
remove  any  chance  of  the  rope  kinking  when  the  slack  rope  is 
payed  on  to  the  cage,  a  short  length  of  aloe  rope  is  inserted 
between  the  bridle-chains  and  the  capping  of  the  steel  rope.  A  s 
this  is  quite  soft  and  flexible,  no  harm  can  result. 
Fencing  the  Pit  Top. — To  allow  the  empty  tubs  to  run  on, 
and  the  full  ones  off  the  cage,  a  movable  fencing  has  to  be 
employed  at  the  pit  top.  This  usually  consists  of  sliding  gates 
opposite  the  ends  of  the  cage,  a  permanent  fence  being  erected  on 
the  other  two  sides.  Projecting  pieces  on  the  cage  top  catch  these- 

--- Page Break ---
280 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  343. 
gates  and  lift  them  upwards  when  the  cage  arrives  at  bank,  but 
as  soon  as  the  descent  commences  the  gates  fall  to  the  ground 
.and  secure  the  top  of  the  shaft.  As  the  cage  travels  at  consider- 
able speed  when  it  strikes  the  fence,  it  is  advisable  that  the  latter 
should  be  made  as  light  as  possible.  The  preferable  plan  appears 
to  be  to  employ  three  strips  of  iron  connected  together  by  chains ; 
the  top  one  is  longer  than  either  of  the  other  two,  and  rests  on 
two  props  in  its  normal  position.  On  the  arrival  of  the  cage  at 
bank,  the  bottom  piece  of  iron  is  first 
lifted,  then  the  second,  and  finally  the third. 
The  problem  is  rather  more  compli- 
cated if  winding  goes  on  at  an  up-cast shaft  where  fan  ventilation  is  employed, 
because,  unless  some  special  means  are 
adopted  when  changing  is  taking  place, 
the  pit  top  is  open  to  the  atmosphere. 
Peinberton  Colliery. — At  the  up-cast 
Eit,  the  entire  distance  from  the  ground jvel  to  near  the  top  of  the  frame  is 
cased  in,  as  shown  in  Fig.  343,  by  two 
rectangular  sheaves  of  wood,  each  form- 
ing a  compartment  in  which  one  cage 
travels.  As  little  play  as  possible  is 
given  between  the  sides  of  the  cage  and 
the  framing,  each  cage  practically  form- 
ing a  piston.  At  the  banking  level,  small 
rectangular  openings  are  made,  of  just 
sufficient  size  to  allow  the  passage  of  the 
tubs  through  them  ;  these  openings  are 
closed  on  the  inside  by  a  vertical  trap- 
door sliding  in  two  grooves,  which  is 
opened  by  the  cage  as  it  ascends,  and 
on  the  outside  by  a  safety  trap -door, 
balanced  by  a  weight  which  is  lifted  by 
the  on-setter.  By  this  method,  the loss  of  air  is  reduced  to  a  minimum. 
The  bottom  deck  of  the  cage  is  made 
solid,  and  to  prevent  any  loss  of  air 
when  standing  at  bank,  it  is  provided  with  a  second  or  false 
bottom,  about  18  in.  below  the  one  on  which  the  tubs  rest.  By 
this  device  the  top  of  the  pit  never  becomes  open  to  the  atmo- 
sphere, even  should  the  engineman  raise  the  cages  a  short  distance 
above  the  proper  level.  To  provide  a  perfect  joint,  and  reduce 
;shock,  the  inside  doors  have  a  gutta  percha  band  running  along the  lower  side. 
Homer  Hill  Colliery. — Another  method  of  covering  commonly 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING. 281 
FIG.  344. 
employed  is  well  illustrated  by  that  in  use  at  this  colliery.     The 
shaft  is  closed  by  a  pyramidal  covering,  at  the  upper  end  of  which 
is  a  small  movable  shutter.     The  pressure  of  air  on  the  outside 
of  this  pyramid,  owing 
to  the  vacuum  beneath, 
is  considerable,  and  it  is, 
therefore,     counter-bal- 
anced    by    weights,    w 
(Fig.   344).     When  the 
cage  is  nearly  at  bank, 
the  capping  on  the  wind- 
ing-rope   first   lifts   the small  shutter,  a,  and  it 
does  so  easily  as  its  area 
is  small.     This  to  a  cer- tain extent  takes  off  the 
pressure    on    the    main 
casing,  and  as  the  weight 
of  the  latter  is  also  coun- 
ter-balanced,   the    cage 
lifts  the  covering  vertically  upwards  without  any  injurious  shock. 
As  an  additional  safeguard,  springs,  6  6,  are  placed  at  the  four •corners. FIG.  345. 
Tub  Controllers.— To  prevent  the  tubs  running  into  the  shafts, 
•ordinary  blocks  (Fig.  216)  are  generally  employed,  but  possess 
many  disadvantages.  They  have  to  be  opened  by  hand,  and  when 
once  open  will  allow  any  number  of  tubs  to  pass  by.  Automatic 
•contrivances  are  much  to  be  preferred. 
At  Lye  Cross  Pit,  the  empty  tubs  are  controlled  by  a  projecting 

--- Page Break ---
282 TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
stud,  a  (Fig.  345),  which  stands  up  between  the  rails  and  catches 
the  axle  of  the  tubs.  This  stud  is  attached  to  a  lever,  b,  pivoted 
about  a  centre,  c.  One  end  of  the  lever  is  weighted,  w,  while  the 
other  is  attached  to  a  foot  treadle,  d.  The  weight  always  keeps  the 
lever  in  such  a  position  that  the  stud,  «,  blocks  the  way,  unless  the 
banksman  depresses  the  treadle.  This  apparatus  has  two  objec- 
tions :  (a)  as  the  stud  engages  the  middle  of  the  axle,  this  may  get 
bent ;  and  (6),  the  banksman  has  to  keep  his  foot  on  the  treadle 
until  the  tub  has  passed  by. 
For  empty  tubs  the  former  is  not  of  much  importance,  as  little 
strain  is  thrown  on  the  axle,  but  for  loaded  tubs  the  objection  is 
fatal.  The  latter  is  scarcely  any  inconvenience,  as  the  apparatus 
is  very  compact,  the  treadle  can  be  placed  anywhere,  and  the 
banksman,  having  the  use  of  both  hands,  is  left  quite  free. 
To  the  apparatus  used  at  Bell  End  Pit  for  regulating  the  passage 
FIG.  346. 
of  the  full  tubs  no  objection  can  be  raised.  It  is  designed  by 
Mr.  B.  Woodworth,  and  can  either  be  arranged  to  automatically 
control  the  delivery  of  tubs  in  and  out  of  cages,  or  for  intermittent 
delivery  from  inclined  planes  or  platforms  without  the  need  of 
attendants  for  scotching  and  releasing  the  tubs.  The  apparatus 
can  be  opened  from  any  distance  by  the  person  requiring  the  tubs, 
and  all  the  other  movements  are  self -controlling. 
To  open  the  controller,  the  shaft,  a  (Fig.  346),  is  twisted  and 
moves  the  tongue,  b,  causing  the  sliding  bolt,  c,  to  project  under  the 
lever,  d,  and  lowering  the  stop  end  at  e,  until  the  axles  run  clear  r 
when  delivery  by  gravitation  commences.  The  succeeding  axles 
turn  the  star  wheel/*,  in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow,  as  they pass  by,  until  the  cam  point,  g,  comes  into  contact  with  the  heel  of 
the  sliding  bolt,  c,  at  c',  and  withdraws  the  same,  causing  the lever,  d,  to  fall  into  its  proper  position  and  stop  the  delivery  of  tubs 
until  it  is  reopened  in  the  usual  way. 
To  check  any  tendency  there  may  be  for  the  star  wheel,  ft  to- 
travel  beyond  its  right  position  when  driven  by  the  axles  of  the 
tubs,  it  is  provided  with  a  square  boss,  h,  upon  which  a  spring,  i, 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  283 
presses,  A  small  roller,  k,  is  fixed  over  the  sliding  bolt,  c,  to  pre- vent any  tilting  up  of  the  latter  when  heavy  loads  are  pressing 
against  the  buffer  stops. 
Either  when  used  on  cage  decks,  or  on  inclined  platforms,  two 
controller  boxes  are  fixed  between  the  rails,  so  that  the  buffer 
stops  come  into  contact  with  the  tub  axles  as  close  to  the  bearings 
of  the  wheels  as  possible ;  by  doing  so,  there  is  little  risk  of 
bending  the  axles  by  the  shock  of  stoppage  of  the  loaded  tubs, 
and,  as  an  additional  preventive,  elastic  spring  buffers  are  also 
used  to  equalise  the  bearings  of  the  axles  against  the  stops.  In 
Fig.  346,  the  box  mechanism  shows  an  arrangement  to  pass  two 
tubs  each  time.  To  pass  one  only  each  time,  two  cam  points,  g, 
are  used  to  one  star- wheel  boss,  while  for  passing  three  tubs,  a 
star-wheel  with  six  points  would  be  used  with  only  one  cam 
point. Signalling. — Nothing  conduces  to  rapid  winding  more  than 
efficient  signals.  Two  systems  are  employed.  The  ordinary  method 
consists  of  a  wire  carried  down  the  side  of  the  shaft,  one  end  being 
attached  to  a  lever  and  the  other  to  the  mechanism  working  a  bell. 
For  small  depths  this  system  works  very  well,  but  where  the  line 
is  a  long  one,  the  power  required  to  ring  the  bell  is  considerable, 
and  although  balance  arrangements  are  used  to  take  off  the  weight, 
the  banksman  has  still  to  exert  a  large  amount  of  force,  which 
necessarily  takes  time. 
Instead  of  these  mechanical  signals,  it  has  now  become  common 
to  use  electrical  ones.  Undoubtedly,  when  such  were  first  applied, 
they  were  by  110  means  suitable  for  the  rough  work  of  a  colliery. 
The  great  mistake  made  consisted  in  making  them  far  too  weak, 
and  not  introducing  sufficient  safeguards;  in  addition,  the  men 
at  collieries  were  quite  unused  to  such  appliances,  and  if  anything 
went  wrong,  an  electrician  had  to  be  sent  for.  At  the  present 
time  none  of  these  objections  hold  good.  It  has  long  been 
recognised  that  signals  suitable  for  dwelling-houses  are  of  no  use whatever  at  collieries,  and  a  special  stronger  type  has  been 
designed.  The  working  and  keeping  in  order  of  such  appliances 
have  ceased  to  be  a  wonder,  and  many  collieries  at  the  present 
time  simply  purchase  their  stores,  and  fit  up  and  keep  the  signals in  order  themselves. 
What  are  known  as  single-stroke  bells  are  generally  employed, 
that  is  to  say,  the  bell  only  makes  one  stroke  each  time  a  signal 
is  given.  The  elements  of  successful  working  principally  lie  in 
having  large-sized  battery  cells,  which  are  almost  universally  of the  Leclanche  type,  and  proper  wire  in  the  shaft.  One  of  these 
wires  should  undoubtedly  be  insulated.  Sometimes  both  wires 
are  suspended  from  a  point  on  the  head-gear  and  hang  free  in  the shaft ;  then  neither  are  covered.  This  arrangement  possesses 
some  advantages  in  the  fact  that  it  is  cheap  and  requires  little 
labour  and  in  addition  the  \\ires  are  not  damaged  by  pieces  of 

--- Page Break ---
284  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
coal,  &c.,  falling  down  the  shaft,  as  these  simply  glance  off  the 
wire  and  do  no  harm.  Sooner  or  later,  however,  leakage  of  the 
current  takes  place.  The  better  plan,  although  tha  dearer  one 
to  commence  with,  is  to  employ  a  properly  insulated  wire  and 
carry  it  in  grooved  boarding  down  the  side  of  the  shaft.  No 
staples  or  iron  should  be  employed  to  keep  the  wire  in  the  groove, 
which  should  preferably  be  made  slightly  smaller  than  the 
diameter  of  the  covered  wire,  and  then  the  latter  lightly  tapped 
into  place,  the  whole  being  finally  covered  with  a  light  wooden 
lid.  The  insulation  prevents  leakage,  and  the  wood  casing  any 
damage  to  the  insulation. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter  : — 
N.  E.  I.  :  Counter -balancing  Winding-Engine*,  John  Daglish,  xx.  205  ;  On 
the  Scroll  Drum,  G.  Fowler,  xxi.  85  ;  Fowler's  Apparatus  for  Loading and  Unloading  Decked  Cages,  D.  P.  Morison,  xxiii.  29  ;  Raising 
Coal  from  great  depths  by  Atmospheric  Pressure  on  the  system  of  Z. 
Blanchet,  T.  W.  Bunning,  xxiii.  81  ;  TJie  application  of  Counter- 
balancing and  .Expansion  to  Winding-Engines,  J.  Danish,  xxv.  201  ; 
Description  of  a  Winding-Engine  ivith  Self-acting  Variable  Expan- 
sion, Wm.  Page,  xxvi.  109  ;  An  Improved  Expansion  Gearing  for 
Winding- Engines,  J.  Daglish,  xxix.  3  ;  8afety  Hooks,  Wm.  Logan, xxix.  20 1. 
BEIT.  soc.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Loading  and  Unloading  of  Decked  Cages,  E.  F. 
Burnley,  iv.  132  ;  Guides  in  Pits,  H.  Bramwell,  vi.  6  and  58,  and 
J.  A.  Longden,  vi.  44 ;  Winding-Ropes  and  their  Attachment  to  the Cage,  P.  M.  Chester,  vii.  47  ;  Notes  on  the  Koepe  System  of  Winding, 
H.  W.  Hughes,  xi.  177. 
SO.  STAFF.  INST.  :  An  Improved  Arrangement  for  Steam  Brakes,  T.  Pas- 
field,  ii.  112;  Self-acting  Caging  and  Banking  Apparatus,  W.  E. 
Wills,  iv.  31  ;  Winding- Engines,  H.  W.  Hughes,  xii.  21. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Note  sur  le  chevalment  enfer  du  puifs  Robert,  M.  Robert 
(2°  Serie),  ii.  295  ;  Tube  atmosplieric  du  puits  Hottingeur,  Z.  Blanchet 
(2e  Serie),  iv.  557  and  vii.  273  ;  Guidage  des  puits  de  mine,  H.  Fayol, 
de  Beauzat,  et  Chanselle  (2e  Se*rie),  vi.  697  ;  Comparison  des  divers modes  des  Guidage,  Rapport  d'un  Commission,  MM.  Mire,  Pinel, 
Griot,  Desjoyeaux,  et  Barietta  (2e  Serie),  vi.  750 ;  Machines  d'extrac- tion  et  machines  motrices  a  V Exposition  de  Paris  (1878).  M.  Rossigneux, 
(2e  Serie),  viii.  789 ;  Note  sur  la  descenderie  de  remblais  du  puits  de 
Li/on,  M.  Griot  (3°  Serie),  iii.  365. 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Winding,  J.  S  Dixon,  i.  77  ;  Colliery  Shaft  Signalling, 
G.  W.  Smith,  i.  361  ;  Electric  Signals  for  Collieries,  C.  McLaren 
Irvine,  iv.  47;  Stauss'  Cage-Easing  Apparatus,  F.  J.  Rowan,  x.  127; A  Long  Distance  Electric  Bell,  J.  Kean,  xii.  42. 
SO.  WALES  INST.  :  Safety  Detaching  Hooks,  &c..  S.  Humble,  xii.  45,  Appen- 
dix by  Hort.  Huxham,  xii.  191  ;  Wire  Ropes,  T.  H.  Deakin, xvi.  305. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Coal  Winding  in  Deep  Shafts,  A.  H.  Stokes,  vi.  248  ;  Self 
Acting  Arrangement  for  Unloading  and  Loading  Colliery  ( 'ages,  T. 
G.  Lees,  xi.  209 ;  The  Koepe  Pa'en't  System  of  Winding  at  Bestwood Collieries,  Robert  Wilson,  xi.  267  ;  Counter -balancing  the  Weight  oj 
Winding  Ropes,  C.  Meinicke,  xiii.  333  ;  The  Application  of  Meiiricke's System  of  Balance  Ropez  to  Winding  with  Flat  Ropes,  J.  C.  Jefferson, xiv.  230. 

--- Page Break ---
WINDING.  285 
AMEE.  INST.  M.  E.  :  The  Equalization  of  Load  on  Winding -Engines  by  tlie 
Employment  of  Spiral  Drums,  E.  M.  Rogers,  xvii.  305  ;  Pneumatic 
Hoisting,  H.  A.  Wheeler,  xix.  107. 
N.  STAFF.  INST.  :  Some  Arrangements  for  preventing  Accidents  at  Level 
Landings  in  Cage  Dips  and  /Shafts,  A.  R.  Sawyer,  viii.  204 ;  On 
Economy  of  Sleam  practically  obtainable  in  Winding  Engines,  B.  Wood- 
worth,  ix.  158  and  219  ;  The  Holding  Power  of  Glands  on  Wire 
Conductors,  A.  R.  Sawyer,  ix.  270. 
EEV.  UNIV.  :  Note  sur  I" installation  d'un  guidonnage  entierement  mttallique 
(Systeme  Briart)  L.  Donekier  (2°  Serie)  iv.  211  ;  >Sy$teme  d'extraction par  cables  sans  Jin,  L.  Trasenster  (2e  Serie)  v.  85  ;  Note  sur  diverses 
dispositions  de  putts  d'extraction  affcctes  a,  Vaerage  par  appareils mecaniques,  H.  Glepin  (2e  Serie)  vi.  107 ;  Note  sur  guidonnages 
metalliques  etablis  aux  fosses  d'  Havre,  Ch.  Demanet  (2°  Serie)  vii. 549 ;  Note  sur  un  nouveau  systeme  de  taquets  de  rctenue  pour  cages 
d'extraction,  A.  Stauss  (2e  Serie)  xviii.  101. 
ANN.  DES  MINES.  :  Itapport  fait  au  nom.de  la  Commission  sur  la  rupture  des 
cables  des  mines,  L.  Aguillon  (7e  Serie)  xx.  373. 
Emploi  des  Cables  Continus  pour  V Extraction  dans  les  Mines,  V.  Watteyne 
and  A.  Demeure  :  Annales  de  Travaux  Publics,  Belgique,  xlviii. 
437- 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER  X. 
PUMPING. 
THE  amount  of  water  met  with  in  mines  is  dependent  on  their 
depth  and  on  the  nature  of  the  overlying  strata.  Shallow  mines 
are  always  more  troubled  with  water  than  deeper  ones.  The 
subsidence  caused  by  extracting  the  material  cracks  and  fissures  the 
ground  above,  and  affords  means  for  the  ingress  of  water.  Even 
when  the  depth  is  great,  if  the  strata  overlying  the  coal  seams  con- 
tain large  quantities  of  water,  as  is  often  the  case,  the  workings 
naturally  release  the  water,  and  it  flows  into  the  mine.  In 
some  cases,  a  series  of  impervious  beds  are  found  to  exist 
between  the  water-bearing  strata  and  the  coal  measures  be- 
neath, and  the  water  met  with  during  sinking  may  be  tubbed back. 
Pumps. — Numerous  types  of  pumps  are  used  for  unwatering 
mines,  but  they  may  be  broadly  divided  into  two  classes — bucket 
and  plunger.  If  the  engines  are  placed  at  the  surface,  with  the 
former  type  the  water  is  lifted  during  the  forward  stroke,  while with  the  latter  it  is  forced  at  the  backward  stroke. 
Bucket  Pumps. — Suction  pumps  in  mines  are  similar  to  those 
used  in  ordinary  wells,  only  better  designed  and  on  a  larger  scale. 
They  consist  of  a  pipe,  called  the  working  barrel,  a  (Fig.  347),  into 
which  a  well-fitting  piston,  p,  having  a  valve  or  valves  opening 
upwards,  is  worked  up  and  down  by  being  attached  to  the  pump- rods.  The  lower  end  of  this  working  barrel  is  connected  to  a 
suction  pipe,  containing  a  valve,  c,  called  a  "  clack."  The  lower 
end  of  the  suction  pipe  is  called  the  "  snore  piece,"  or  "  wind 
bore,"  and  is  provided  with  a  number  of  holes  at  or  near  the bottom,  through  which  water  enters  the  pipe,  and  which  prevent, 
to  a  certain  extent,  any  large  piece  of  solid  material  entering  the 
working  barrel.  The  combined  area  of  these  holes  should  be 
larger  than  the  area  of  the  suction  pipe. 
When  the  piston,  or  bucket,  makes  its  up-stroke,  a  vacuum  is created  in  the  working  barrel,  and  the  pressure  of  air  forces  water 
through  the  suction  pipe  and  clack  into  the  working  barrel.  On 
the  return  stroke  the  clack  closes,  and  the  bucket  valve  opens, 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
287 
allowing  the  water  to  pass  to  the  upper  side  of  the  bucket,  to  be 
raised  to  the  surface  on  the  return  stroke  of  the  engine. 
Plunger  Pumps. — In  this  system  the  water,  instead  of  being 
lifted,  is  forced  up  by  the  action  of  a  plunger.  The  arrangement 
of  this,  and  the  necessary  valves,  is  shown  in  Fig.  348,  where  the 
piston,  a,  is  just  commencing  its  upward  stroke,  and  is  sucking 
water  through  the  valve,  b.  On  the  return,  the  valve  c  will  open 
and  b  close,  and  as  the  plunger  passes  downwards,  water  is  forced 
through  c  to  the  surface. 
Hollow  Plungers.— With  bucket  pumps,  lighter   rods  can  be 
FIG.  347. FIG.  348. 
FIG.  349. 
jo    c-    nl| 
j 
employed  than  with  plungers,  but  wear  and  tear  is  large,  and  the 
maintenance  charge  is  heavier.  Plunger  pumps  have  one  dis- 
advantage ;  unless  the  column  of  water  is  solid  at  the  commence- 
ment of  the  return  stroke  the  ram  falls  suddenly,  and  the  pipes 
receive  a  severe  shock.  To  remove  the  difficulty ;  and  to  combine 
the  advantages  of  both  systems,  hollow  rams  are  often  used; 
they  consist  of  a  hollow  plunger,  a  (Fig.  349),  having  at  the  top 
a  valve,  6,  which  is  closed  during  the  up-stroke,  and  opened  on 
the  return,  being  prevented  going  too  far  by  the  stop,  c.  Such  a 
plunger  may  either  work  through  an  internal  stuffing-box  in  the 
rising  main,  or,  preferably,  the  stuffing  box  is  placed  outside, 
where  it  may  easily  be  tightened  up  without  stopping  the  work. 

--- Page Break ---
288  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Stocks  or  Trees.  —  The  pipes  through  which  the  water  is 
delivered  to  the  surface  are  called  "  stocks,"  or  "  trees,"  and,  in 
combination,  form  the  rising  main.  They  consist,  as  a  rule,  of  cast- 
iron  pipes,  generally  9  ft.  long,  shorter  lengths  of  3  ft.  and  6  ft. 
being  used  for  making-up  pieces.  They  should  be  as  long  as 
possible,  without  making  them  difficult  to  handle,  as  by  doing  so 
the  number  of  joints  is  reduced,  there  being  less  liability  for  air 
to  enter.  They  should  always  be  cast  standing  ;  if  not,  the  pro- babilities are  that  the  metal  will  be  thicker  on  one  side  than  the 
othpr. 
The  thickness  depends  on  the  size  and  the  pressure  to  be  withstood, 
A  cubic  foot  of  water  weighs  62  J  Ibs.,  and  as  it  stands  on  a  base  of 
144  sq.  in.,  .the  pressure  per  sq.  in.  due  to  each  foot  in  depth  is- 
.434  Ibs.  The  common  rule,  and  one  erring  on  the  right  side,  is* 
to  allow  a  pressure  of  4-  Ib.  for  each  foot  in  depth,  or  to  find  the 
total  pressure  in  Ibs.  per  sq.  inch  due  to  a  column  of  water,  its- 
vertical  height  in  feet  may  be  divided  by  2.  Indeed,  some  allow- 
ance is  absolutely  necessary  in  determining  strengths,  because  it 
is  well  known  that  the  pressure  experienced  in  pumping  sets  is 
variable  during  different  parts  of  the  stroke,  and  exceeds  that  due 
simply  to  the  weight  of  the  water.*  The  necessary  thickness  of the  pipes  is  determined  by  the  formula  : 
t== 
2  X  28CO 
where  d  —  internal  diam.  in  inches,  t  =  thickness  in  inches  and 
p  =  the  pressure  in  Ibs.  per  sq.  inch. 
The  weight  of  any  length  of  pipes  is  found  by  the  formula  : 
w  =  c(D-d), 
where  w  —  weight  per  lineal  foot,  D  =  the  outside  diam.  in 
inches,  d  =  inside  diam.  in  inches,  and  c  is  a  constant  =  2.45 
for  cast  iron,  and  2.64  for  wrought  iron. 
Of  late  years,  wrought-iron  and  steel  pipes  have  been  substi- 
tuted for  cast-iron  ones.  For  the  same  strength  their  weight  is 
considerably  less,  and  they  can  be  made  in  longer  lengths,  and 
yet  be  much  easier  handled  ;  15  to  20  ft.  lengths  are  by  no  means 
uncommon.  They  have  additional  advantages  in  being  cheaper,. and  not  so  liable  to  fracture. 
Joints.  —  The  trees  are  joined  together  in  various  different 
ways.  For  moderate  lifts,  the  common  practice  is  to  face  and! 
turn  in  two  concentric  V  grooves  in  each  flange.  A  sheet  of  lead  is 
placed  between  the  two  flanges,  and  when  the  bolts  are  screwed 
together,  this  lead  is  forced  into  the  V  grooves.  The  better  plan 
for  heavy  pressures  is  to  employ  what  is  known  as  the  male  and 
*  Consult.  K.E.I,  xxi.  949  ;  and  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.iii.  107,  and  viii.  138- 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
289 
FIGS.  350  AND  351. 
female  joint.  One  flange  is  provided  with  a  projection  and  the 
other  with  a  corresponding  recess.  An  india-rubber  or  lead  ring 
is  placed  in  this  groove,  and  the  flanges  screwed  firmly  together. 
For  wrought-iron  pipes,  one  of  the  best  known  joints  is 
Williams's  patent. 
Each  pipe  termin- ates in  a  short  cone, 
a  (Figs.  350  and 
351),  and  is  pro- vided with  a  loose 
flange,  b.  The  joint 
is  made  by  intro- ducing a  double 
cone-shaped  annu- 
lus,  c,  and  screwing  the  flanges  tightly  together.  An  india-rubber 
ring  is  fitted  upon  each  ferrule.  The  advantages  are,  the  small 
amount  of  time  taken  to  make  a  joint,  and  the  pipes  can  be  con- 
nected at  small  angles,  whereby,  in  many  cases,  the  trouble  and 
expense  of  bends  is  avoided.  They  possess  an  advantage  over 
screwed  wrought-iron  pipes,  as  they  are  not  weakened  by  having threads  cut  on  them,  and  when  galvanised,  no  part  is  subjected  to 
corrosion,  as  is  the  case  when  galvanised  pipes  are  screwed. 
Supporting  Pipes  in  Shaft. — The  ordinary  plan  is  to  pro- vide a  main  bunton  of  timber  running  across  part  of  the  shaft, 
upon  which  two  smaller  pieces  are  fixed  at  right  angles,  one  on 
each  side  of  the  pipe  under  a  flange.  These  short  pieces  are 
hollowed  out  to  fit  the  pipe  perfectly.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how 
such  support  can  be  improved,  and  it  is  invariably  employed 
where  there  is  plenty  of  room.  It,  however,  requires  a  consider- 
able amount  of  space,  because  the  main  cross-piece  has  to  be  fixed 
on  the  outside  of  the  pipe,  and  as  it  has  to  bear  all  the  weight, 
is  necessarily  large. 
In  a  shaft  where  room  was  valuable,  the  author  applied  the 
method  shown  in  Figs.  352  and  353.  A  bearer,  a,  was  fixed  at 
right  angles  to  the  brickwork  of  the  shaft.  "Wrought-iron  pipes were  employed,  as  the  flanges  on  them  took  up  considerably  less 
space  than  cast-iron  ones  would  have  done.  One  of  these  timber 
pieces  was  fixed  immediately  below  each  joint  of  the  pipe.  A 
wrought  iron  gland,  b,  with  two  screwed  pin-ends  passed  round 
the  pipe  and  through  the  timber  piece,  and  was  firmly  bound 
against  the  tube  by  nuts  screwed  as  tight  as  possible.  A  main 
bearer  similar  to  that  described  in  the  preceding  paragraph  was 
fixed  at  the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  this  supporting,  in  a  great 
measure,  the  weight  of  the  pipes. 
Spear  Rods. — The  buckets,  or  plungers,  are  connected  to 
the  engine  through  the  medium  of  what  are  called  "spear 
rods."  In  the  great  majority  of  cases  these  consist  of  wood, although  iron  and  steel  are  sometimes  employed.  Since  those 

--- Page Break ---
290 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
above  have  to  support  their  own  weight  and  the  weight  of  all 
below,  the  upper  rods  must  be  made  proportionately  large.  With 
plunger-pumps,  the  rods  must  be  heavy  enough  to  force  up  the column  of  water  before  them.  Wooden  rods  are  preferably  made 
of  pitch  pine,  except  at  the  surface,  where  they  are  exposed  to 
changes  of  temperature.  Pine  is  more  readily  obtained  in  long 
straight  lengths  free  from  knots. 
If  rods  of  sufficient  sectional  area  cannot  be  obtained,  they  are 
made  up  of  two  pieces,  the  joints  of  the  one  coming  into  the  centre 
of  the  other  set.  Single  rods  are  sometimes  jointed  by  cutting 
FIGS.  352  AND  353. FIGS.  354  AND  355. 
the  ends  slanting  with  a  hole  in  the  middle,  the  connection  being 
made  by  an  iron  plate  on  both  sides  and  bolts  passed  through. 
An  oak  wedge  is  finally  driven  into  the  hole  in  the  centre  to  make 
the  joint  quite  firm  (Fig.  354),  but  this  has  the  disadvantage  that 
the  wood  is  likely  to  split.  The  bolts  are  not  passed  through  the 
core  of  the  wood,  but  alternately  on  either  side.  A  common  joint 
is  to  cut  off  the  ends  of  the  rods  square  and  to  bolt  connecting 
plates  on  all  four  sides. 
Compound  rods  are  often  put  together  by  two  pieces  side  by 
side,  which  may  be  cut  so  as  to  fit  into  one  another  (Fig.  355),  or 
they  may  be  simply  in  contact  with  bolts  at  intervals.  Often  the 
rods  are  connected  by  side  irons,  with  the  bolts  outside  the timbers. 
Iron  rods  are  built  up  of  various  sections  fixed  together  with 
bolts  or  rivets,  usually  the  latter.  A  general  form  is  composed  of 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 291 
two  channel  pieces,  back  to  back,  and  two  flat  strips,  one  on  each 
side,  but  every  section  of  compound  girder  is  employed. 
Guiding   the    Bods. — This   is   usually   very   simple.      Two beams 
shaft FIG.  356. are  placed  across  the 
with  cross-pieces  (Fig. 
35  6).  Rubbing  boards  are  fixed to  the  side  of  the  actual  rod  to 
take  up  wear.  Catches  are  also 
fixed,  the  object  of  which  is  to 
prevent  the  rods  falling  down 
the  shaft  should  a  breakage 
occur,  and  to  stop  the  engine 
exceeding  its  stroke. 
Counterbalancing. — In  deep  shafts,  the  weight  of  the  rods 
becomes  very  great,  and  is  more  than  that  required  by  the 
plungers ;  in  addition,  a  more  powerful  engine  is  needed  to  lift 
FIG.  357. FIGS.  358  AND  359. 
them.  To  remove  this  disadvantage,  balance-bobs  are 
placed  at  one  or  more  points  at  the  surface  or  in  the 
shaft  wherever  possible. 
Connections  to  Rods. — Owing  to  the  ease  with which  bucket  lifts  can  be  lengthened,  it  is  common  to 
find  one  of  these  at  the  bottom  and  plungers  higher 
up  the  shaft.  This  necessitates  attaching  the  plungers 
to  the  main  spear  rods  by  some  form  of  connection. 
In  general,  water  from  great  depths  is  not  forced  or 
lifted  to  the  surface  in  one  operation,  but  in  a  number  of  stages, 
each  of  which  is  called  a  lift.  It  is,  therefore,  common  to  find  the 
n>ain  pumping  rod  going  direct  to  the  bottom  of  the  shaft,  with 
plungers  attached  to  it  at  intervals.  These  connections  are  often 
made  by  the  method  illustrated  in  Fig.  348,  but  the  better  plan 
is  to  fork  the  main  rod  (A  B,  Fig.  357),  instead  of  placing  the 

--- Page Break ---
292 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
plungers  at  the  side.  The  plunger  is  then  fixed  in  the  line  of  the 
rods,  the  latter  being  continued  on  either  side,  joining  again afterwards. 
Valves. — The  simplest  kind  of  valve  is  that  in  which  a  flap 
works  on  a  hinge.  This  is  the  type  used  on  the  buckets  of 
suction  pumps,  but  it  consists  of  two  flaps  instead  of  one  (Fig, 
358) ;  clack-valves  are  constructed  in  a  similar  manner,  but  instead 
of  fixing  the  hinges  of  the  flaps,  they  work  within  guides,  and  the 
whole  is  free  to  move  upwards  a  few  inches,  thus  giving  a  greater 
area  of  water  passage  at  the  commencement  of  the  stroke. 
A  valve  largely  employed  for  pumps  of  moderate  capacity  for 
lifts  of  3  to  500  ft.  is  the  single  beat  one  (Fig.  359).  The  spindle 
is  fitted  with  alternate  discs  of  india-rubber  and  sheet-iron,  the 
lift  of  the  valve  being  determined  by  the  amount  of  compression 
of  the  india-rubber  discs. 
For  lifts  up  to  300  ft.,  india-rubber  disc  valves  give  good  results. 
FIG.  360. FIG.  361. 
An  india-rubber  disc  is  fixed  over  the  centre  of  a  grid,  and  on  the 
water  rushing  through  the  holes  is  lifted  at  the  edges,  and  imme- 
diately shuts  again  at  the  return  stroke.  In  the  ordinary  con- 
struction, as  the  disc  drops  in  the  same  place  each  time,  it  is  soon 
cut  away  by  the  bars  in  the  grid.  To  remove  this  disadvantage, 
Messrs.  Evans  and  Sons  fix  a  small  brass  collar,  a  (Fig.  360),  in 
the  centre  of  the  disc,  6,  and  place  it  on  a  spindle.  Instead  of  the- 
passages  through  the  grid  being  vertical,  they  are  placed  at  an 
inclination,  with  the  result  that  the  water  flows  obliquely,  and 
turns  the  rubber  disc  slightly  at  each  stroke,  causing  it  to  drop  in 
a  different  place  each  time.  In  their  later  construction  of  valve, 
the  holes  through  the  seat  are  made  vertical,  but  the  disc  has  teeth 
cut  all  round  its  circumference,  such  teeth  being  inclined ;  the 
action  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  the  former  case,  but  the  cost  has 
been  reduced.  Such  a  valve  is  superior  to  a  metal  one  up  to 
certain  pressures,  especially  where  the  water  is  gritty  and  dirty. 
For  heavy  pressures,  nothing   gives   better   results   than  the 
Cornish,  or  double  beat,  valve  (Fig.  361).    These  have  been  applied 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
293 
FIG.  362. 
to  pumps  9  in.  diam.,  working  under  700  ft.  head,  and  have  given 
every  satisfaction.  For  larger  pumps,  instead  of  employing  one 
valve,  which  would  be  very  unwieldy  and  often  get  broken, 
multiple  valves  are  used,  that  is  to  say,  several  double  beats  are 
arranged  in  a  cluster.  At  the  Bradley  pumping  engine,  where  the 
plungers  are  27  in.  diam.,  there  are  seven  such  valves  working  on 
gutta-percha  beats  in  each  clack  box. 
Quadrants. — For  any  type  of  horizontal  engine  fixed  at  the 
surface,  quadrants  have  to  be  employed  to  change  the  direction  of 
motion.  If  two  lifts  are  used,  quadrants  are  placed  on  opposite 
sides  of  the  shaft,  and  so  connected 
that  one  is  making  the  up  stroke, 
while  the  other  is  making  the  down 
stroke.  In  such  case,  the  quad- 
rant consists  simply  of  an  L-piece, as  one  balances  the  other ;  but 
where  only  one  lift  is  employed, 
the  quadrant  is  made  of  j_-shape, and  a  balance  weight  placed  on 
one  end.  Instead  of  using  wooden 
quadrants,  wrought-iron  or  steel 
girders  are  common. 
Suspended  Lifts. — When 
water  is  met  with  in  sinkings,  even 
in  small  quantities,  pumping  has 
to  be  resorted  to,  owing  to  the 
limited  space.  This  is  not  only 
a  difficult  but  a  very  expensive 
operation.  With  the  ordinary 
spear  rods  and  engine  at  the 
surface,  there  are  several  methods 
for  dealing  with  pumps  during 
sinking,  which  may  be  divided  into 
two  distinct  types :  (a)  The  trees 
may  be  permanently  fixed  in  the 
shaft  as  sinking  proceeds  and  pipes 
added  above  the  working  barrel; 
such  system  requires  a  telescopic 
suction,  or  a  telescopic  pipe  above 
the  working  barrel,  and  owing  to 
the  difficulty  of  securing  the  lower 
part  of  the  pipes,  is  not  to  be  pre- ferred to  (b)  where  the  lift  is  slung 
by  ground  spears,  and  pipes  added  at  the  top  of  the  lift. 
With  this  suspended  lift  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  make  one 
part  of  the  shaft  into  which  the  suction  pipe  is  dipped  lower  than 
the  other.  An  ordinary  snore-piece  is  employed,  a  (Fig.  362), 
above  which  the  clack-piece  is  attached,  followed  by  the  working 

--- Page Break ---
294 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
barrel  and  rising  main  until  the  surface  is  reached.  Sometimes 
projecting  pieces  are  cast  on  each  side  of  either  the  suction  or 
clack-pipe,  but  a  commoner  plan  is  to  fix  two  wrought-iron  glands, 
c,  underneath  a  flange.  These  glands  receive  the  wrought-iron 
ends  of  the  ground  spears,  d,  which  are  secured  in  their  place  by 
cotters.  These  ground  spears  consist  of  two  pieces  of  timber, 
passing  down  each  side  of  the  pump,  and  they  carry  at  their  upper 
ends  pulley  blocks,  e,  which  are  connected  to  similar  pulleys,  ft  at 
the  surface,  and  with  the  aid  of  ropes,  the  whole  set  can  be 
lowered  or  raised  as  necessity  requires.  For  additional  security, 
other  wrought-iron  glands  are  added,  which  not  only  steady  the lift,  but  strengthen  the  spears.  A  front  bearer,  or  collar  ring,  </, 
is  also  fixed  to  steady  the  pump,  and  prevent  any  movement, 
which  would  be  likely  to  take  place  through  the  up-and-down 
motion  of  the  pump  rods.  Other  cross-pieces,  6,  are  placed  to 
serve  as  guides  for  the  spear  rods.  The  ropes  from  the  pulleys 
on  the  ground  spears  are  wound  on  small  crab  engines  at  the 
surface.  Pipes  are  added  at  the  top  as  required. 
The  height  at  which  the  working  barrel  can  be  fixed  above  the 
water  depends  on  several  circumstances.  Theoretically,  the 
distance  is  34  feet,  because  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  will 
balance  a  column  of  water  of  that  height.  There  are,  however, 
several  disturbing  causes.  The  joints  are  never  perfectly  air- 
tight. There  is  also  a  certain  amount  of  friction  between  the 
water  and  the  sides  of  the  pipe,  which  increases  if  bends  are 
present.  In  actual  practice  from  27  to  30  feet  is  about  the  limit. 
Such  lifts  are  expensive  both  in  first  cost  and  in  maintenance. 
To  a  great  extent  they  have  been  superseded  by  direct-acting 
steam  pumps  slung  in  the  shaft.  The  types  of  pumps  employed 
are  described  a  little  further  on.  Three  ranges  of  pipes  are  re- 
quired— steam,  exhaust,  and  rising  main,  all  of  which  are  usually 
of  wrought-iron.  The  steam-pipe  is  sup- 
plied with  a  sliding  joint,  and  a  sliding 
suction  has  also  to  be  employed,  as  the 
whole  arrangement  is  only  moved  bodily 
about  every  15  to  18  feet  of  sinking. 
At  Denaby  Main  Colliery,  Yorkshire,* the  pumps  were  suspended  by  two  rope? 
worked  by  a  steam  crab,  and  the  steam, 
exhaust,  and  deliverypipes  were  all  clamped 
together  and  fastened  to  the  ropes.  The 
clamps  were  formed  of  two  pieces  of  iron 
about  4  in.  by  i  in.  (Fig.  363),  bent  and 
curved  to  fit  the  pipes  and  ropes,  and  bolted 
together  between  each  pipe.  With  this 
arrangement  nearly  100  yards  was  sunk  in  one  lift,  but  as  this  was 
FIG. 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xiv.  56. 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
295 
not  sufficient  to  get  through  the  water,  a  tank  was  placed  about 
60  yards  from  the  top. 
At  Canklow  Sinking,  Yorkshire,*  a  large  quantity  of  water  was successfully  dealt  with  by  pulsometers,  which  were  all  of  No.  10 
size,  and  capable  of  pumping  50,000  gallons  of  water  per  hour. 
They  were  suspended  on  one  side  of  the  shaft  by  heavy  chains,  to 
which  the  steam  and  delivery  pipes  were  clamped  as  at  Denaby 
Main  Colliery.  At  a  depth  of  something  under  30  yards,  which 
is  the  limit  of  the  pulsometer's  power,  a  tank  was  fixed  in  the shaft,  and  a  man  stood  on  a  platform  adjoining,  to  regulate  the 
flow  of  water  and  see  that  the  two  lifts  kept  pace  with  each  other. 
FIG.  364. FIG.  365. 
At  the  worst  period, 
I5o,ooogallonsperhour 
were  pumped  with  two 
lifts  of  three  pulso- meters each,  arranged one  above  the  other. 
With  an  ordinary 
cast-iron  snore-piece, 
breakages  through  shot 
firing  are  common.  At 
Canklow  a  very  excel- lent form  of  wind-bore 
was  employed.  It  con- 
sisted of  three  wrought  - 
iron  plates  (a  a  a,  Fig. 
364),  the  bottom  one 
blank,  the  other  two  with  a  hole  the  size  of  the  suction  pipe 
through  them.  The  lower  flange  of  the  cast-iron  pipe  was  bolted 
to  the  top  plate,  and  the  three  flanges  were  fastened  together  by  a 
large  number  of  small  bolts,  covered  with  iron  ferrules,  which  being 
loose,  withstood  the  shots,  the  whole  forming  a  grating  or  cage. 
Cornish  Pumping  Engines. — This  type  of  engine,  which  is 
still  largely  employed  for  pumping  operations,  is  illustrated  in 
Fig.  365.  It  consists  of  a  single  cylinder,  with  its  piston-rod connected  to  one  end  of  a  beam,  the  pump  rods  being  attached 
to  the  other.  It  is  a  single  acting  engine,  steam  being  admitted 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xiv.  52. 

--- Page Break ---
296 TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  366. 
to  the  upper  surface  of  the  piston,  causing  the  engine  to  make  its 
in-stroke.  An  equilibrium  valve  is  then  opened,  and  steam  passes 
to  the  lower  side  of  the  piston ;  the  pressure  is  then  equal  on 
both  sides.  The  weight  of  the  pump  rods  causes  the  outward 
stroke.  Communication  is  now  opened  between  the  lower  side 
of  the  piston  and  the  condenser,  a  vacuum  formed,  and  steam  re- 
admitted to  the  upper  side  of  the  piston.  This  engine  was 
designed  by  Watt,  and  remains  at  the  present  time,  as  he  left  it. 
The  valves  are  opened  and  closed  at  the  proper  time  by  tappet 
rods,  regulated  by  a  cataract.  Any  number  of  strokes  per  minute 
can  be  obtained,  although  from  the  massiveness  of  the  machinery, 
speed  must  necessarily  be  slow ; 
in  addition,  a  pause  is  made 
between  the  successive  strokes, 
during  which  the  valves,  or  clacks, 
have  time  to  close,  thus  reducing 
any  chance  of  shock.  It  is  a  large 
piece  of  machinery,  very  expen- sive in  itself,  and  also  to  work, 
but  when  once  in  operation 
requires  little  attention,  has  a 
very  high  efficiency,  and  its  wear- 
ing capacity  is  almost  unlimited. 
Bull  Engine. — To  reduce  the 
cost  of  the  machinery  and  erec- 
tions, the  Cornish  Bull  engine 
(Fig.  366)  is  often  employed.  In 
it  the  cylinder  is  placed  directly 
over  the  shaft,  and  the  piston  rod 
connected  to  the  spear  rods.  It 
works  in  exactly  the  same  manner 
as  the  Cornish  engine. 
Davey  Differential  Engine. 
— Pumping  engines  have  fre- 
quently been  called  "profit  eaters," and  attempts  are  always  being 
made  to  reduce  both  their  first  and  working  cost.  It  is  question- 
able whether  the  working  cost  of  any  engine  is  less  than  that  of 
the  Cornish  type,  but  its  first  cost  is  great,  and  it  is  liable  to 
accident,  especially  in  sinking,  when  what  is  known  as  a  "  riding 
column  "  often  occurs — that  is  to  say,  some  obstruction  gets  in one  of  the  valves  in  the  clack  ;  the  whole  weight  of  the  column  of 
water  is  thrown  on  the  engine  in  the  return  stroke,  and  the  load 
acts  in  conjunction  with  the  steam  pressure,  instead  of  opposing 
it.  In  nine  cases  out  of  ten  this  means  that  something  has  to 
break,  although  to  reduce  the  risk,  stops,  previously  alluded  to, 
are  fixed  at  intervals,  to  prevent  the  engine  going  too  far  either 
oa  its  out  stroke  or  on  its  in-stroke. 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
297 
To  remove  the  danger  Mr.  Henry  Davey  has  designed  a 
gear,  whereby  a  differential  motion  is  communicated  to  the  slide- 
valve  which  is  connected  to  a  lever,  one  end  of  which  is  worked 
by  the  engine  piston,  while  the  other  receives  an  independent 
motion  from  a  subsidiary  piston  controlled  by  a  cataract.  The 
action  of  the  gear  will  be  readily  understood  from  Figs.  367- 
370,  and  the  following  description  given  by  Mr.  Davey.*  The diagrams  are  not  drawn  to  a  scale,  but  clearly  show  the  action  of 
the  gear. 
The  main  slide-valve,  g,  is  actuated  by  the  piston-rod  through a  lever,  A,  turning  on  a  fixed  centre,  which  reduces  the  motion  to 
the  required  extent  and  reverses  its  direction.  The  valve-spindle 
is  not  coupled  direct  to  this  lever,  but  to  an  intermediate  lever,  I, 
which  is  joined  to  h  at  one  end,  while  the  other  end,  m,  is  joined 
to  the  piston-rod  of  a  small  subsidiary  steam  cylinder,  j,  which 
has  a  motion  independent  of  the  engine  cylinder,  its  slide-valve,  «, 
FIGS.  367,  368,  369  AND  370. 
being  actuated  by  a  third  lever,  n,  coupled  at  one  end  to  I,  and 
moving  on  a  fixed  centre, />,  at  the  other  end.  The  motion  of  the 
piston  in  the  subsidiary  cylinder,^*,  is  controlled  by  a  cataract cylinder,  &,  on  the  same  piston-rod,  by  which  the  motion  of  this 
piston  is  made  uniform  throughout  the  stroke ;  the  regulating- 
plug,  g,  can  be  adjusted  to  give  any  desired  time  for  the  stroke. 
The  lever,  I,  has  not  any  fixed  centre  of  motion,  as  its  outer 
end,  m,  is  joined  to  the  piston-rod  of  the  subsidiary  cylinder,^'; the  main  valve,  g,  consequently  receives  a  differential  motion, 
compounded  of  the  separate  motion  given  to  the  two  ends  of  I. 
If  this  lever  turned  about  a  fixed  centre  at  the  end,  m,  steam 
would  be  cut  off  in  the  engine  cylinder  at  a  constant  point  in  each 
stroke ;  but  as  the  centre  of  motion  at  the  end,  m,  shifts  in  the 
opposite  direction  with  the  movement  of  the  piston,  j,  the  point 
of  cut-off  also  moves,  and  is  dependent  on  the  position  of  the 
*  Inst.  Mec.  Eng.,  1874,  p.  261. 

--- Page Break ---
298  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
subsidiary  piston  at  the  moment  when  the  slide-valve  closes.  At 
the  beginning  of  the  engine-stroke,  the  subsidiary  piston  is  moving in  the  same  direction,  as  shown  by  the  arrows  in  Fig.  367,  and  in 
the  instance  of  a  light  load,  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  368,  the  engine- 
piston,  having  less  resistance  to  encounter,  moves  off  at  a  higher 
speed,  and  soon  overtakes  the  subsidiary  piston  moving  at  a  con- 
stant speed  under  the  control  of  the  cataract ;  the  closing  of  the 
main  valve,  g,  is  consequently  accelerated,  causing  an  earlier 
cut-off.  With  a  heavy  load,  as  in  Fig.  369,  the  engine-piston, 
encountering  greater  resistance,  moves  off  more  slowly,  and  the 
subsidiary  piston  has  time  to  advance  further  in  its  stroke  before 
it  is  overtaken,  thus  retarding  the  closing  of  the  main  valve,  g, 
causing  it  to  cut-off  later.  At  the  end  of  the  engine-stroke 
(Fig.  370),  the  relative  positions  become  reversed  from  Fig.  367, 
in  readiness  for  the  commencement  of  the  return-stroke.  A 
retarding-goar  is  also  applied,  by  means  of  which  any  pause  that is  required  between  successive  strokes  is  easily  obtained. 
It  is  now  many  years  since  this  gear  was  brought  out,  and  long 
experience  has  proved  its  perfect  reliability.  Opinions  differ  as  to 
the  relative  economies  of  the  compound  engine,  with  which  this 
arrangement  is  connected,  and  that  of  the  Cornish  engine ;  but 
every  one  is  agreed  on  the  merits  of  the  valve-gear,  and  it  is 
becoming  quite  common  to  find  it  applied  to  the  Cornish  engine. 
Mr.  Davey  mentions  an  instance  during  sinking  operations  where 
the  bottom-clack  failed,  and  90  yards  of  1 8-inch  column  was  riding on  the  bucket,  and  the  engine  continued  working  without  any 
injury  whatever.  The  total  weight  on  the  engine  in  the  outward 
stroke  was  7  or  8  tons,  and  in  order  to  save  the  cylinder  covers 
from  being  carried  away,  steam  had  to  be  admitted  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  piston,  reversing  the  ordinary  working  of  the 
engine,  and  forming  a  cushion  in  front  of  the  piston.  This  was 
entirely  accomplished  by  the  automatic  action  of  the  differential 
valve-gear. 
Direct-acting  Steam  Pumps. — With  any  type  of  engine fixed  at  the  surface  the  first  cost  is  great,  both  for  the  engine 
itself  and  for  its  pit  work.  As  considerable  power  is  required  to 
lift  the  great  weight  of  rods  hanging  in  the  shaft,  the  engine  has 
to  be  made  larger  than  if  such  were  absent.  It  has  consequently 
become  common,  instead  of  employing  such  type  of  engine,  to  fix 
the  pumps  at  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  and  force  the  water  to  the 
surface.  The  disadvantages  here  are — conveying  steam  under- 
ground, the  difficulty  of  dealing  with  the  exhaust-steam,  and  the 
liability  for  the  pump  itself  to  be  "  drowned,"  if  the  lodge,  or sump-room,  is  not  large. 
The  objections  to  introducing  steam  are  here  more  than  counter- 
balanced by  the  convenience  of  using  the  pumps,  for  their  porta- 
bility and  the  ease  with  which  they  may  be  worked  is  considerable. 
The  exhaust  steam,  except  with  the  larger  pumps,  can  be  got  rid 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING.  299 
of  by  several  devices.  The  liability  to  drowning  can,  to  a  certain 
extent,  be  avoided  by  fixing  the  pump  in  a  special  chamber,  and 
only  allowing  as  much  water  to  pass  into  it  as  the  pump  can  raise. 
This  is  usually  done  by  a  self-acting  tap  and  ball  arrangement. 
Such  pumps  can  be  applied  to  lifts  of  a  thousand  feet,  as  the 
water  is  always  flowing  in  the  same  direction,  the  movement  dur- 
ing the  reversal  of  the  stroke  being  kept  up  by  an  air  reservoir. 
The  cost  is  low,  breakages  are  rare,  and  the  space  occupied  by  them 
in  the  shaft  is  small.  To  lessen  the  difficulty  of  working  the 
engine  and  keeping  the  room  for  it  open,  they  are  constructed 
long,  narrow  and  low. 
As  with  the  other  type,  they  are  capable  of  being  divided  into 
two  classes — bucket  and  plunger — and  in  addition,  may  be  single and  double  acting.  For  clean  water,  the  bucket  pump  with  cup 
leathers  is  the  best  up  to  400  to  500  ft.  head,  as  the  packing  is 
easily  replaced — any  ordinary  mechanic  can  do  it — and  its  cost  is less  to  commence  with.  For  gritty  water  and  high  lifts  the 
plunger  types  are  preferable,  as  they  are  outside-packed,  and  any leakage  is  easily  detected.  Double  acting  pumps  are  certainly 
preferable  to  single  acting  ones.  The  latter  only  deliver  water  at 
each  alternate  stroke ;  their  capacity  is  half  that  of  a  double  act- 
ing one,  and  the  column  of  water  is  brought  to  rest  after  each 
stroke,  and  has  to  be  started  again.  In  all  cases,  the  stroke  should 
be  made  as  long  as  possible,  as  to  obtain  a  given  piston  speed 
fewer  strokes  are  required ;  the  direction  of  motion  is  not  changed 
so  often,  there  is  less  wear  and  tear  on  the  valves,  and  less  shock 
to  the  different  parts. 
Among  the  many  excellent  pumps  before  the  mining  public, 
those  of  Messrs.  Evans  &  Sons  are  in  great  favour.  After  con- 
sidering several  types,  the  author  adopted  those  of  Messrs.  Evans' for  his  work.  They  are  strong,  well-designed  machines,  perform 
the  work  they  are  stated  to  do,  and  are  easily  managed  by  any 
ordinary  attendant.  They  will  restart  themselves  if  stopped  by 
want  of  steam,  and  require  little  supervision.  It  may  appear 
invidious  to  single  out  one  particular  firm,  but  this  is  done  because 
it  is  impossible  to  give  descriptions  of  even  a  portion  of  the  many 
pumps  which  are  at  work,  to  which  the  remarks  made  above 
may  apply  equally  well. 
The  steam  end  of  Evans's  Cornish  pump  consists  of  an  ordinary 
piston  fitted  with  Tonkin's  valve,  which  is  a  steam-moved  one, consisting  of  a  smaller  plunger  inside  a  larger  one,  the  latter 
carrying  a  common  slide-valve.  The  steam-chest  is  placed  on  the 
side  of  the  cylinder,  and  the  bottom  of  the  steam-port  on  the  same level  as  the  bottom  of  the  cylinder ;  the  whole  of  the  condensed 
steam  is  carried  out  at  every  stroke  of  the  piston,  and  the  necessity 
for  drain  cocks  avoided.  There  is  no  extraneous  gear  whatever ; 
the  pumps  will  start  at  any  point  of  the  stroke,  there  being  no 
dead  centre,  and  they  can  be  worked  by  compressed  air.  The 

--- Page Break ---
300 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
double  acting  plunger  pump,  with  the  pump-end  half  in  section, is  shown  in  Fig.  371. 
All  the  pump  parts  are  of  cylindrical  form,  and  the  various 
portions  are  so  arranged  that  they  may  be  renewed  without  necessi- 
tating an  entirely  new  pump.  The  valve-boxes  are  constructed 
to  work  against  very  heavy  pressure,  every  valve  is  easy  of  access, 
and  may  be  readily  got  at  and  renewed  when  required. 
With  the  ordinary  form  of  direct  acting  steam  pumps,  the 
motion  is  a  purely  reciprocating  one.  To  make  them  work  more 
smoothly  and  regularly,  and  also,  perhaps,  with  more  economy, 
fly  wheels  are  added;  such  type  lose  the  advantage  of  compact- 
ness, which  is  so  valuable  for  underground  use. 
Worthington  Pumps. — In  this  type,  two  pumps  are  placed 
side  by  side,  the  valve  of  each  cylinder  deriving  its  motion  through 
FIG.  371. 
levers,  &c.,  coupled  to  the  piston-rod  of  the  opposite  cylinder. 
"When  the  one  piston  has  nearly  completed  its  stroke,  the  piston of  the  second  cylinder  is  put  into  motion,  and  in  turn  gives  effect 
to  the  slide  valve  and  piston  of  the  first  cylinder.  The  great 
advantage  is,  that  as  the  second  piston  starts  to  move,  just  at  the 
moment  when  the  first  piston  is  completing  its  stroke,  a  steady 
and  uniform  flow  is  obtained  in  the  delivery  main.  The  column 
of  water  is  never  entirely  stopped,  and  any  recoil  or  shock  is  pre- vented. As  one  or  other  of  the  steam  valves  is  always  open,  the 
pump  will  start  at  any  point  in  the  stroke.  At  the  present  time 
every  one  is  manufacturing  the  duplex  pump,  and  they  are  rapidly 
replacing  the  single  cylinder  form.  For  heavy  pressures,  they  are, 
undoubtedly,  superior  to  all  others.  They  are  open  to  the  objec- tion that  if  one  pump  meets  with  an  accident,  both  become  useless. 
Messrs.  Evans  have  recently  patented  a  duplex  arrangement  of 
their  Cornish  steam  pump,  each  of  which  has  Tonkin's  valves,  and can  be  worked  independently  of  the  other  in  case  of  break-down. 
Pumps  for  Sinking. — Any  well  constructed  pump  can  be  used 
during  sinking,  but  special  types  are  manufactured  for  this  pur- 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
301 
pose.     Messrs.  Evans    construct    one   in    which    two    rams   are 
placed  in  the  same  straight  line  as  the  steam  cylinder,  which  is  of 
the  ordinary  pattern.     The  lower  pump-ram  is  twice  the  diameter of  the  upper  one,  and  only  one  suction  valve  is  used.     All  the 
water  first  passes  under  the  lower  ram,  which  on  its  downward 
stroke  delivers  half  the  water  into  the  rising  main,  and  half  into 
the  upper  end  of  the  top  plunger.     When  the  rams  rise,  the  lower 
one  sucks  in  water,  and  the  upper  one  delivers 
that  water  which  has  passed  into  it  during  the         FIG.  372. 
downward  stroke.     An  air  vessel  is  placed  in  the 
vertical  delivery  pipe  similar  in  construction  to 
Fig.  375- 
At  Denaby  Main  Colliery  a  special  type  of  pump 
was  designed  by  Messrs.  Bailey  &  Co.,  which  con- 
sisted of  three  hollow  plungers.  The  upper  pair 
(a  and  b,  Fig.  372)  are  stationary,  and  over  them 
slide  barrels,  which  are  connected  to  the  steam 
piston.  From  the  lower  end  of  these  barrels  pro- 
jects the  bottom  plunger,  c,  which  works  into  the 
third  barrel,  together  with  the  two  stationary 
plungers,  and  is  secured  by  means  of  connecting 
rods  to  the  steam  cylinder ;  thus,  there  are  two 
smaller  barrels  in  connection  with  the  larger  ram, 
moving  between  the  larger  barrel  connected  with 
the  smaller  rams.  A  series  of  valves,  dj  consti- 
tuting the  delivery  valves,  are  placed  in  the  junc- 
tion between  the  smaller  barrels  and  the  large  ram, 
while  the  suction  valves,  e,  are  placed  at  the  bottom 
of  the  large  barrel. 
As  the  bottom  plunger  rises,  the  water  follows 
it  into  the  lower  barrel,  while  at  the  same  time 
the  water  in  the  upper  hollow  plunger  is  forced 
into  the  rising  main.  On  the  down  stroke,  the 
water  in  the  lower  barrel  is  forced  through  the 
lower  plunger  and  valve  into  the  upper  barrels 
and  plunger,  and  thence  into  the  rising  main ;  the 
discharge  of  water  is  therefore  continuous.  One 
of  the  upper  plungers,  6,  is  open  at  the  top,  and 
forms  the  discharge  orifice  for  the  water;  the 
other,  a,  is  closed,  forming  an  air  vessel,  which  is 
kept  continuously  charged  with  air,  as  a  suitable  snifting  valve,/, 
is  fitted  to  that  side  of  the  pump  and  below  the  discharge  valves. 
It  permits  a  small  quantity  of  air  to  be  taken  in  with  every  up- stroke of  the  pump. 
Arrangement  of  Supply  Pipes,  &c. — For  successful  work- 
ing, a  great  deal  depends  on  the  arrangement  of  the  suction  and 
delivery  pipes.  The  bends  should  be  made  as  large  as  possible, 
and  suitable  air  vessels  are  a  necessity.  Perhaps  the  best 

--- Page Break ---
302 
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
arrangement  is  that  shown  in  Fig.  373.  The  suction  pipe  is 
attached  to  the  end  of  the  pump,  and  its  lower  length  is  pro- 
vided with  a  foot  valve,  6,  which  always  keeps  the  pipes  and 
cylinder  charged  with  water,  and  prevents  the  pump,  on  being 
started,  from  having  to  free  both  itself  and  the  suction  pipes 
from  air.  For  gritty  water,  a  strainer,  c,  is  introduced  in  the 
suction  pipes,  and  serves  to  prevent  any  coarse  matter  passing 
into  the  pump.  A  retaining  valve  should  be  placed  between  the 
end  of  the  pump  and  the  commencement  of  the  delivery  main, 
so  that  when  any  repairs  are  necessary,  the  pressure  of  water  is 
kept  off  the  pump.  For  charging  the  suction  if  at  any  time  it 
loses  water,  a  short  length  of  pipe,  a,  with  a  suitable  valve  is 
inserted  between  the  suction  and  the  delivery  pipes,  of  course, 
FIG.  373. FIGS.  374  AND  375. 
beyond  the  retaining  valve.  Where  the  suction  pipe  is  long,  it 
is  just  as  necessary  that  an  air  vessel  should  be  placed  on  it 
as  on  the  delivery  side.  This  is  best  done  by  carrying  the 
suction  pipe  upwards  and  introducing  a  tee-pipe,  d.  This  chamber can  easily  be  extended  by  adding  ordinary  pipes  and  putting  a 
blank  flange  at  the  top. 
Air  Vessels. — Direct  acting  steam  pumps  always  work  better 
with  air  vessels,  although  their  utility  is  much  questioned. 
Water  being  an  incompressible  fluid,  some  elastic  medium  has 
to  be  introduced  to  resist  the  shocks  due  to  stopping  and  starting 
the  column.  Sometimes  a  pump  works  just  as  well  (or  rather  as 
badly)  with  an  air  vessel  as  it  did  without  one,  but  this  is  not 
the  fault  of  the  air  vessel ;  it  is  more  probably  due  to  its  improper 
position,  insufficient  size,  and  lack  of  attention.  In  the  first 
place,  the  air  vessel  should  be  so  situated  that  the  air  in  the 
water  tends  to  come  back  into  it  and  not  to  flow  past  it.  A 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 303 
very  good  rough  arrangement  is  shown  in  Tig.  374,  but, 
perhaps,  the  best  is  Fig.  375,  where  all  the  water  has  actually 
to  flow  right  through  the  air  vessel. 
Then  as  to  its  size.  What  may  appear  to  be  a  large  chamber 
is  fitted  on  to  a  pump,  but  it  must  be  remembered  that  it  is  only 
charged  with  air  at  atmospheric  pressure.  With  a  lift,  say,  300 
feet,  the  pressure  per  square  inch  would  be  roughly  150  Ibs.,  and 
immediately  the  pump  starts  to  work,  the  water  will  compress 
the  air  in  the  air  chamber  with  this  pressure,  and  necessarily 
reduce  its  bulk;  therefore  instead  of  having,  say,  10  cubic  feet 
of  air  in  the  chamber,  the  volume  under  the  above  load  is 
reduced  to  i  cubic  foot.  It  is  also  suggested  that  the  air  enters 
into  mechanical  combination  with  the  water  under  this  heavy 
pressure,  just  in  the  same  way  as  it  does  in  mineral  waters,  and 
that,  sooner  or  later,  unless  it  is  attended  to,  the  air  chamber 
gets  completely  filled  with  water. 
Neglect  of  counteracting  these  causes  has  in  many  cases  made 
air  vessels  quite  useless,  and  has  given  them  a  bad  name,  but  with 
proper  attention  they  will  do  everything  that  is  claimed  for  them. 
They  never  work  well,  unless  means  are  adopted  to  keep  them 
properly  charged  with  air,  and  the  air  so  introduced  should  be 
above  atmospheric  pressure.  The  better  plan,  although  it  entails 
a  little  expense,  is  to  employ  a  small  force  pump,  worked  by  the 
piston-rod  of  the  pump,  which  delivers  a  small  quantity  of  air  into the  air  vessel  with  each  stroke. 
Condensing  Arrangements. — Where  the  diameter  of  the 
steam  end  is  not  double  that  of  the  water  end,  the  exhaust  steam 
can  be  easily  got  rid  of  in  several  ways.  If  the  steam  end  is 
large,  and  the  pump  end  small,  the  volume  of  exhaust  steam  is  so 
great  that  the  water  is  heated  too  much.  Often  the  exhaust  is 
turned  into  the  suction  pipes  simply  with 
ordinary  pipe  connections ;  but  a  far  more 
successful  arrangement  is  Hoi  man's  conden- ser, as  applied  by  Messrs.  Tangyes  to  their 
steam  pumps  (Fig.  376).  A  vacuum  of  from 
8  to  10  Ibs.  is  easily  obtained,  and  back 
pressure  removed.  The  apparatus  consists 
of  one  or  more  double-beat  valves,  and  the steam  is  introduced  in  annular  streams  to 
meet  the  suction  water  passing  to  the  pump. 
A  condenser,  acting  in  a  very  similar 
manner,  is  made  by  Messrs.  Hayward,  Tyler 
<fe  Co.  The  aim  of  this  appliance  is  to  dis- 
tribute the  steam  as  much  as  possible  in 
order  that  a  large  surface  may  be  operated 
upon,  and  the  condensation  be  correspondingly  rapid.  Where 
such  appliances  are  used  some  valve  has  to  be  introduced, 
to  allow  the  exhaust  steam  to  be  turned  into  the  atmosphere 
FIG.  376. 

--- Page Break ---
3o4  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
whenever  required.  When  the  pump  is  first  started,  before  the 
pipes  are  thoroughly  filled  with  water,  some  such  device  is  abso- 
lutely necessary.  Any  ordinary  two-way  valve  will  perform  the 
operation. 
Calculations  as  to  the  Size  of  Pumps. — The  size  of  a 
pump  to  perform  a  certain  amount  of  work  is  easily  obtained  by 
a  simple  method  of  reasoning.  As  an  illustration  of  how  such 
is  done  an  actual  example  is  given.  At  a  colliery  under  the  author's charge,  water  was  raised  by  winding  it  in  a  tank ;  and  by  measure- ment it  was  found  that,  after  allowing  for  slip,  10,000  galls,  an 
hour  had  to  be  dealt  with,  or  166  galls,  per  minute.  The  first 
point  to  decide  is  the  piston  speed  ;  many  authorities  say  that  this 
may  be  from  200  to  300  feet  per  minute.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
such  velocity  can  be  used,  but  no  pump  makers,  who,  after  all, 
are  the  best  judges  of  the  capacities  of  the  machines,  would 
recommend  such  speed  for  regular  working.  By  common  consent, 
a  good  and  safe  velocity  may  be  taken  at  100  ft.  per  minute.  If 
1 66  galls,  have  to  be  delivered  every  minute,  and  the  piston 
speed  be  100  ft.,  1.66,  or,  say,  1.7  galls,  will  be  delivered  for  each 
foot  the  pump  works,  if  it  is  a  double-acting  one. 
One  gallon  of  water  contains  277.25  cubic  inches,  therefore 
1.7  gall,  x  277.25  =  471.325  cubic  inches  of  water  have  to  be 
delivered  for  each  foot  the  pump  works. 
is  the  area  in  sq.  inches  of  the  required  water  column. 
If  the  piston-rod  of  the  pump  is  put  at  3  in.  diameter,  its  area will  be  7.068  in.,  and  this  added  to  the  area  of  the  water  column 
makes  the  area  of  the  required  plunger  to  be  : — 
39.277  +  7.068  =  46.345  sq.  in. 
.%  diameter  of  required  plunger     / 1^345.  =  7.68  in. 
V    -7854 
The  height  to  which  water  had  to  be  lifted  was  400  ft. ;  the 
pressure  per  sq.  in.  will,  therefore,  be  : — 
400  x  .433  =  173.2  Ibs.  .'.  total  pressure =39.277*  x  173.2  =  6802.6  Ibs. 
The  steam  pressure  available  was  60  Ibs.  per  sq.  in.  The  area 
of  the  steam  cylinder,  therefore,  should  be  :— 
*  The  pressure  only  acts  on  that  part  of  the  plunger  surrounding  the 
piston-rod,  not  on  the  rod  itself. 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 305 
One  half  of  this  area  should  be  added  for  frictional  resistance, 
&c.,  making  the  area  170.07  sq.  in. 
.*.  diameter  of  steam  cylinder  =     /-^ao7  =  14.743  in» 
V    -7854 or  practically  1 5  inches. 
From  these  results  a  pump  was  put  to  work,  having  a  steam 
cylinder  16  in.  diameter,  and  7^  in.  rams,  and  has  dealt  with  the 
quantity  of  water  it  was  intended  for. 
In  determining  the  quantity  of  water  a  pump  of  a  given  size  will 
deliver,  the  converse  of  the  preceding  calculations  can  easily  be 
made.  When  the  piston  speed  is  known,  all  that  has  to  be  done 
is  to  find  the  area  of  the  rams,  remembering  that  the  area  of  the 
piston-rods  must  be  taken  out,  as  the  water  cannot  occupy  the 
space  that  they  take  up  in  the  pump  chamber. 
The  quantity  so  found  is  the  theoretical  one,  but  is  never  reached 
in  practice,  owing  to  the  occurrence  of  what  is  known  as  "  slip." Neither  the  suction  nor  delivery  valves  can  be  instantaneously 
opened  or  closed,  and,  as  a  result,  the  piston  does  not  discharge  its 
theoretical  volume  at  each  stroke ;  a  certain  quantity  is  forced 
back  into  the  suction  during  the  delivery  stroke,  and  another 
quantity  escapes  back  into  the  pump-chamber  on  the  return 
stroke.  The  amount  depends  entirely  on  whether  the  pump  is  in 
emcient  working  order  or  not.  With  the  best  constructed  varieties 
in  good  order,  the  loss  or  slip  will  not  amount  to  more  than  2  per 
cent.,  but  it  may  increase  from  that  to  anything  if  the  valves  are 
worn,  or  if  an  obstruction  gets  beneath  them  and  prevents  their 
closing. 
Effect  of  Acid  Water.  —  Water  containing  sulphates  and 
chlorides  has  a  most  injurious  effect  on  the  working  parts  of 
pumps.  Even  when  present  in  small  quantities  their  influence 
soon  makes  the  working  parts  rough,  which  either  cuts  away  the 
bucket  leathers  or  grooves  the  plungers.  Free  sulphuric  and 
hydrochloric  acids  are  contained  in  many  mine  waters,  and  are 
specially  objectionable.  To  prevent  this  action  the  working  parts 
are  generally  lined  with  gun-metal  with  satisfactory  results.  It 
is  expensive,  but  there  is  no  other  alternative. 
Draining  Deep  Workings. — If  the  shaft  is  at  the  lowest 
point  the  water  may  easily  be  conveyed  from  the  working  places 
to  it  and  raised  to  the  surface,  but  if  the  shaft  is  on  a  higher  level 
than  the  workings  the  problem  becomes  a  far  more  difficult  one. 
With  small  quantities,  the  common  way  is  to  load  the  water  into 
special  tubs  and  convey  them  to  the  shaft  in  the  same  manner  as 
the  mineral,  or  hand-pumps  can  be  employed.  Both  of  these 
operations  are  very  costly. 
If  the  height  to  which  the  water  has  to  be  lifted  is  not  very 
great,  large  quantities  can  be  removed  from  deep  workings  by  the 

--- Page Break ---
306 
TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
-- 
-3L.--US 
use  of  a  syphon,  the  principle  of  which  is  shown  in  Fig.  377.  If 
the  tube,  a  b  c,  is  filled  with  water  and  open  at  both  ends,  the 
water  naturally  falls  out  of  the  end,  c,  which  is  the  lowest,  and creates  a  vacuum  at  the 
FIG.  377.  point,  b.     Now  if  the  end, 
a,  be  connected  with  a 
reservoir  of  water  the  pres- 
sure of  the  atmosphere  at 
that  point  will  force  water 
along  a  b  to  fill  the  vacuum, and  a  constant  flow  will 
pass  from  a  to  c  under certain  conditions.  One 
condition  is  that  the  ver- 
tical height  from  a  to  5,  or  the  height  A,  must  not  be  more 
than  that  which  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  will  supply. 
This  theoretical  height  is  never  reached,  owing  to  the  friction 
of  the  water  in  the  pipes  and  the  resistance  caused  by  the 
introduction  of  certain  valves  which  are  necessary  for  the  suc- 
cessful working  of  the  syphon.  Practice  proves  that  it  cannot 
with  safety  be  more  than  27  ft.  The  other  condition  is  that 
the  discharge  orifice  must  be  lower  than  the  inlet ;  it  is  also 
advisable  that  the  gradient  should  be  as  uniform  as  possible,  or  air 
will  collect  in  the  bend,  and  the  syphon  cease  to  work.  Indeed, 
where  the  pipes  are  undulating,  as  they  sometimes  have  to  be, 
discharge  cocks  must  be  placed  at  each  bend  in  order  that  the  pipes 
can  be  always  freed  from  air.  The  discharge  orifice  should  be  as 
far  below  the  inlet  as  is  possible,  for  the  velocity  of  efflux  is 
represented  by  the  pressure  B — A. 
Where  pumps  are  used,  a  small  pipe  should  be  led  from  the 
rising  main  into  the  syphon  to  allow  water  to  be  taken  out  and  the 
syphon  filled,  if  any  leakage  has  taken  place.  A  clack  of  a  very 
light  construction  should  be  fixed  at  the  inlet  end  to  prevent  the 
water  flowing  out  when  not  at  work,  and  a  tap  should  also  be 
introduced  in  the  drop-leg  to  regulate  the  flow. 
If  the  height  exceeds  27  ft.  other  means  have  to  be  \dopted, the  commonest  of  which  is  that  where  horses  are  used,  a  throw- 
pump  being  worked  by  bevel  gearing.  This  is,  perhaps,  the  most 
arduous  work  to  which  horses  can  be  put,  and  they  are  unable  to 
remain  at  it  for  any  length  of  time ;  it  is  also  slow  and  costly. 
The  horses  are  soon  worn  out,  and  something  else  must  be  employed. 
If  power  transmitted  by  wire  ropes  passes  the  place  where  the 
pumps  are  situated,  or  any  point  near,  it  becomes  a  very  simple 
matter  to  carry  an  off-shoot  to  a  pulley,  which  then  takes  the 
place  of  a  horse.  The  endless  rope  system  is  particularly  suitable 
for  such  arrangement.  A  clutch  can  be  fixed  to  the  pump,  which 
can  be  set  to  work  whenever  required. 
Where  compressed  air  is  available,  pumps  can  be  driven  by  it 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING. 
3°7 
readily  and  cheaply ;  several  are  designed  which  work  very  satis- 
factorily with  such  a  power,  and  are  capable  of  dealing  with  large 
quantities  of  water. 
Hydraulic  Power. — Where  pumping  appliances  are  fixed  in 
the  shaft,  hydraulic  engines  are  often  employed  to  pump  from 
deep  workings  into  the  sump,  the  power  to  drive  them  being 
obtained  from  the  rising  main  of  the  pumps.  Their  action  depends 
on  the  principle  that  a  small  quantity  under  heavy  pressure  is 
equal  to  a  large  quantity  at  a  small  pressure,  or  having  a  head  of 
water  of  600  or  700  feet  in  the  rising  main,  a  small  quantity  of 
FIG.  378. 
this  can  be  conveyed  to  the  deep,  and  lift  a  larger  quantity  of  water 
into  the  sump  for  a  height  considerably  less. 
A  common  construction  of  such  engine  is  employed  at  Tees 
Hetton  Colliery,  Durham,  *  and  is  shown  at  Fig.  378.  It  consists 
•of  a  motor  cylinder  of  special  design,  provided  with  controlling 
valves,  and  connected  through  a  strong  base  plate  to  the  pump,  which 
is  of  the  ordinary  type.  The  piston  of  the  motor  cylinder,  a,  is  con- 
nected direct  to  the  piston  of  the  pump,  c,  and  the  latter  is  provided 
with  a  cross-head,  d,  which  serves  to  actuate  the  tappets  on  the 
tappet-rod,  e.  The  small  auxiliary  valve,  /,  is  operated  by  the 
tappet-rod,  e,  through  the  lever  and  valve  rod,  g,  thus  admitting  the 
drive  water  to  either  end  of  the  piston,  h,  which,  in  its  turn,  en- 
gages the  main  slide  valve,  j,  and  admits  drive  water  to  the  motor 
piston,  k.  The  latter  accordingly  makes  its  stroke  until  arriving 
at  the  opposite  tappet,  when  the  motion  is  reversed.  The  exhaust 
water  from  the  motor  cylinder  is  discharged  on  the  upper  side  of 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud  xi.  132. 

--- Page Break ---
308 
TEXT  BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  379- 
the  delivery  valves  in  the  pump,  and  passes  away  to  the  main 
pumping  engine.  The  controlling  valves  of  the  motor  cylinder 
are  composed  of  lignum-vitse,  as  this  wood  requires  no  further 
lubrication  than  is  afforded  by  the  water.  The  pressure  on  the 
motor  piston  of  the  pump  was  roughly  230  Ibs.  per  sq.  in.,  and 
by  means  of  this  pressure,  7000  galls,  per  hour  were  forced  to  a 
height  of  156  feet. 
Moore's  Arrangement.* — An  hydraulic  engine  of  a  totally  differ- ent class  is  that  designed  by  Mr.  Joseph  Moore,  where  two 
columns  of  water  are  substi- 
tuted for  the  ordinary  solid 
rods  connecting  the  steam- 
engine  to  the  pump.  The action  will  best  be  seen  from 
the  diagrammatic  represen- 
tation (Fig.  379).  A  cylinder,. 
a  by  at  the  surface,  having  a 
piston  p  is  driven  in  the 
ordinary  way  by  a  steam 
engine,  and  each  end  of  this 
piston  is  connected  to  each 
end  of  a  smaller  cylinder, 
c  d,  situated  underground, 
having  a  piston,  q,  and  con- 
nected through  a  piston-rod to  an  ordinary  double  acting 
pump.  The  pipes  and  the 
cylinders  are  all  full  of  water. When  the  surface  piston  p 
moves  from  a  towards  b,  water  is  forced  down  the  pipe  e  and 
moves  over  the  piston  q  towards  d ;  when  the  piston  p  reverses 
its  motion,  the  piston  q  is  also  reversed. 
The  success  of  the  appliance  is  due  to  an  arrangement  whereby 
the  stroke  of  the  rams  is  adjusted,  as  without  some  such  appliance, 
should  there  be  any  leakage  in  one  of  the  power  pipes,  the 
plunger  at  the  bottom  would  make  a  shorter  stroke  in  one 
direction  than  in  the  other,  and  would  work  towards  the  end,  and, 
unless  there  were  some  regulator,  knock  off  the  cylinder  cover. 
It  will  be  noticed  that  the  pipe  g  h  connects  the  two  power 
pipes  e  and/*.  In  this  pipe  are  two  valves,  j  and  &,  opening  in opposite  directions,  the  former  closing  against  pressure  from 
pipe  e,  and  the  latter  against  pressure  from  f.  These  valves  are 
opened  by  tappets,  m  and  I,  set  apart  a  few  inches  more  than  the 
length  of  the  stroke.  If  the  pipe  e  leaks,  the  piston  q  will  not 
make  as  long  a  stroke  as  it  should  do,  and  stops  short  of  d.  In 
the  return  stroke,  when  the  piston  q  has  travelled  as  far  as  it 
*  Min.  Inst.  Scot.  xii.  168. 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING.  309 
safely  should  do,  and  before  the  piston  p  on  the  surface  has  com- 
pleted its  stroke,  the  projection  *  catches  the  tappet  I  and  opens 
the  valve  k.  The  pressure  of  water  in  /  is  now  free  to  lift  the 
valve  j,  and  to  run  into  e,  immediately  equalising  the  pressure  on 
both  sides  of  the  piston  q  and  stopping  it.  The  water  displaced 
by  the  remaining  part  of  the  stroke  of  the  piston  p,  passes 
through  the  valves  from  one  power  pipe  to  the  other. 
The  power  pipes  are  kept  charged  from  a  tank  placed  above 
the  level  of  the  highest  point.  There  is  a  valve  opening  inwards 
on  each  of  them,  and  when  the  piston  p  makes  the  return  stroke, 
enough  water  is  sucked  in  to  make  up  any  leakage.  A  con- 
siderable number  of  these  engines  are  at  work,  and  it  is  stated 
that  diagrams  taken  from  one  working  at  the  Shotts  Iron  Co.'s Collieries,  Edinburghshire,  show  that  66.26  per  cent,  of  the  work 
shown  in  the  indicator  diagram  of  the  steam-engine  is  got  out  of the  pump. 
Electricity. — The  use  of  electricity  in  mines  was  first  called 
into  requisition  for  pumping,  and  by  far  the  larger  number  of 
installations  are  still  applied  to  such  a  purpose.  An  electric 
motor  can  be  readily  connected  to  a  pump,  either  by  gearing  or 
belts.  The  convenience  of  electricity  is  such  that  in  all  installa- 
tions of  the  last  few  years,  scarcely  anything  else  has  been 
employed  in  pumping  from  deep  workings.  Innumerable  instances 
could  be  quoted  of  its  success,  but  for  our  purpose  we  may  best 
refer  to  the  first  pumping  plant  and  its  additions,  which  were  put 
down  by  Mr.  Brain,  at  Trafalgar  Colliery,  Gloucestershire.*  This commenced  working  in  December  1882,  and  attained  such  success 
that  three  additional  plants  were  erected  in  May  1887,  arw^  are 
now  doing  the  larger  part  of  the  underground  pumping. 
The  last  installation  consists  of  a  double  throw  9  in.  plunger,  by 
10  in.  stroke,  situated  2220  yards  from  the  generator,  and  1650 
yards  from  the  bottom  of  the  shaft ;  the  pipe  main  is  7  in.  in 
diameter,  and  at  a  maximum  speed  of  25  strokes,  the  pump  lifts 
1 20  gallons  per  minute,  300  ft.  high.  The  current  is  conveyed  to 
the  motor  by  a  copper  conductor  consisting  of  -J-J-  wire,  insulated and  carried  on  earthenware  cups.  The  E.  M.  P.  is  320  volts,  and 
the  current  required  is  43  amperes.  The  cost  of  the  engine  and 
the  electrical  plant  was  ^644 ;  the  weekly  cost  for  maintenance, 
including  15  per  cent,  for  depreciation  and  interest  on  capital,  is 
£7  175.  or  .oo2d.  per  horse  power  per  hour.  The  efficiency 
attained  throughout  was  only  35  per  cent.,  but  the  engine,  which 
is  an  old  one,  loses  6.49  horse  power,  or  22  per  cent,  alone; 
excluding  loss  in  the  engine  the  efficiency  is  45  per  cent. 
With  the  aid  of  accumulators,  or  secondary  batteries,  in  which 
the  current  of  electricity  can  be  stored  and  carried  about,  small 
quantities  of  water  at  inaccessible  points  can  be,  and  have  been, 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xi.  48. 

--- Page Break ---
3*0 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
dealt  with  in  mines.  These  accumulators  can  be  placed  on  a 
carriage  and  taken  anywhere  required.  A  small  motor  and  pump 
on  a  second  carriage  are  also  arranged,  and  accompany  the accumulators. 
Pulsometer. — When  describing  the  methods  of  dealing  with 
water  during  sinking,  reference  was  made  to  the  pulsometer, 
which  is  also  largely  employed  for  draining  deep  workings.  It 
consumes  a  great  deal  of  steam,  but  its  advantage  is  that  it  will 
pump  nearly  everything  that  will  go  through  the  valves.  No 
matter  how  gritty  or  dirty  the  water  is,  it  works  nearly  as  well 
as  if  it  were  quite  clean.  Its  peculiarity  consists  in  there  not 
being  any  steam  cylinder, 
piston,  piston-rods,  or bucket,  as  is  usual  in  the 
ordinary  form  of  pump. 
Its  construction  is  shown 
in  Fig.  380.  It  consists* of  two  pear-shaped  water chambers,  a  a,  the  air 
chamber,  b,  the  suction 
passage,  c,  and  the  de- livery passages,  d  d, which  communicate  with 
the  discharge  pipe.  Steam is  admitted  to  either  of 
the  chambers,  a,  through 
the  pipe,  e,  but  the  direc- tion is  controlled  by  a  ball- 
valve,  /,  which  is  capable 
of  oscillating,  and  closes 
each  passage  alternately ; 
g  g  are  the  suction- valves, which  are  of  the  ordinary 
flap  form,  and  are  pre- vented going  too  far  by 
the  stops,  h  h.  It  should 
be  especially  noticed  that the  delivery  passages,  d  d, 
commence  in  each  of  the 
water  chambers  just  above  the  suction-valves. 
The  action  of  the  apparatus  is  as  follows : — When  the  two chambers,  a  a,  are  full  of  water,  if  steam  be  admitted  through 
the  opening,  e,  it  will  pass  into  that  chamber  which  is  not 
closed  by  the  ball-valve,  /,  and  rapidly  depressing  the  water 
without  causing  any  agitation,  will  force  it  through  the  delivery 
chamber,  d,  into  the  rising  main.  This  action  continues 
So.  Wales  Inst.  xi.  85. 

--- Page Break ---
PUMPING.  311 
until  the  water  is  depressed  to  the  top  of  the  passage,  d,  when 
the  steam  attempts  to  rush  through  this  opening,  and  in  doing 
so  violently  agitates  the  surface  of  the  water.  Immediately  this 
takes  place,  instant  condensation  follows,  and  a  vacuum  is  pro- 
duced in  the  chamber.  This  sucks  over  the  ball- valve,  and 
diverts  the  live  steam  into  the  other  chamber,  depressing  in  turn 
the  water  there.  While  this  is  going  on  the  vacuum  in  the 
first  chamber  sucks  up  the  water  through  the  pipe,  c,  and  lifts 
the  suction-valve,  g.  When  condensation  takes  place  in  the second  chamber,  as  it  will  do  as  soon  as  the  water  is  lowered  to 
the  top  of  the  discharge  orifice,  d,  the  ball-valve  is  again  sucked 
over,  and  live  steam  diverted  into  the  first  chamber.  The  suction- 
valve  then  closes,  and  the  water  is  discharged  as  before ;  first  one 
chamber  and  then  the  other  is  filled  and  emptied. 
Dams. — It  is  often  necessary  to  put  in  stoppings,  called  "  dams," to  prevent  water  passing  from  one  part  of  the  mine  to  another. 
On  the  Continent  wooden  dams  are  most  in  favour,  while  in  this 
country  masonry  is  generally  employed.  The  advantages  of  the 
former  are  that  if  the  wood  is  perfectly  dry  when  put  in,  the 
moisture  expands  it  and  makes  the  structure  more  water-tight, and  any  movement  in  the  surrounding  strata  is  not  so  liable 
to  dislodge  or  crack  the  wooden  dam,  as  it  is  a  masonry  one. 
Owing,  however,  to  the  convenience  and  ease  with  which 
bricks  can  be  obtained  and  put  in  position,  their  use  is 
becoming  common,  even  in  districts  where  wood  was  formerly 
employed. 
In  putting  in  permanent  dams  the  first  thing  is  to  select  some 
spot  where  the  strata  is  of  an  impervious  character  and  quite 
free  from  cracks.  Dams  are  invariably  wedge-shaped,  with  the broader  end  towards  the  pressure.  If  this  be  heavy,  two  or  three 
wedges  are  built,  one  against  the  other.  In  preparing  the  ground, 
nothing  but  the  pick  and  chisel  should  be  employed ;  the  sides, 
floor,  and  roof  are  carefully  dressed  to  the  required  shape,  and 
covered  with  Portland  or  other  cement,  to  obtain  a  hard  and 
proper  surface  to  receive  the  masonry.  Good  hard  burnt  bricks 
should  be  employed,  and  the  lime  should  be  of  an  hydraulic character. 
To  pass  the  water  from  one  side  to  the  other  while  building  is 
going  on,  a  pipe  is  invariably  built  through  the  lower  part  of  the 
dam,  this  being  fitted  with  a  valve  at  one  end,  which  can  be 
closed  when  the  work  is  finished.  A  second  pipe  of  smaller 
dimensions  is  also  built  through  the  dam  near  the  top,  and  its 
inlet  end  carried  into  a  cavity  in  the  roof,  the  object  of  this  being to  ensure  the  removal  of  the  last  trace  of  air  from  behind  the 
dam,  which  is  a  point  of  the  greatest  importance.  The  water side  of  the  dam  is  often  covered  with  either  tarred  sheets  or  well 
puddled  clay,  either  of  which  will  preserve  it,  and  prevent  leakage should  it  become  much  cracked. 

--- Page Break ---
312       TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter  : — 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT. :  Some  Practical  Eesults  of  Hydraulic  Pumping,  D.  John- 
stone,  iii,  157  and  vi.  112  ;  On  the  Sucking  Power  of  the  Common  Pump 
and  of  some  of  the  Shocks  which  occur  in  Pumping,  J.  McCreath, 
iv.  239;  On  an  Improved  Arrangement  for  Working  Underground 
Pumps  by  means  of  Hydraulic  Pressure,  Robert  T.  Moore,  v.  290 
and  xii.  168;  Air  Vessels,  Dugald  Baird,  x.  251 ;  Air  Vessels,  Allan 
Andrews,  xi.  113. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Memoire  sur  la  nouvelle  machine  d'epuisement  inUrieure  de 
Montceau~les -mines,  M.  Audemar  (2e  Serie),  i.  437 ;  Machines 
d'epuisement  a,  I' Exposition  de  Paris  (1878),  Ch.  Buisson  (2°  Serie), viii.  801  ;  Note  sur  le  nouveau  balancier  dequilibre  de  la  pompe  du 
putts  de  I'Ondaine,  M.  Griot  (3°  Serie),  iii.  349. 
SO.  WALES  INST. :  Pumping  Arrangements  at  the  Badstock  Collieries,  &c., 
J.  McMurtrie,  xi.  66 ;  A  /Short  Description  of  the  Pulsometer  and 
Hydrotrope,  Hort.  Huxham,  xi.  85. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Draining  and  Ventilating,  &c.t  at  Staveley  Collieries,  Jos. Humble,  ix.  31. 
AMEB.  INST.  M.E. :  The  Worthington  Compound  Duplex  Pressure  Pump, 
E.  W.  Hunt,  iv.  317  ;  Pumping  Engines,  John  Birkinbine,  v.  455. 
FED.  INST.  :  Parker  &  Weston's  Pump  for  CoUiery  Purposes,  G.  B.  Walker, ii.  II  :   Pumping  Appliances   at  Eltringham  CoUiery,  J.  K.  Guthrie, 
"•    457  )    Notes  on  an  Electric   Transmission  Plant  at  East   Howie 
Colliery,  H.  Palmer,  iii.  271  ;   The  Pumping  Appliances  used  in  the 
Sinking  Operations  at  Cadeby  New  Winning,  W.  Henry  Chambers,  iii. 
5I3- N.  E.  I :  A  Direct  Acting  Engine  at  Towneley  Colliery,  J.  B.  Simpson,  xv.  157  ; 
On  the  duty  of  Cornish  and  other  Pumping  Engines  for  Mines,  J.  B. 
Simpson,  xix.  201  ;  The  Difference  between  the  Statical  and  Dynamical 
Pressure  of  Water  Columns  in  Pumps,  E.  Bainbridge,  xxi.  49. 
BRIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD. :  Variation  of  Pressure  in  Pumps,  H.  F.  Bulman, 
iii.  107  and  viii.  138  ;  Notes  on  the  Erection  of  a  Large  Earn  Pump, 
E.  F.  Melly,  viii.  40 ;  Electricity  applied  to  Mining,  F.  Brain,  xi.  48  ; 
Hydraulic  Pawning,  W.  Walker,  Jun  ,  xi.  132;  Electrical  Pumpinn 
Plant  at  South  Pontop  Colliery,  J.  R.  Ritson,  xiv.  82  ;  Some  Methods 
of  Draining  Dip  Workings,  H.  F.  Bulman,  xv.  46. 

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTEE  XL 
VENTILATION. 
Importance. — It  is  most  important  that  mines  should  be 
properly  ventilated.  All  coals  give  off,  to  a  more  or  less  greater 
extent,  a  quantity  of  deleterious  gases,  which  have  an  injurious 
effect  on  the  human  life,  even  if  they  are  not  explosive.  In  ad- 
dition the  breathing  of  men  and  of  other  animals,  and  the  burning 
of  illuminants,  render  air  impure.  It,  therefore,  becomes  necessary 
that  a  vigorous  current  of  cool,  fresh  air  should  be  circulated 
through  the  galleries  and  the  working-places;  indeed,  General 
Rule  I.  of  the  Mines'  Regulation  Act,  1887,  makes  such  a  current compulsory,  but  even  if  such  were  not  so,  it  really  pays  to  have 
good  ventilation,  as  men  are  not  only  capable  of  doing  a  greater 
quantity  of  work,  but  they  do  it  with  greater  comfort  and  are  far more  contented. 
The  quantity  of  air  required  in  a  given  mine  depends  prin- 
cipally on  the  volume  of  gases  produced  by  the  coal.  The  quantity 
of  gas  given  off  does  not  always  increase  as  the  workings  become 
more  extensive,  as  it  principally  depends  on  the  area  of  freshly 
exposed  coal  surface.  If  bord  and  pillar  working  be  adopted,  a 
quantity  of  gas  will  be  given  off  while  the  exploring  work  is 
being  done,  but  as  the  pillars  are  large  blocks  of  coal,  up  to  50 
yards  square  or  more,  the  comparatively  narrow  (2  to  5  yards) 
places  driven  to  form  the  pillars,  cannot  liberate  the  whole  of 
the  gas.  When  the  second  or  broken  workings  are  proceeding, 
wider  places  are  driven  and  the  coal  is  got  more  easily,  so  that 
more  coal  is  being  worked  per  man  per  shift,  and  more  gas  is 
liberated.  With  long  wall  working,  as  the  workings  get  more 
extensive,  a  greater  area  of  face  is  opened  out,  and  consequently 
more  gas  will  be  given  off.  The  best  plan  is,  therefore,  to  make 
the  amount  of  air  proportionate  to  the  output  and  to  increase 
the  current,  if  exploratory  work  is  proceeding.  It  is  often 
stated  that  the  amount  of  air  passing  should  be  regulated  by 
the  number  of  men  employed.  Of  course,  if  the  output  increases, 
the  number  of  men  generally  increases  also,  but  the  better  plan  is 
to  be  guided  by  the  output,  which  is  the  practice  of  the  Borinage 
district  of  Belgium,  which  is,  probably,  the  most  fiery  in  the  world. 

--- Page Break ---
3i4  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Gases  met  with  in  Mines. — Atmospheric  air  in  its  pure 
state  is  a  mixture  of  two  gases,  nitrogen  and  oxygen,  but,  as 
generally  found  in  Nature,  it  contains  small  quantities  of  another 
gas,  carbonic  acid,  and  of  aqueous  vapour.  The  oxygen  is  the 
life-supporting  element,  the  nitrogen  acting  simply  as  a  diluting 
agent.  Dry  air  is  composed  of  79  per  cent,  by  volume  of  nitrogen 
gas  and  21  per  cent,  of  oxygen.*  In  breathing,  men  and  other 
animals  take  air  into  their  lungs,  and  part  of  the  oxygen  com- 
bines with  carbon,  forming  carbonic  acid,  whilst  the  nitrogen  is 
unaltered  ;  the  same  result  follows  the  burning  of  lights. 
Carbonic  Acid  is  known  to  the  miner  as  black-,  or  choke-damp, 
or  stythe.  Its  presence  is  common,  and  is  due  to  the  combustion  of 
illuminants,  respiration  of  men  and  horses,  combustion  of  blasting 
explosives,  decomposition  of  pit  timber,  and  often  exudation  from 
the  coal.  It  is  chemically  composed  of  carbon  and  oxygen ;  its 
symbol  is  C02,  and  it  has  a  specific  gravity  of  1.53.  As  it  is  con- siderably heavier  than  air,  it  tends  to  occupy  the  lowest  part  of 
the  mine.  In  its  pure  state  it  has  no  colour,  but  has  a  peculiar 
sharp,  but  not  sour,  odour  and  taste.  Its  presence  is  manifested 
by  its  influence  on  the  flame  of  a  candle,  as  it  will  not  support 
combustion.  Its  effect  on  human  life  is  dependent  upon  the  pro- 
portion present.  Over  3  per  cent,  produces  sleepiness,  while  with 
10  per  cent,  the  motion  of  the  heart  is  temporarily  suspended. 
On  the  Continent,  outbursts  of  carbonic  acid  are  frequent,  and 
are  in  every  respect  similar  to  those  of  fire-damp.  The  blowers  are 
generally  found  in  the  vicinity  of  faults.  At  Toulane  Pit,  Roche- belle,  one  blower  filled  500,000  cubic  feet  of  workings  in  less  than 
ten  minutes,  and  disengaged  over  400  tons  of  coal. 
Carbonic  Oxide  is  variously  known  as  carbon  monoxide  and 
white-damp.  Its  chemical  symbol  is  CO  and  specific  gravity  0.97. 
Luckily  its  presence  is  much  less  frequent  in  mines  than  black- damp,  as  it  is  far  more  poisonous  than  that  gas.  As  little  as  i 
per  cent,  produces  giddiness  and  faintness,  while  over  2  per 
cent,  may  cause  death.  Indeed,  J  per  cent,  breathed  for  any 
length  of  time  is  fatal.  Carbonic  oxide  is  known  by  its  sweet  and 
delicate  odour  and  deadly  results.  Candles  burn  well  in  this  gas, 
if  anything,  a  little  brighter,  although  their  flame  is  not  elon- 
gated until  12  J  per  cent,  is  present.  It  is  produced  by  imperfect 
combustion,  and  especially  by  spontaneous  ignition. 
Sulphuretted  Hydrogen  is  not  found  in  large  quantities.  Its 
chemical  symbol  is  SH2,and  specific  gravity  1.17.  It  arises  from 
the  decomposition  of  timber  in  water  containing  sulphates  in 
solution,  or,  to  a  smaller  extent,  from  blasting,  especially  if  inferior 
cheap  gunpowder  is  employed.  It  has  an  injurious  effect  on  life, 
does  not  support  combustion,  and  burns  with  a  blue  flame.  Its 
presence  is  immediately  detected  by  a  characteristic  and  offensive smell. 
*  A  table  is  given  at  the  end  of  the  chapter  showing  the  specific 
gravities,  molecular  weights,  &c.,  of  the  gases  met  with  in  mines. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  315 
Light  Carburetted  Hydrogen. — This  gas,  known  as  fire-damp,  is the  one  commonly  found  in  mines,  and  to  which  explosions  are 
principally  due.  It  consists,  in  the  pure  state,  of  carbcn  and 
hydrogen,  its  symbol  being  OH4  and  specific  gravity  0.559.  The 
fire-damp  of  the  miner  is,  more  correctly  speaking,  a  mixture  of 
several  gases,  the  largest  proportion  being  carburetted  hydrogen. 
Other  hydrocarbons,  with  hydrogen,  carbonic  oxide,  oxygen,  and 
nitrogen,  are  generally  present,  the  quantities  of  such  gases  vary- ing considerably  in  almost  every  colliery,  and  often  in  different 
districts  of  the  same  pit. 
The  coal  itself  is  the  principal  reservoir  of  the  gas,  where  it  is 
held  in  the  pores  or  cells  in  a  state  of  more  or  less  high  tension. 
Different  gases  exuded  from  the  coal  have  been  described  in 
Chapter  II., where  the  phenomenon  of  "  blowers  "  was  also  referred to.  Blowers  are  a  more  or  less  steady  discharge  of  gases  from  the 
coal,  continuing  for  a  long  time.  Where  this  discharge  is  a 
violent  and  sudden  one  of  large  quantity,  only  continuing  a  short 
time,  it  is  known  as  an  "  outburst." Carburetted  hydrogen  is  colourless,  and  when  pure  is  odourless, 
while  fire-damp  is  often  detected  by  its  smell.  This  gas,  if 
breathed  in  a  pure  state,  would  soon  cause  death;  it  quickly 
extinguishes  flame  or  lamps  if  undiluted  by  air.  When  3  to 
4  per  cent,  is  present  in  air,  the  gas  can  easily  be  detected  by 
the  elongation  of  the  flame  in  a  safety  lamp.  If  6  per  cent,  be 
present  the  flame  is  not  only  elongated,  but  a  blue  halo,  or  cap, 
appears  above  it.  This  halo  is  often  of  a  brown  colour,  produced 
by  the  presence  of  carbonic  acid  gas  with  the  fire-damp.  With  7  to 
8  per  cent,  the  mixture  becomes  explosive,  and  flame  is  propagated 
through  the  contents  of  the  lamp;  with  10  to  12  per  cent,  the 
propagation  is  instantaneous  and  the  explosion  attains  its  maxi- 
mum amount ;  with  20  per  cent,  the  mixture  no  longer  explodes, 
but  instantly  puts  out  any  flame  that  may  be  brought  into  it. 
After-damp. — Under  this  head  is  included  all  the  products 
resulting  from  the  ignition  of  an  explosive  mixture.  When  fire- 
damp is  exploded,  the  carbon  combines  with  the  oxygen  in  the 
air,  and  forms  carbonic  acid,  while  hydrogen  also  combines  with 
oxygen  and  forms  aqueous  vapour,  leaving  a  large  amount  of 
free  nitrogen  without  the  corresponding  amount  of  oxygen. 
Carbonic  oxide  is  generally  present  in  after-damp,  and  is  always 
formed  during  the  combustion  of  every  explosive  mixture  con- 
taining carburetted  hydrogen  in  which  the  proportion  of  air  is 
less  than  9.5  parts.  Messrs.  Atkinson*  give  an  analysis  of  the 
after-damp  gases  of  the  Usworth  explosion  in  1885.  The  sample was  taken  from  between  two  stoppings  erected  on  the  fifth  and 
seventh  days  after  the  explosion,  and  contained  2.48  per  cent,  of 
carbonic  oxide,  and  4.54  per  cent,  of  carbonic  acid  gas;  it  may  be, 
however,  that  the  presence  of  a  fire  beyond  may  have  had  some  in- 
fluence on  the  production  of  these  gases,  the  proportions  being  un- 
usually high. 
*  Explosions  in  Coal  Mines,  London,  1886,  p.  113. 

--- Page Break ---
316  TEXT-BOOK   O.F  COAL-MINING. 
The  combustion  of  i  cubic  ft.  of  fire-damp  renders  about  40 
cubic  ft.  of  air  unfit  for  respiration.  If  an  excess  of  air  or  fire- 
damp were  present  before  explosion,  such  excess  would  remain 
mixed  with  the  after- damp  after  the  explosion,  but  in  no  case  can 
the  after-damp  gases  contain  more  than  one-third  of  their  volume 
of  unchanged  air,  or  the  explosion  would  not  have  happened. 
After-damp  is  sometimes  responsible  for  more  deaths  than  an 
actual  explosion,  as  often  all  that  escape  the  latter  are  suffocated 
by  the  former. 
Coal-Dust. — The  roadways  of  some  mines  contain  accumula- 
tions of  very  fine  coal-dust  scattered  over  the  timber  and  resting 
on  the  floor.  Messrs.  Faraday  and  Lyell,  in  a  report  on  the  Has- 
well  Colliery  explosion  in  1844,  were  the  first  to  demonstrate  the 
effect  these  accumulations  of  dust  may  have  in  extending  fire- 
damp explosions.  Although  several  persons  investigated  the 
matter,  it  was  not  until  1876,  when  Mr.  Win.  Galloway  read 
his  first  paper  before  the  Royal  Society,*  that  general  attention 
was  directed  to  the  important  part  that  coal-dust  plays  in  aggra- 
vating fire-damp  explosions.  Subsequent  experiments  by  Mr. 
Galloway,f  by  several  members  of  the  North  of  England  Insti- 
tute,! a  committee  of  the  Chesterfield  Institute, §  Sir  F.  A. 
Abel,||  and  particularly  by  the  Prussian  Fire-damp  Commission,^]" demonstrated  that,  under  certain  conditions,  the  presence  of 
coal-dust  in  a  fine  state  of  division  is  a  source  of  danger  in 
dry  mines  in  which  blasting  is  carried  on  without  special  precau- 
tions.** Upwards  of  300  experiments  were  made  by  the  Prussian  Fire- 
damp Commission  at  Neunkirchen,  near  Saarbrlicken,  and  it  was 
considered  that  the  following  conclusions  were  warranted  by  the 
results  obtained  :f  f — 
1.  The  presence  of  coal-dust  in  more  or  less  abundance  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  working  face,  gives  rise  to  more  or  less  _  elongation  of  the 
flame  projected  by  a  blown-out  shot,  whetlter  small  quantities  of  fire-damp  be 
present  in  the  surrounding  air  or  not. 
2.  (a)  In  the  complete  absence  of  fire-damp,  the  elongation  or  propagation of  flame  is  generally  of  limited  extent,  however  far  the  deposits 
of  dust  may  extend  in  the  mine- ways. 
*  Proc.  Royal  Society,  March  2,  1876,  xxiv.  239. 
t  Ibid,  xxviii.  437  and  490,  and  xxxvii.  42. 
j  N.  E.  I.,  xxv.  239,  and  xxviii.  85. 
§  Vol.  x.,  with  appendixes. 
||  Blue-Book,  "  Seaham  Colliery  Explosion,"  and  Proc.  Royal  Institution, x.,  Part  1. 1882. 
f  Translation  by  T.  W.  Bunning,  N.  E.  I.,  xxxiv.  199  and  297. 
**  A  complete  review  of  the  literature  of  the  subject  with  extracts  of the  opinions  held  by  English  authors,  is  given  by  Mr.  E.  S.  Hutchinson  in 
paper  entitled  Notes  on  Coal-dust  in  CoUiery  Explosions,  Amer.  Inst.  M.  E. xiii.  253. 
ft  English  Commission  on  Accidents  in  Mines.    Final  Report,  1886, 
P- 43- 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  317 
2.  (6)  There  are,  however,  certain  descriptions  of  coal-dust   which,  if 
ignited  by  a  blown-out  shot,  will  not  only  continue  to  carry  on the  flame  even  to  distances  extending  considerably  beyond  the 
confines  of  the  dust  deposits,  but  will  also  give  rise  to  explosive 
phenomena  or  results,  in  the  complete  absence  of  any  trace  of  fire- 
damp, which  in  character  and  effects  are  similar  to  those  pro- 
duced by  some  other  dusts  in  air  containing  7  per  cent,  of  fire- damp. 
3.  («)  All  the  phenomena  produced  by  the  burning  of  and  propagation 
of  flame  by  coal-dust  are  intensified  by  the  presence  in  the  air 
of  small  proportions  of  fire-damp. 
(&)  Certain  dusts  which  under  favourable  conditions  appear  to  have 
the  power  of  propagating  flame  to  an  indefinite  extent  in  a  dust- 
laden  area,  the  air  being  free  from  fire-damp,  will,  if  only 
sparsely  suspended  in  air  containing  fire-damp  in  some  propor- 
tion below  3  per  cent.,  render  such  a  gas-mixture  susceptible  of 
explosion  by  a  blown-out  shot. 
4.  Special  experiments  in  which  the  branch  gallery,  described  as  opening 
into  the  main  gallery  near  its  extremity,  was  charged  with  a  fire-damp 
mixture  (retained  by  brattice  cloth),  demonstrated  that  a  coal-dust  ignition 
or  explosion,  developed  in  the  complete  absence  of  fire-damp,  can  communi- 
cate ignition  to  an  explosive  gas-mixture  existing  at  a  very  considerable distance  from  the  point  of  first  ignition. 
Special  stress  was,  however,  laid  on  the  fact  that  the  occurrence 
of  a  blown-  out  shot  is  indispensable  to  the  production  of  any  and 
all  of  the  effects  (of  ignition,  propagation  of  flame,  or  explosion) 
to  which  coal-dust  can  give  rise  ;  and  Mr.  Hilt  emphasises  the 
fact  that  the  part  played  by  coal-dust  is  not  nearly  so  dangerous 
as  it  might  appear  from  a  superficial  examination  of  the  Saar- 
briicken  experiments. 
Messrs.  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier,  in  a  review  of  the  work  of  the 
Prussian  Commission,*  consider  the  phenomenon  of  the  ignition 
of  coal-dust  by  a  blown-out  shot  to  be  as  follows  :  —  In  that  part 
of  the  gallery  reached  by  the  powder-gases  travelling  at  a  high velocity  and  endowed  with  a  high  temperature,  the  dust  is 
violently  thrown  into  suspension  and  ignites.  The  gaseous  mass 
thus  ignited  (considerably  expanded  by  heat  and  increased  by  the 
partial  distillation  of  dust  that  has  been  thrown  into  suspension 
by  the  mechanical  effects  of  the  powder-shot)  expands  into  the gallery,  and  extends  to  a  distance  proportional  to  the  mechanical 
effects  of  the  powder-gases  and  to  the  ease  in  which  the  dust  in 
suspension  is  distilled.  The  mechanical  effect  of  this  jet  of  flame 
on  the  dust  in  the  gallery,  situated  at  such  a  distance  as  to  escape 
the  initial  action  of  the  powder-gases,  is  small,  and  rapidly  de- creases until  it  is  destroyed  at  a  very  short  distance  from  the 
shot.  They  consider  that  the  experiments  of  the  Prussian 
Commission  confirm  these  opinions,  and  also  their  previously 
expressed  ones,f  that  the  combustions  of  dusts  are  not,  to  speak 
exactly,  explosions;  that  combustions  only  produce  mechanical 
effects  entirely  insignificant  for  most  dusts,  and  always  much  less 
*  Ann.  des  Mines  (8*  Serie),  ix.  638.         f  %>M.  (8e  Serie),  iv.  274. 

--- Page Break ---
3i8  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
than  fire-damp  explosions,  even  for  most  exceptional  dusts ;  and 
that  the  combustion  produced  at  any  point  does  not  extend  inde- 
finitely over  the  whole  area  covered  with  dust. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  Royal  Commission  on  Accidents  in 
Mines  *  considered  that  the  most  emphatic  refutation  of  Messrs. 
Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier's  conclusion,  "  that  the  influence  of  fire- damp upon  the  combustibility  of  dusts,  if  not  altogether  nil,  is  at 
least  much  slighter  than  was  at  first  believed,"  and  confirmation of  the  established  facts  which  it  combated,  was  furnished  by  the 
Saarbriicken  experiments,  and,  after  a  review  of  the  whole 
subject,  considered  that  the  following  facts  relating  to  the  part 
played  by  dust  in  coal-mine  explosions  may  be  regarded  as  con- 
clusively established : — 
1.  The  occurrence  of  a  blown-out  shot  in  working  places  wliere  very  highly 
inflammable  coal-dust  exists  in  great  abundance  may,  even  in  the  total  absence  of 
fire-damp,  possibly  give  rise  to  violent  explosions,  or  may  at  any  rate  be followed  by  the  propagation  of  flame  through  very  considerable  areas,  and 
even  by  the  communication  of  flame  to  distant  parts  of  the  workings  where 
explosive  gas-mixtures,  or  dust-deposits  in  association  with  non-explosive 
gas-mixtures,  exist. 
2.  The  occurrence  of  a  blown-out  shot  in  localities  where   only  small 
proportions  of  fire-damp  exist  in  the  air,  in  the  presence  of  even  comparatively 
slightly  inflammable,  or  actually  non-inflammable  but  very  fine,  dry  and  porous 
dusts,  may  give  rise  to  explosions,  the  flame  from  which  may  reach  to 
distant  localities  where  either  gas  accumulations  or  deposits  of  inflammable 
coal-dust,  may  be  inflamed,  and  may  extend  the  disastrous  results  to  other 
regions. 
That  the  above  conclusions  are  true  is  now  generally  admitted, 
and  the  importance  of  adopting  some  effectual  means  for  dealing 
with  dust-deposits  becomes  self-evident  when  it  is  remembered 
that  the  most  practised  observer  cannot  detect  gas  in  the  air- 
currents  with  safety-lamps  when  the  proportion  present  does  not exceed  2  per  cent. 
It  is,  however,  contended,  more  prominently  by  Mr.  Galloway 
and  Messrs.  Atkinson,f  that  coal-dust  plays  the  principal  part  in 
colliery  explosions,  and  that  fire-damp  must  be  relegated  to  a 
secondary  position.  The  chief  argument  in  favour  of  this  view  is 
that  explosions  are  so  often  confined  to  the  intake  air-ways  and 
not  to  return  air-ways.  The  intakes  are  where  dust  collects 
owing  to  the  haulage  of  coal,  while  the  returns  are  those  along 
which  gas  is  carried  off.  It  is  also  contended  that  gas  explodes 
•equally  in  all  directions,  while  many  explosions  in  mines  do  not seem  to  pass  into  all  the  routes  equally  open  to  them,  but  follow 
certain  definite  paths,  such  as  intake  airways  where  gas  is  absent 
but  coal-dust  present.  An  explosion  that  took  place  in  a  coal- 
hopper  at  Brancepeth  Colliery,  Durham,  where  no  gas  could  be 
present,  is  also  quoted  as  an  argument  in  favour  of  this  theory. 
*  Final  Report,  p.  47. 
f  Explosions  in  Coal  Mines,  London,  1886. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  319 
This  hopper  was  used  to  store  coal  in  for  the  use  of  the  coke 
ovens.  It  was  being  cleaned  out,  when  the  fine  dust  took  fire  at 
an  open  torch  lamp.  Several  men  were  severely  burnt  and  three 
lost  their  lives.  It  may,  however,  be  taken  more  as  an  instance 
of  ignition  than  of  explosion,  as,  although  several  windows  existed 
in  the  hopper,  none  of  the  panes  of  glass  were  blown  out,  although 
they  were  much  cracked  by  the  intense  heat.  Only  one  sheet  of 
corrugated  iron  was  burst  off  the  box,  and  this  was  not  blown 
away,  but  was  simply  dislodged  and  fell  to  the  ground.* The  theory  is  supported  by  the  fact  that  explosions  happen  in 
flour  mills,  and  in  the  drying  chambers  used  for  the  preparation 
of  brown  coal  for  the  market.  It  has  also  been  proved  by  large 
explosions  which  have  taken  place  in  flour  mills  at  Annapolis, 
U.S.A.,  that  in  the  entire  absence  of  inflammable  gas,  the  explo- 
sion beginning  in  a  distant  portion  of  the  works  may  be  carried 
through  the  entire  building.  It  is  also  possible,  experimentally, 
to  obtain  explosions  with  air  and  lycopodium,  simply  with  the 
lycopodium  lying  on  the  floor  and  not  forming  a  thick  cloud. 
The  great  argument  against  coal-dust  being  the  principal  agent 
in  coal-mine  explosions,  as  pointed  out  by  the  Royal  Commission on  Accidents  in  Mines,f  is  the  fact  that,  if  it  were  so,  every 
blown-out  shot  occurring  in  a  very  dusty  and  dry  mine  should 
actually  be  attended  by  a  more  or  less  disastrous  explosion  or 
conflagration ;  and  that,  looking  therefore  to  the  enormous 
amount  of  powder  expended  in  shot-firing  in  this  and  other 
countries,  and  to  the  not  inconsiderable  proportion  which  blown- 
out  shots  must  constitute,  in  many  localities,  of  the  total  number 
of  shots  fired,  disastrous  coal-mine  explosions  should  be  of  more than  daily  occurrence,  if  this  view  were  correct. 
Messrs.  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier  maintain  that  all  explosions  of 
magnitude  which  have  been  solely  attributed  to  coal-dust  have 
occurred  in  mines  in  which  fire-damp  occurs ;  that  the  possibility 
of  coal  dust,  per  se,  giving  rise  to  an  important  explosion  could 
only  be  established  by  the  occurrence  of  an  explosion  in  a  mine 
in  which  the  total  absence  of  fire-damp  can  be  absolutely  demon- 
strated ;  and  by  the  fact  that  lignite  mines,  which  are  generally 
very  dusty,  the  dust  being  extremely  inflammable,  but  which  are 
at  the  same  time  almost  free  from  fire-damp,  have  never  yet  been visited  by  accidents  of  this  class. 
In  Chapter  II.  reference  was  made  to  the  experiments  of  Mr. 
J.  W.  Thomas  on  the  gases  enclosed  in  coal.  Dr.  P.  P.  Bedson 
has  conducted  similar  investigations  on  coal-dust  |  and  has  estab- 
lished the  point  that  some  dusts  give  off  considerable  volumes  of 
explosive  gas  at  a  comparatively  low  temperature.  The  enclosed 
gases  in  coal-dust  resemble  in  many  respects  those  which  have 
*  Eoyal  Commission  on  Coal  Dust,  First  Report,  p.  108. t  Final  Report,  p.  47. 
J  A  Contribution  to  Our  Knowledge  of  Coal-dust,  N.  E.  I.  xxxvii.  245. 

--- Page Break ---
320  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
been  obtained  from  coal.  The  main  points  of  difference  to  be 
noted  are,  first,  the  large  proportion  of  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  as 
compared  with  the  amounts  found  by  Mr.  Thomas,  and,  second, 
the  presence  of  olefines  and  higher  members  of  the  paraffin  series 
of  hydrocarbons. 
In  the  final  Report  of  the  Austrian  Fire-Damp  Commission  *  it 
is  stated  that  the  experiments  made  confirm  those  of  Neunkirchen 
with  regard  to  the  danger  of  coal-dust,  but  also  show  that  the dangers  are  greater  than  have  hitherto  been  admitted.  First  of 
all  the  Commission  tested  the  different  kinds  of  coal-dust  so  as  to 
classify  them  according  to  their  sensitiveness  to  ignition  and  their 
danger.  As  they  considered  that  black  powder  and  similar  explo- 
sives are  dangerous  in  fiery  mines  and  that  their  use  should  be 
entirely  prohibited,  they  confined  their  experiments  to  high  explo- 
sives, especially  dynamite  No.  i.  The  experiments  were  made  in 
levels,  like  the  one  at  Neunkirchen.  Each  kind  of  dust  that  was 
used  was  also  tested  in  order  to  determine  the  following  facts 
concerning  it : — 
1.  Percentage  of  volatile  matter. 
2.  Hygroscopic  moisture. 
3.  Percentage  of  ash. 
4.  Quantity  of  marsh  gas  in  100  grammes  of  dust. 
5.  Quantity  of  gas  given  out  by  100  grammes  of  dust  at  100°  C. 
6.  Composition  of  gas  given  out  by  100  grammes  of  dust  at  100°  C. 
Instead  of  imitating  blown-out  shots,  the  experiments  were 
mostly  made  with  cartridges  of  dynamite  lying  loose,  or  with  a 
slight  covering  of  coal-dust.  The  coal-dust  experiments  were 
almost  exclusively  made  without  any  admixture  of  gas.  In  one  of 
the  levels,  353  experiments  were  carried  out  and  showed  that  many 
notoriously  dangerous  dusts  were  less  inflammable  than  other  less 
dangerous  dusts.  Coal-dusts  were  therefore  classified  into  sensi- 
tive and  dangerous  kinds.  To  judge  of  their  sensitiveness,  the 
coal-dusts  were  all  tested  with  the  same  charge  of  dynamite,  viz. : 
100  grammes  (3^  ounces).  The  experiments  showed  that  without 
any  admixture  of  fire-damp,  nearly  all  kinds  of  coal-dust  were 
ignited  by  a  cartridge  of  100  grammes  of  dynamite  lying  loose. 
The  following  points  were  considered  established  : — 
1.  The  degree  of  inflammability  can   scarcely  be   deduced  from  the 
chemical  composition. 
2.  The  texture  of  the  coal  is  important.     Hard  compact  coal  will  give 
less  dust  than  crumbling  friable  coal.     The  fineness  of  coal-dust  depends upon  its  texture. 
3.  The  sensitiveness  of  a  coal-dust,  and  as  a  rule,  its  danger,  increase with  its  dryness. 
4.  The  danger  of  a  coal-dust  appears  to  depend  more  upon  its  physical qualities  than  upon  its  chemical  composition. 
*  Schlussbericht  des  Centralcomites  der  osterreichischen  Commission 
zur  Ermittlung  der  zweckmassigsten  Sicherheitmassregeln  gegen  die 
Explosion  schlagender  Wetter  in  Bergwerken.  Vienna,  1891. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  321 
5.  A  blown-out  shot  with  coal-dust  as  tamping,  or  a  charge  of  dynamite 
lying  free,  will  ignite  every  kind  of  coal-dust.     Most  kinds  of  coal-dust 
were  ignited  with  a  charge  of  100  gr.  (3^-  oz.),  and  all  without  exception were  ignited  with  a  charge  of  300  gr.  (104  oz.). 
6.  A  coal-dust  which  otherwise  is  not  dangerous  and  takes  fire  with 
difficulty,  may  give  rise  to  a  disastrous  explosion  if  there  is  a  little  fire-damp 
present. 
The  question  continuing  to  be  a  very  debatable  one,  Mr.  Henry 
Hall  was  appointed  by  the  Home  Secretary,  in  1890,  to  carry  on 
a  further  series  of  experiments.*  The  result  of  these  experiments 
being  still  non-conclusive,  a  Royal  Commission  was  appointed  in 
1891,  to  inquire  into  the  effect  of  coal-dust  in  originating  or 
extending  explosions  in  mines,  whether  by  itself  or  in  conjunction 
with  fire-damp.  This  inquiry  is  not  yet  completed,  but  a  pre- 
liminary report  f  has  been  issued  giving  the  evidence  taken  up  to date. 
Sir  F.  A.  Abel  {  considers  that,  under  extremely  favourable 
conditions  as  regards  the  nature  of  dust,  its  physical  condition 
and  its  composition,  and  the  quantity  of  dust  existing  and  sus- 
pended in  the  air  at  the  time  of  the  explosion,  in  the  entire 
absence  of  fire-damp,  coal-dust  undoubtedly  has  the  power  of carrying  on  explosions  almost  to  an  indefinite  extent  in  mines. 
He  questions  whether  there  is  practically  any  limit,  as,  looking  to 
the  great  commotion  set  up  by  the  rush  of  gas  produced  as  the 
explosion  originates  and  as  it  progresses,  the  motion  of  the  air  is 
such  that  particles  of  coal-dust  must  be  whirled  up  into  it,  and 
must  continue  to  produce  a  mixture  of  sufficient  intimacy  and 
sufficiently  highly  charged  with  inflammable  particles  to  develop 
afresh  the  conditions  which  existed  originally  when  the  explosion 
was  started,  and  in  that  way  the  explosion  may  be  considered  to be  a  continuous  one. 
Mr.  A.  H.  Stokes  §  considers  that  the  Prussian  experiments 
proved  that  coal-dust,  without  a  trace  of  gas,  in  a  pure  atmosphere, 
is  not  dangerous.  Coal-dust  in  mines  promotes,  extends,  and 
aggravates  explosions  due  to  fire-damp,  by  reason  of  the  rapid inflammability  of  its  finely  divided  particles.  The  sensitiveness 
to  ignition  of  coal-dust  and  air,  appears  to  be  in  proportion  to  the intensity  of  heat  at  the  point  of  ignition,  and  the  size  and  impact 
of  the  initial  flame  has  a  very  important  influence  in  controlling 
the  propagation  of  flame.  The  condition  necessary  to  ignite  a 
mixture  of  coal-dust  and  air  appears  to  depend  on  the  temperature, volume,  and  the  way  in  which  the  initial  flame  strikes  the  current ; 
also  that  each  atom  of  dust  be  surrounded  by  air  so  that  it  can 
get  oxygen  instantly,  and  that  each  atom  be  near  enough  to  its 
*  Colliery  Guardian,  1890,  Ix.  875. 
t  Blue-Book  :   First  Report  of  the  Royal  Commission  on  Explosions  from 
Coal-dust  in  Mines,  July  1891. 
$  Ibid.  p.  82.  §  Hid.  p.  103  and  104. 
X 

--- Page Break ---
322  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
neighbour  to  be  able  to  communicate  flame.  He  has  not  been 
able  to  find  any  record  of  an  explosion  in  a  dry  and  dusty  mine 
in  which  gas  had  never  been  found.  In  most  experimental  cases 
where  coal-dust  was  fired,  the  atmosphere  was  thickly  charged 
with  coal-dust — in  fact,  so  thick  that  no  living  being  could  exist 
in  it;  and  this  was  a  state  of  affairs  which  could  scarcely  be 
found  in  any  mine  unless  as  the  result  of  a  serious  explosion 
of  fire-damp,  nor  one  that  a  blown-out  shot  could  create  and 
fire  with  its  own  flame  unless  it  were  pointed  directly  into, 
and  in  close  proximity  to,  an  accumulation  of  dust.  A  mixture 
of  air  and  fire-damp  which  cannot  be  detected  by  a  safety-lamp, and  which  may  be  harmless  in  the  absence  of  dust,  may,  if  dust 
be  present  in  sufficient  quantities,  become  an  inflammable  mix- 
ture, and  be  the  means  of  carrying  flame  as  far  as  such  mixture 
extends.  The  current  of  ventilation  in  a  dry  and  dusty  mine 
may  be  charged  with  such  a  low  percentage  of  fire- damp  that  the most  careful  observer  would  fail  to  detect  the  blue  cap  indicative 
of  fire-damp  in  the  ordinary  safety- lamp,  yet  it  might  be  so 
charged  with  fire-damp  that  any  unusual  circumstances,  such  as 
a  heavily  charged  blown- out  shot  or  other  violent  concussion, 
might  raise  a  cloud  of  dust  and  render  the  current  at  once  an 
inflammable  mixture.  A  comparatively  small  explosion  in  a  dry 
and  dusty  mine  giving  off  fire-damp,  may  be  developed  link  by link  into  a  most  extensive  disaster.  The  most  dusty  atmosphere 
of  a  mine,  in  its  ordinary  working  condition,  could  not  be  ignited 
by  the  direct  action  of  any  blown-out  shot.  If  the  current  of  air- 
be  free  from  fire-damp,  in  no  mine  in  its  normal  state,  and  the 
ventilation  free  from  fire-damp,  would  an  ordinary  blown-out  shot raise  sufficient  dust  to  make  the  ventilative  current  an  inflam- 
mable mixture  such  as  would  ignite  from  the  same  shot,  flame  and 
create  what  might  be  termed  an  explosion,  unless  such  a  shot  be 
fired  directly  into  a  bed  or  considerable  accumulation  of  coal-dust. 
Action  of  Moisture. — It  may  now  be  regarded  as  established 
that  small  amounts  of  moisture  are  sufficient  to  prevent  the 
possibility  of  coal-dust  being  ignited,  and  at  many  colleries  the main  roads  are  regularly  watered.  In  order  to  be  efficient  the 
water  should  be  applied  in  such  quantities  as  will  simply  damp 
the  dust  and  prevent  clouds  of  it  being  raised  by  any  means.  If 
the  floor  be  properly  watered  it  is  sufficient  to  prevent  any  deposit 
of  dust  on  the  sides  or  the  roof.  As  a  large  quantity  of  dust  is 
formed  in  the  tubs  during  the  progress  of  hauling  them  along  the 
roads,  a  quantity  of  water  is  often  thrown  over  the  contents  of 
each  tub  immediately  before  it  leaves  the  working  face. 
Attempts  have  been  made  to  render  dust  harmless  by  applying 
along  the  roadways  some  deliquescent  body  such  as  salt,  but 
although  the  result  in  some  cases  has  been  satisfactory,*  yet  the 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxxi.  145. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION 323 
method   has  not  received  many  applications,  the  use   of  water 
being  superior. 
In  some  cases  ordinary  tubs  are  provided  with  a  perforated  pipe 
at  the  back,  and  the  water  applied  in  the  same  way  as  in  streets 
of  towns.  If  such  a  watering  appliance  is  to  be  used,  a  good 
.arrangement  is  that  suggested  by  Messrs.  Archer  &  Robson.*  A 
circular  brush  is  affixed  to  the  rear  of  a  tub,  and  is  suitably  con- 
nected by  bevel  gearing  to  the  axle  of  the  tub,  so  that  when  this 
moves  along  the  brush  is  rotated.  The  spindle  of  the  brush  is 
hollow,  and  water  is  passed  along  it  and  through  holes  on  the 
rim  of  the  boss,  and  is  thrown  by  centrifugal  force  from  the  tips 
of  the  bristle  brush  in  the  form  of  fine  rain  or  spray. 
M!any  collieries  in  South  "Wales  are  fitted  with  watering  ap- pliances, and  the  methods  used  have  been  described  by  Mr.  A. 
Hood.f  At  Llwynypia  Colliery,  water-pipes  are  carried  along  the roads,  and  a  fine  jet  allowed  to  issue  at  intervals,  the  spray 
being  carried  along  by  the  air-current.  Round  outlet  holes  can be  used  when  a  deflecting  plate  is  placed  at  a  small  inclination  to 
the  jet  to  drive  it  into  spray.  Flat  jets,  however,  give  a  better 
spray,  but  round  ones  are  less  likely  to  be  choked  up  with  dirt. 
In  some  cases,  even  with  the  finest  spray,  the  action  of  the  water 
causes  the  roads  to  heave  to  a  considerable  extent,  but  at  Ynishir 
Colliery,  where  two  miles  of  piping  are  laid  with  outlet  pipes  at  inter- 
vals of  from  40  to  60  yards,  little  difficulty  has  been  experienced  from 
heaving.    Of  course  this  objection  depends 
entirely  on  the  nature  of   the   roof   and 
floor.     The  best  procedure  is  to  load  up 
and  remove  the  dust  as  much  as  possible 
before  watering,  as  not  so   much   water 
is   necessary,    and   mud    is    not   formed. 
Watering  certainly  makes  the  conditions 
more   pleasant.     At  Pochin  Colliery  the 
intake  air  had  been  warmed  and  a  jet  of 
steam  injected  into   it   with   satisfactory 
results.     The  warming  of  the  intake  air- 
€urrerit  is,  however,  objectionable. Mr.  H.  W.  Martin  has  described  the 
method  in  use  at  Dowlais,  where  a  very 
elaborate  system  is  applied .J     Two  mains 
are  laid,  one  for  water,  and  the  other  for 
compressed  air.     Out  of  these  at  intervals 
small  branch   pipes  of  half-inch  internal diameter  are  carried  to  the  roof,  and  then 
across,  when  they  join  together  by  a  conical 
nozzle  (a,  Fig.  381)  in  the  interior  of  an 
ordinary  T  couple.     The  water  is  forced  out  by  the   air  through 
FIG. 
PLAN. 
N.  E.  I.  xxxvi.  99.         t  South  Wales  Inst.,  xiv.  357.        J  Ibid.  xv.  267. 

--- Page Break ---
P4       TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
an  adjustable  spray  producer,  b.  The  aperture  in  this  is  made 
adjustable,  so  that  in  the  event  of  its  being  clogged  by  any 
sediment  it  can  be  "  flushed  "  for  an  instant.  The  adjustment  is made  by  a  nut  and  screw.  A  regulating  tap  is  placed  in  both  the 
air  and  water  branches,  and  to  prevent  entry  of  water  into  the 
air-pipe,  and  vice  versd,  a  small  ball-  valve  on  a  leather  seating  is introduced  into  each  pipe.  The  spray  producer  hangs  vertically 
from  the  roof.  An  exceedingly  fine  spray  is  obtained,  which  is 
carried  along  with  the  air,  and  effectually  damps  the  finest  dust 
lurking  behind  timbers.  It  also  cools  the  air-current,  the  ex- 
perience at  Harris  Navigation  Colliery  being  that  the  temperature 
of  the  intake  has  been  reduced  4  to  5  degrees.  The  pressure 
of  water  should  exceed  that  of  the  air,  but  it  is  only  necessary 
that  it  should  be  a  few  pounds  above.  The  spray  producer  is 
made  of  brass,  and  is  globular  in  form.  It  can  be  opened  in  a 
second  by  unscrewing  a  nut  at  the  bottom,  when  dirt  is  readily blown  out. 
The  mixture  of  air  and  water  not  only  produces  a  very  fine- 
spray,  but  it  seems  to  act  further  owing  to  the  intimate  mixture, 
and  hence  the  discharge  jets  can  be  placed  at  greater  distances 
apart.  There  can,  however,  be  little  doubt  that  the  velocity  of 
the  air-  current  influences  in  a  great  measure  the  distance  to- 
which  the  spray  is  carried. 
Laws  of  Friction,  &c.  —  Before  describing  how  a  ventilating 
current  is  produced  and  circulated  through  the  workings,  a  short 
description  should  be  given  of  the  law^s  of  friction  and  of  the  general rules  relating  to  ventilation.  The  subject  is  such  a  complicated 
and  extensive  one  that  only  the  briefest  summary  is  possible  here. 
The  finest  series  of  papers  in  the  English  language  are  those  by 
the  late  Mr.  J.  J.  Atkinson,*  which,  although  written  so  long ago,  still  remain  the  standard  authority.  To  these,  and  others 
written  at  the  same  time  by  several  of  his  contemporaries,  the 
student  is  referred  for  detail  of  information  and  reasoning.  The 
principal  points  dealt  with,  and  brought  out  by  the  above  series 
of  papers,  have  been  summarised  and  elucidated  by  Mr.  W. Fairley.f 
Currents  of  air,  either  on  the  surface  or  in  a  mine,  are  produced 
by  a  difference  of  pressure,  and  would  flow  at  a  great  speed  if  no 
resistance  were  encountered.  If  v  =  the  velocity  in  ft.  per  second, 
y  =  gravity,  or  32.2,  and  A  =  the  height  from  which  a  body  must 
fall  in  order  to  generate  this  velocity,  such  height  being  the 
motive  column, 
.         .         .         •     (0 
The  water  gauge,  which  is  the  measurement  of  the  pressure- 
*  See  list  at  end  of  chapter. t  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Ventilating  Coal  Mines. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  325 
required  to  generate  this  velocity  at  which  the  air  travels,  if 
resistance  were  absent,  would  be  a  small  one,  and  may  be  deter- 
mined by  the  formula — 
where  w  =  the  weight  of  a  cubic  ft.  of  air  at  the  temperature  of 
the  upcast,  and  h  =  the  motive  power. Now 
_  1.3253  x  height  of  barometer  (n) 
459  + temperature  (t) and 
,,2 
/*=-       .        .        .        .        .    (4) 
2(J 
1-3253  XH  x^! 
.-.  W.G.  (in  inches)  =  -^~^   ~         '        *   (5) 
From  this  formula  it  will  be  found,  that  if  the  air  has  a  final 
velocity  of,  say,  50  ft.  a  second,  the  theoretical  water  gauge 
required  to  produce  it  is  only  0-6  inch.  Fifty  feet  per  second  is 
a  velocity  scarcely  attained  in  mines,  and  it  is  equally  rare  that 
the  water  gauge  only  shows  0-6  inch.  The  difference  between  the 
water  gauge  due  to  velocity,  and  the  actual  water  gauge  of  any 
mine,  is  the  measurement  of  the  friction  which  the  air  meets  with 
in  passing  through  the  air-ways. 
The  three  main  laws  which  govern  the  friction  of  gases  flowing 
through  pipes  are  as  follows  : 
(1)  The  frictional  resistance  varies  directly  as  the   rubbing 
surface  ;  this  rubbing  surface  is  found  by  multiplying  the 
length  of  the  gallery  by  its  perimeter,  or,  in  other  words, its  circumference. 
(2)  The  pressure  required  to    overcome   the   friction   varies 
inversely  as  the  area,  if  the  rubbing  surface  and  velocity 
remain  the  same — that  is  to  say,  if  two  air-ways  be  taken, 
one  of  which  is  double  the  area  of  the  other,  only  half 
the  pressure  has  to  be  applied  to  each  sq.  ft.  of  the  large 
one  as  would  have  to  be  applied  to  the  small  one,  to 
overcome  the  same  amount  of  friction  in  the  two  ways, 
provided  the  velocity  of  the  air  and  the  extent  of  rubbing surface  were  the  same  in  each. 
(3)  The  frictional  resistance  varies  directly  as  the  square  of 
the  velocity ;  consequently,  if  the  velocity  be  doubled,  the 
resistance  increases  four  times.  The  explanation  of  this 
law  is  a  simple  one,  if  it  be  remembered  that  if  the  velocity 
be  doubled,  double  the  quantity  of  air  passes  through  the 
air- way  in  a  given  time,  and  meets  every  resistance  with 
double  velocity. 

--- Page Break ---
326  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
From  these  laws  the  following  formula  is  deduced : 
2>a  =  Isv*   (6) 
where  p  =  the  pressure  in  Ibs.  per  sq.  ft.,  a  =  the  area  of  the 
air-way  in  sq.  ft.,  s  =  the  area  in  sq.  ft.  of  rubbing  surface, 
v  =  the  velocity  of  air  in  feet  per  minute,  and  k  is  a  constant 
called  a  co-efficient  of  friction,  and  is  equal  to  the  ventilating pressure  required  to  overcome  the  resistance  that  a  unit  of  air 
with  unit  velocity  would  meet  with  in  circulating  round  a 
mine  of  unit  area  and  having  unit  rubbing  surface.  The  value  of 
this  co- efficient  has  never  been  satisfactorily  determined  for  the 
irregular  passages  of  mines.  Although  it  is  generally  admitted 
that  Mr.  Atkinson's  figures  are  not  strictly  correct,  yet  they  are freely  adopted.  He  states  that  it  seems  probable  that  for  every 
foot  of  rubbing  surface,  and  for  a  velocity  in  the  air  of  1000  ft.  a 
minute,  the  friction  is  equal  to  0-26881  ft.  of  air  column  of  the 
same  density  as  the  flowing  air,  which  is  equal  to  a  pressure,  with 
air  at  32°  F.,  of  0-0217  Ib.  per  sq.  ft.  of  area  of  section. The  difference  between  pressure  and  power  must  be  clearly 
understood;  pressure  is  the  force  per  sq.  ft.  producing  the 
ventilation,  and  power  is  the  quantity  passing  multiplied  by  the 
pressure.  The  quantity  is  found  by  multiplying  the  area  by  the 
velocity. 
By  transposing  and  substituting  values  of  the  different 
symbols  in  (6)  nearly  every  formula  can  be  deduced  to  work 
out  the  problems  met  with  in  ventilating  mines.  Several  of 
the  more  prominent  results  obtained  may  be  summarised  as 
follows : — 
1 i )  The  quantity  of  air  circulating  in  a  mine  is  according  to 
the  square  root  of  the  pressure. 
(2)  In  air-ways  of  the  same  sectional  area,  but  which  only 
vary  in  length,  the  volume  and  velocity  of  air  currents 
are  inversely  proportionate  to  the  square  root  of  the 
lengths. 
(3)  The  quantity  of  air  passing  in  air-ways  of  different  areas, other  things  being  equal,  is  according  to  the  square  root 
of  the  area  multiplied  by  the  area. 
(4)  The  resistance  varies  directly  as  the  length. 
(5)  The  pressure  required  to  propel  air  through  passages  is 
inversely  proportional  to  the  area,  other  conditions 
remaining  the  same. 
(6)  If  any  two  machines  are  employed  to  ventilate  a  miner 
each  of  which  when  working  separately  will  produce 
certain  quantities  which  may  be  denoted  by  a  and  b,  the 
quantity  of  air  that  will  pass  when  the  two  are  working 
together  will  be  ,Ja*  +  b*. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  327 
(7)  The  quantity  of  air  passing  is  according  to  the  cube  root 
of  the  power  applied.* 
(8)  Since  the  quantity  of  air  circulating  varies  as  the  cube- 
root  of  the  power  employed,  and  as  the  number  of  revolu- 
tions of  a  fan  also  varies  as  the  cube  root  of  the  power 
employed,  it  follows  that  the  quantity  of  air  circulating 
depends  directly  on  the  speed  of  the  fan. 
PRODUCTION  OP  AIR  CURRENTS.— The  problem  of 
producing  sufficient  air,  and  of  so  carrying  it  into  every  part  of 
the  mine  that  the  noxious  gases  are  effectually  removed,  is  one  of 
great  importance.  By  the  law  in  this  and  in  many  other  countries^ 
every  mine  has  to  be  provided  with  two  shafts,  or  outlets  ;  one 
of  these  serves  for  the  introduction  of  the  fresh  air,  and  is  called 
the  "down-cast";  the  other,  for  the  egress  of  the  current  after 
it  has  passed  round  the  workings,  and  is  called  the  "  up-cast." Natural  Ventilation. — No  matter  what  the  respective  sizes 
of  the  two  shafts  may  be,  provided  that  they  are  connected  by  a 
passage  and  that  the  density  of  the  air  in  the  two  columns  is  equal, 
no  current  is  produced.  If,  however,  the  densities  are  different, 
the  pressure  of  the  one  column  of  air  will  overbalance  that  of  the 
other.  The  equilibrium  in  the  two  shafts  is  destroyed  by  the  natural 
heat  of  the  strata  altering  the  density  of  the  air.  As  a  descent 
is  made  towards  the  centre  of  the  earth,  a  proportionate  rise  of 
temperature  is  foundj — that  is,  after  a  certain  limit  is  passed.  This limit  is  found  at  a  depth  of  about  50  ft.,  where  the  temperature 
of  the  rocks  is  on  an  average  5o|-°  F..  this  temperature  remaining constant  all  the  year  round.  From  the  mean  of  numerous 
observations,  it  may  be  taken  that  the  underground  temperature 
increases  i°  for  every  60  ft.  of  depth  below  the  invariable  stratum. Therefore,  the  deeper  the  mine,  the  greater  the  difference  of 
temperature  of  the  air  in  the  two  shafts,  consequently,  the  greater the  ventilation. 
.  From  this  cause  ventilation  is  produced  without  any  artificial 
assistance,  and  is  called  natural  ventilation.  It  is,  however,  so 
inconstant  as  to  be  wholly  unreliable,  depending  to  a  consider- able extent  on  the  temperature  of  the  outside  air,  and  the 
difference  in  the  levels  of  the  tops  of  the  two  shafts.  In  winter, 
the  current  may  flow  one  way,  and  in  summer  the  other.  For 
such  reasons  natural  ventilation  is  never  to  be  relied  upon,  although 
it  does  in  many  cases  materially  assist  the  other  means  which  are 
used  to  produce  the  air  current. 
Furnace  Ventilation. — The  oldest  means  of  producing 
ventilation  was  to  artificially  alter  the  density  of  one  of  the 
*  A  most  interesting  paper  has  been  contributed  to  the  Federated  Insti- 
tution of  Mining  Engineers  (vol.  ii.  page  483)  by  Mr.  W.  Cochrane  on  a 
Duplex  Arrangement  of  Ventilators,  the  results  obtained  agreeing  remark- 
ably well  with  the  theoretical  deductions  given  in  (6)  and  (7). 

--- Page Break ---
328 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
columns  of  air  by  heating  it.  At  first,  this  was  done  by  merely 
hanging  fire-lamps  in  the  up-cast  shaft,  to  be  soon  superseded  by 
placing  a  furnace  at  the  bottom,  as  by  the  latter  means  the 
greatest  effect  is  obtained.  Furnaces  may  be  constructed  on  two 
main  principles  (a),  either  an  open  fire-place  with  all  the  air 
passing  over  the  fire ;  or  (b)  contracting  the  area  above  the  fire, 
and  forcing  the  greater  part  of  the  current  through  the  bars. 
Neither  of  these  methods,  separately,  gives  the  best  result.  In  the 
former,  where  a  strong  current  is  passed  over  the  fire,  its  cooling 
action  is  so  great  that  the  combustion  is  feeble  and  a  high 
temperature  is  nob  attained;  while  in  the  latter,  if  all  the  air 
passes  through  the  bars,  not  only  is  carbonic  oxide  formed  in  large 
quantities,  but  the  resistance  or  drag  of  the  mine  is  much  in- creased. A  combination  of  the  two  gives  the  best  results,  and  is 
almost  invariably  employed. No  better  illustration  of  a  well  constructed  and  efficient  furnace 
FIG.  382. 
can  be  given  than  that  at  Eppleton  Colliery  (Fig.  382).  The 
length  of  the  grate  is  60  ft.,  and  its  breadth  n  ft.;  the  end  of 
the  fire  bars  are  120  ft.  away  from  the  shaft.  An  air  passage 
and  firing-hole  is  provided  on  each  side  of  the  furnace,  and  also  an 
air  passage  along  each  side  of  the  drift  going  to  the  shaft.  This 
drift  rises  i  in  2,  and  is  lined  throughout  with  fire  bricks. 
With  this  large  grate  area,  all  the  air  passing  over  the  fire  is 
thoroughly  heated,  and,  in  addition,  doors  are  provided  at  the 
front,  so  that  the  quantity  forced  through  the  bars  can  be  regu- lated. Doors  on  furnaces  are,  to  a  certain  extent,  necessary, 
especially  on  re-starting  after  cleaning.  The  current,  which  is then  small,  can  be  forced  through  the  fire,  and  as  it  increases, 
owing  to  the  temperature  getting  high,  the  doors  are  gradually 
opened,  and  more  air  allowed  to  pass  over  the  fire.  The  advantage 
of  the  side  passages  is,  that  not  only  may  firing  be  entirely  done 
at  the  side,  but  the  risk  of  setting  the  adjoining  strata  on  fire  is 
reduced.  A  good  casing  of  sand  is  placed  all  round  these  arches 
as  an  additional  precaution. 
At  Eppleton  Colliery,  twenty-four  tons  of  coal  are  burnt  in  the 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  329 
twenty-four  hours.  During  two  shifts  a  number  of  boilers  are  at 
work  underground,  so  that  the  furnace  does  not  produce  all  the  air 
circulated.  While  these  boilers  are  at  work  one  man  per  shift  is 
employed  for  firing,  but  at  night  two  men  are  necessary ;  this 
means  four  men  per  twenty-four  hours.  The  quantity  of  air circulated  is  303,000  cubic  ft.  per  minute,  with  2  in.  of  W.G.,  but 
only  120,000  cubic  ft.  passes  over  the  furnace. 
In  fiery  mines  it  would  not  be  safe  to  pass  the  return  air-current over  a  furnace,  and  it  has  to  be  fed  with  fresh  air.  As  the 
temperature  at  the  bottom  of  the  up-cast  shaft  is  sufficient  to 
ignite  gas,  the  return  air-current  has  furthermore  to  be  brought 
through  a  passage  called  a  "  dumb-drift  "  into  the  shaft  at  some point  above  the  furnace  where  the  temperature  has  fallen  below 
the  igniting  point.  Neither  feeding  the  furnace  with  fresh  air  nor 
carrying  the  return  air-current  through  a  dumb-drift  increases 
the  efficiency  of  furnace  ventilation,  but,  on  the  contrary,  dimin- 
ishes it,  as  not  only  is  the  temperature  of  the  air-current  reduced, but  a  shorter  column  of  air  is  heated. 
The  amount  of  ventilation  produced  by  a  furnace  varies  as  the 
square  root  of  the  difference  of  temperature  in  the  two  shafts — 
that  is  to  say,  if  the  mean  temperature  of  the  down-cast  be  50°  F. 
and  the  up-cast  75°  F.,  if  the  temperature  of  the  up-cast  be  in- 
creased to  150°  the  ventilation  will  be  doubled,  as  the  difference  ii> 
the  first  instance  was  25°  and  in  the  second  ioo° ;  therefore, 
vToo 
— .•    =  2. V25 
The  objections  to  furnaces  are  the  danger  of  introducing  fire 
into  mines  yielding  fire-damp,  the  risk  of  setting  adjacent  coal  on 
fire,  the  corrosive  effect  on  all  shaft-fittings  and  tubbing,  and to  the  fact  that  no  more  than  a  certain  quantity  of  air  can  be  got 
out  of  a  given  furnace,  110  matter  how  much  coal  is  used. 
Furnaces  are  most  objectionable  where  tubbing  is  employed,  as 
the  wood  sheeting  between  the  segments  is  continually  being 
burnt  out.  Lining  with  brick- work  offers  little  protection,  as 
when  the  fires  are  damped  down  (for  repairs  to  furnace  or  drift) 
the  tubbing  contracts  so  much  that  a  large  escape  of  water  takes 
place,  which,  in  some  instances,  so  cools  the  shaft  that  the  air- 
current  is  reversed.  Where  tubbing  is  employed,  it  is  practically 
impossible  to  stop  firing.  In  some  cases  in  the  north  of  England, 
which  is  the  home  of  furnace  ventilation,  a  second  furnace  is 
often  built,  and  when  the  first  is  slacked  for  repairs  the  second one  is  started. 
Steam  Jet. — In  the  early  part  of  the  century,  Sir  Goldsworthy Gurney  proposed  that  furnace  ventilation  should  be  superseded 
by  the  use  of  a  steam  jet.  Steam  at  high  pressure  was  to  be 
carried  in  pipes  down  the  shaft,  and  allowed  to  escape  at  the 
bottom  through  a  series  of  jets  arranged  gridiron-fashion  across 

--- Page Break ---
330 
TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  pit.  As  it  was  soon  found  that  this  method  was  neither  so 
economical,  nor  so  capable  of  producing  large  volumes  of  air,  as  a 
furnace,  its  use  was  abandoned,  and  except  in  cases  of  emergency 
it  is  never  employed. 
Mechanical  Ventilators. — From  the  earliest  times  attempts 
were  made  to  produce  currents  of  air  by  mechanical  means.  The 
first  forms  consisted  of  a  species  of  pump,  which,  in  its  improved 
form,  represents  the  modern  displacement  machine.  Other 
attempts  were  made  to  circulate  air  by  the  rotation  of  fans, 
which  was  not  attended  with  much  success  until  about  thirty 
years  ago. 
The  comparative  efficiencies  of  displacement  machines  and  cen- trifugal ventilators  have  been  exhaustively  dealt  with  by  Mr.  W, 
Cochrane.*  The  chief  disadvantages  of  the  former  are  the  heavy and  cumbrous  machine  which  has  to  be  employed  to  produce 
large  quantities  of  air,  and  the  defect  that,  if  there  are  sources  of 
leakage  in  the  apparatus,  the  volume  of  external  air  thus  let  in 
would  increase  as  the  depression  increases,  and,  therefore,  the  air 
drawn  from  the  mine  will  diminish.  The  re-entry  of  air  must 
always  be  considerable,  as  a  shutter  is  employed,  which  is  neither 
rigid  nor  even,  in  contact  with  the  casing. 
The  theoretical  objections  have  been  fully  sustained  in  practice, 
and  at  the  present  time  displacement  machines  have  been  entirely 
superseded  by  fans, of  which  numerous 
and  varied  types 
exist.  It  would  be 
quite  impossible  to describe  the  steps 
which  have  led  up 
to  the  latest  designs,. 
or  even  the  whole 
of  these  designs. 
Reference  can  only 
be  made  to  thos& 
largely  in  use,  and? which  give  good 
results. 
#tuW.— Thisfan 
usually  consists  of 
eight  or  ten  rectan- gular vanes,  which are  not,  however,, 
arranged  radially,, 
but  are  set  back- 
wards, as  will  be  seen  from  Fig.  383.  Each  vane  is  secured 
FIG. 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxvi.  161. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  331 
to  a  pair  of  bars  and  angle-irons,  which,  in  their  turn,  are  bolted 
to  cast-iron  bosses,  keyed  on  the  main  shaft.  As  these  bars  are 
carried  past  the  bosses  and  interlaced,  a  very  firm,  simple,  and  in- 
expensive structure  is  obtained.  The  fan  is  enclosed  in  a  casing, 
giving  about  \  in.  to  i  in.  clearance  on  each  side.  Over  the  fan  an 
arch  is  provided,  giving  about  2  in.  clearance  to  the  vanes,  such 
arch  being  continued  round  as  an  invert,  but  towards  the  bottom 
the  clearance  is  increased,  and  gradually  expands  until  it  ends  in 
the  sloping  side  of  a  chimney. 
In  its  original  form  this  fan  differed  from  all  others  in  one 
point :  it  was  provided  with  a  sliding  shutter,  a,  which  is  really  a 
continuation  of  the  circle  of  the  top  arch  of  the  casing.  This 
shutter  allowed  the  area  of  the  discharge  opening  to  be  regulated and  fixed  at  such  an  amount  that  the  best  results  could  be  obtained. 
In  many  fans  only  one  inlet  orifice  was  left  in  the  casing.  On 
the  other  side  a  blank  wall  was  provided,  through  which  the  shaft 
of  the  fan  passed,  and  was  connected  to  an  engine.  For  machines 
of  small  capacity  such  arrangement  acted  very  well,  but  in  the 
larger  fans  it  was  not  only  found  that  the  ventilator  did  not  get 
sufficient  air,  but  that  all  this  air,  entering  on  one  side,  and  doing 
so  diagonally,  threw  a  severe  thrust  on  the  shaft  and  its  bearings. 
For  such  reasons  it  was  found  preferable  to  give  such  fans  a 
double  inlet,  that  is  to  say,  leave  a  circular  orifice  through  the 
casing  on  both  sides. 
The  use  of  the  shutter  is  to  regulate  the  outlet  to  suit  the 
special  requirements  of  the  mine,  and  its  proper  position  can  only 
be  determined  by  experiment,  as  no  theoretical  calculations  will 
determine  the  quantity  of  air  that  any  fan  will  produce  from  any 
particular  mine.  If  the  discharge  orifice  be  too  large,  air  will 
re-enter  the  fan,  while  if  it  be  too  small,  the  air  will  not  get  away 
fast  enough.  The  use  of  the  expanding  chimney  is  to  reduce  the 
velocity  of  the  air  as  it  leaves  the  fan.  When  the  air  leaves  the 
vanes,  it  is  travelling  at  a  very  high  velocity,  but  as  it  passes  up 
the  chimney,  whose  area  increases  as  it  expands,  it  gradually 
travels  slower  and  slower,  until  at  the  top  it  is  discharged  quietly 
into  the  atmosphere. 
From  its  simplicity,  freedom  from  repairs,  and  high  efficiency, 
the  Guibal  fan  has  been  in  marked  favour  ever  since  its  introduc- 
tion in  1862,  and  probably  more  of  its  type  have  been  erected 
than  of  all  the  other  fans  put  together.  The  objection  to  the 
Guibal  is  its  very  large  size,  the  expensive  foundations  required, 
and  that  it  cannot  be  run  above  a  certain  velocity  with  safety. 
The  latter  difficulty  has  been  removed  by  Messrs.  Walker  Bros. 
shutter,  which  is  described  a  little  further  on,  but  even  with  this 
the  tendency  at  the  present  time  is  to  put  down  some  of  the 
smaller  type  cf  fans  which  run  at  very  much  higher  velocities. 
Waddle. — This  is  of  an  entirely  different  type  to  the  Guibal, 
being  what  is  known  as  an  open  running  fan — that  is  to  say,  it  is 

--- Page Break ---
332 
TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
not  enclosed  in  a  casing,  and  air  is  discharged  all  the  way  round  the 
circumference  instead  of  only  at  one  point.  As  constructed  until 
recently,  it  consisted  of  an  arrangement  of  long  and  short  curved 
blades  arranged  alternately  between  two  iron  discs ;  one  of  these 
discs  is  provided  with  a  central  opening  through  which  the  air 
passes  into  the  fan,  and  is  inclined  towards  the  other  disc  at  such 
an  amount  that  the  products  of  the  angular  velocity,  multiplied 
by  the  sectional  area  at  any  point,  are  constant  throughout  the 
fan.  Mr.  Walton  Brown*  has  described  several  modifications, which  have  been  recently  introduced.  In  the  old  type  the  air 
was  discharged  into  the  atmosphere  at  a  somewhat  high  velocity, 
FIG.  384. 
but  in  the  new  fan  its  velocity  is  considerably  reduced  by  the 
addition  of  a  trumpet-shaped  outlet  which  extends  beyond  the 
external  ends  of  the  blades.  Fig.  384  shows  the  fan  as  constructed 
at  the  present  time  \  a  and  b  are  the  curved  blades,  the  former 
running  down  to  the  centre.  The  area  of  this  outlet  is  more  than 
double  the  area  described  by  the  external  tips  of  the  blades,  con- 
sequently the  velocity  of  the  air  is  gradually  reduced  as  it  passes 
through  this  divergent  outlet,  and  as  the  resistance  varies  with 
the  square  of  the  velocity,  less  power  is  required  to  discharge  the 
air,  and  therefore  less  power  is  required  to  drive  the  fan,  the 
result  of  which  is  to  increase  its  efficiency.  In  addition,  the 
blades  are  brought  in  towards  the  centre,  and  the  air  strikes  all 
parts  of  them  equally,  bub  to  give  the  maximum  area  for  the 
*  Fed.  Inst.  ii.  173. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 333 
entrance  of  the  air,  the  long  blades,  a,  are  reduced  in  width  as 
they  near  the  centre.  The  disadvantage  of  open-running  fans  is their  liability  to  be  affected  by  high  winds. 
Schiele. — This  is  an  enclosed  fan,  but  is  not  placed  centrally 
within  the  casing  (Fig.  385).  The  moving  part  is  small  in 
diameter,  and  the  blades  of 
the  fan  taper  from  the  tip  FIG.  385. 
widening  towards  the  centre. The  air  enters  at  each  side 
in  equal  proportions,  and the  vanes  revolve  between 
a  casing  of  such  form  that 
its  sides  follow  the  taper  of 
the  blades,  while  the  cir- 
cumference is  arranged  as  a 
gradually  increasing  volute 
chamber  surrounding  the 
periphery  of  the  blades, 
culminating  in  the  exit, 
which  forms  the  widest  part  of  the  air  chamber. 
Cockson. — The  objections  to  the  Guibal,  as  before  mentioned, 
are  its  great  weight,  size,  and  the  vibration  resulting  from  its 
unbalanced  nature.  To  remedy  the  latter  defect,  Mr.  Cockson 
has  modified  the  ordinary  construction.  The  close-fitting  casing, 
expanding  chimney, 
and  adjustable  shut-  FIG.  386. ter  are  retained,  but 
the  blades  taper  from 
the  centre  to  the  cir- cumference in  such 
proportion  that  an 
equal  area  of  air 
passage  is  obtained 
throughout  the  fan 
(Fig.  386).  The  ex- 
panding chimney  is not  so  wide  in  one 
direction  owing  to 
the  blades  tapering, 
and  its  width  is, 
therefore,  increased 
in  the  other  direction 
so  as  to  obtain  the  proper  area  of  discharge.  This  alteration  has- 
removed  the  objectionable  vibration,  such  fans  being  practically 
noiseless,  and  as  they  are  more  balanced,  can  be  run  at  a  higher 
speed,  thereby  allowing  a  smaller  one  to  be  used. 
'Capell. — This  fan  (Fig.  387),  is  a  departure  from  all  others  in 
its'  arrangement  and  construction.  All  sizes  above  eight  feet 

--- Page Break ---
334 TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
diameter  are  constructed  with  a  double  inlet.  The  fan  is  divided 
both  vertically  and  horizontally,  into  chambers.  The  vertical 
division  consists  of  a  stiff  steel  diaphragm,  a,  which  entirely 
separates  the  air  received  on  one  side  from  that  of  the  other.  The 
horizontal  .division  consists  of  a  cylinder,  6,  having  a  series  of  port- 
holes through  it,  and  usually  six  blades,  c,  projecting  inwards, 
FIG.  387. 
curved  with  the  convex  side  in  the  direction  of  rotation.  The 
air  first  enters  into  this  cylindrical  chamber,  and  is  discharged 
through  the  port-holes,  c/,  at  a  very  high  velocity  against  the  inner and  concave  side  of  the  outer  wings.  It  is  claimed  that  to  an 
extent  the  vis  viva  in  the  air  is  given  up  to  the  outer  wings  and 
FIG.  388. 
actually  assists  in  driving  the  fan.  The  velocity  of  the  air  is  also 
reduced,  as  the  size  of  the  external  chamber  is  greater  than  the 
internal  one,  and  when  it  leaves  the  tips  of  the  blades  a  further 
reduction  takes  place  as  the  air  is  discharged  into  a  spiral  volute 
chamber,  and  finally  passes,  by  means  of  an  expanding  chimney, 
into  the  open  air. 
Walker*— This  is  one  of  the  more  recently  designed  fans,  and  is 
more  or  less  a  combination  of  several  types.  It  has  Guibal  blades, 
chimney,  and  shutter,  but  it  is  placed  eccentrically  in  the  casing 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  335 
like  a  Schiele.  Its  construction  is  of  the  strongest  type,  and  it  is 
claimed  by  the  makers  to  be  indestructible.  It  is  built  up  some- 
what as  follows  :  In  the  centre  is  a  mild  steel  disc,  G  (Fig.  388), 
which  does  not,  however,  reach  the  circumference  as  in  the  Capell. 
On  each  side  of  this  are  angle-irons,  C,  to  which  the  vanes,  A,  eight or  ten  in  number,  are  attached.  JRivets  pass  through  the  two 
angle-irons  and  disc,  and  through  each  angle-iron  and  blade.  The 
disc  is  supported  between  two  iron  bosses,  D,  turned  where  they 
come  in  contact  with  the  disc  plate,  and  secured  thereto  by  turned bolts  driven  into  rimer ed  holes.  The  bosses  are  bored  out  and 
secured  to  the  fan  shaft  by  keys.  The  blades  in  the  larger  fans 
are  also  braced  together  by  struts,  H,  and  strengthened  by  a  gusset- 
stay,  B,  and  instead  of  being  full  width  from  the  top  to  the  boss, 
they  are  cut  away,  as  shown  at  A,  in  the  cross  section,  and,  if 
necessary,  removable  pieces  are  attached  by  bolts,  to  partially  fill 
up  the  opening.  By  doing  so,  it  is  claimed  that  the  minimum 
amount  of  central  obstruction  with  the  largest  amount  of  fan 
power  could  be  secured  in  each  case. The  two  fans  last  described  seem  to  be  the  ones  most  in  favour 
at  the  present  time ;  both  of  them  have  high  efficiency  and  both 
are  cheap.  Neither,  however,  have  been  in  use  long  enough  to 
determine  whether  their  wearing  capacity  is  equal  to  that  of  the 
larger  slow  running  fans,  which  have  been  so  well  tried  and 
proved  in  the  past. 
Walker's  Shutter. — The  object  of  this  invention  is  to  reduce the  objectionable  noise  and  vibration  caused  by  rotary  fans.  In 
the  ordinary  Guibal,  the  edge  of  the  shutter  forms  a  horizontal 
line  parallel  with  the  shaft  of  the  fan,  and  faces  the  blades.  A 
little  consideration  will  show  that  during  the  revolution,  as  each 
blade  nears  the  discharge  orifice,  it  has  on  it  a  large  pressure,  but 
as  soon  as  the  tip  of  the  blade  and  bottom  of  the  shutter  coincide 
the  delivery  of  air  is  abruptly  terminated,  the  fan  enters  the  fan 
casing,  the  load  is  removed,  and  a  rebound  necessarily  takes  place. 
The  jerk  thus  caused,  is  transmitted  to  the  fan  shaft,  and  as  each 
arm  acts  in  a  similar  manner,  the  result  is,  that  the  whole  struc- 
ture is  in  a  constant  state  of  vibration,  and  injury  to  it  must 
necessarily  follow. 
Messrs.  Walker  replace  the  horizontal  edge  of  the  shutter  with 
an  inverted  V,  thus,  /\.  Each  blade  commences  to  discharge  at 
the  broad  part  of  the  /^,  and  as  it  proceeds  on  its  journey  meets 
with  a  gradually  decreasing  area  of  discharge  orifice,  until  at  the 
top  of  the  /\  all  egress  of  air  is  stopped.  As  a  result,  the  pressure 
of  air  is  gradually  taken  off  each  vane.  The  length  of  the  yy 
is  somewhat  greater  than  the  distance  between  two  blades,  so 
that  the  following  vane  may  be  opposite  the  commencement  of  the 
shutter  before  the  blade  next  in  advance  has  entirely  left  it. 
Without  doubt,  this  is  one  of  the  greatest  improvements  which 
has  been  added  to  enclosed  fans  of  late  years. 

--- Page Break ---
336  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
Driving  by  Straps  and  Ropes. — High  speed  fans,  except  in rare  instances,  are  not  driven  direct  by  engines,  but  through  belts, 
or  better  still,  by  a  number  of  ropes  working  in  grooved  pulleys.. 
With  a  steady  running  fan-engine  high  degrees  of  expansion  can be  used,  as  the  work  is  uniform,  but  such  procedure  causes  a 
certain  amount  of  shock  to  the  fan,  as  the  piston  receives  full 
pressure  of  steam  at  beginning  of  stroke.  Then  steam  is  cut  offr and  the  rest  of  the  revolution  is  due  to  the  momentum  obtained 
and  the  expansion  of  steam  already  in  the  cylinder.  The  fan  is- 
thus  practically  driven  by  a  series  of  kicks. 
Belts  or  ropes  take  up  this  shock.  Ropes,  although  more  expen- 
sive than  belts  in  first  cost,  are,  perhaps,  the  best  in  the  long  run. 
If  a  belt  breaks,  all  the  machinery  is  stopped,  but  all  the  ropes 
will  never  break  at  the  same  time.  The  only  mistake  that  can  be 
made  is  to  put  too  great  a  strain  on  each  rope,  by  which  wear 
becomes  very  rapid.  These  ropes  are  constructed  of  hemp,  and 
to  obtain  sufficient  grip  are  generally  made  to  run  in  grooves, 
whose  sides  are  inclined  towards  each  other  at  an  angle  of  45°, The  ordinary  method  of  application  is  to  have  each  rope  in 
separate  grooves.  They  are  pulled  very  taut  at  first,  but  get  less 
tight  as  the  rope  lengthens.  Another  method  is  to  wind  a  single 
rope  round  the  two  pulleys  as  many  times  as  required  for  th& 
necessary  horse-power,  and  to  put  on  a  tension  pulley  to  get  the 
required  grip  and  to  take  up  slack. 
The  wear  of  a  rope  is  due  to  two  causes :  internally,  by  the 
movement  of  the  fibres  on  each  other  due  to  the  bending  on  the 
pulleys,  and,  externally,  through  the  wedging  and  slipping  in  the 
grooves  of  the  pulley,  both  of  which  may  be  said  to  be  directly 
proportional  to  the  speed.  Hope  drives  have  only  been  employed 
for  about  the  past  twelve  years,  and  have  not  been  in  use  suffi- 
cient time  to  determine  their  wearing  capacity;  it,  however,, 
appears  to  be  unlimited. 
Arrangement  of  Engines,  &c. — To  minimise  the  result  of  a 
breakdown  in  the  engine,  it  is  usual  to  apply  two  to  a  fan,  each 
working  alternately  for  certain  lengths  of  time,  generally  about three  months  at  a  stretch. 
This  arrangement  only  provides  relief  in  case  of  accident  to  the- engine,  and  if  the  fan  breaks  down  everything  is  stopped.  Of 
late  years  it  has  become  common  to  duplicate  the  whole  of  the 
ventilating  machinery,  and  work  each  fan  alternately.  A  very 
good  arrangement  for  two  ventilators,  as  applied  at  Celynen 
Colliery,  South  "Wales,  is  shown  in  Fig.  389.  Two  Waddle  fans, each  45  ft.  diameter,  are  situated  as  illustrated.  The  air- drifts are  16  ft.  wide  by  21  ft.  high,  and  in  each  one,  at  points  a  and  6, 
are  eight  wooden  doors,  working  in  iron  frames  (see  cross  section). 
These  doors  open  towards  the  fans. 
To  change  fans,  the  one  that  has  been  standing  is  started,  and 
speed  gradually  got  up  to  about  40  revolutions.  The  other  fan  is- 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 
337 slowed  down  to  50  revolutions,  while  the  speed  of  the  second  fan  is 
increased ;  immediately  the  revolutions  of  the  second  fan  exceed 
those  of  the  first,  the  air  doors  in  its  drift  open,  and  at  the  same 
FIG.  389. 
Cross 
time,  those  going  to  the  first  machine  shut.  The  first  fan  is  then 
stopped,  and  the  speed  of  the  second  one  increased  to  the  ordinary amount. 
Determination  of  the  Useful  Effect.  —  The  amount  of  use- 
ful effect  produced  by  a  fan  is  found  by  carefully  determining  the 
quantity  of  air  put  into  circulation  by  it,  and  by  measuring  the 
water  gauge.  Each  inch  of  water  gauge  is  equal  to  a  pressure  of 
5.2  Ibs.  per  sq.  ft.  The  horse-power  in  the  air 
X5.2 
33,000 where  q  =  the  quantity  of  air  in  cubic  ft.  per  minute  and  W.G.  = 
water  gauge  in  inches. 
While  the  air  measurements  are  being  taken,  the  speed  of  the 
engine  is  carefully  noted,  and  indicator  diagrams  taken,  from 
which  the  mean  steam  pressure  in  the  cylinder  is  determined. 
The  H.  P.  of  the  engine 
_  pxd2*  .7854  x  2  x  S  x  B ~~~~ 
-where  jt?  =  the  average  steam  pressure,  d  =  ihe  diameter  of  the 
cylinder,  S  =  the  length  of  the  stroke  in  feet,  and  R  =  the  number 
of  revolutions  per  minute.  The  ratio  between  the  horse-power  in 
the  air  and  the  horse-power  exerted  by  the  engine  gives  the  useful effect  of  the  fan. 
It  must  be  admitted  that,  in  comparing  fans,  it  is  scarcely  fair 
to  do  so,  without  deducting  the  power  required  to  drive  the 
engine  when  it  is  not  connected  to  the  fan.  The  higher  type  of 
engine  in  perfect  condition  necessarily  absorbs  less  power  to  drive 
it  than  a  badly  designed  machine  in  an  indifferent  condition  ;  it 
may,  therefore,  happen  that  a  good  fan  driven  by  a  bad  engine 
will  not  show  such  a  high  efficiency  as  a  less  perfect  fan  driven 
by  a  good  engine. 
Efficiency  of  Fans.  —  No  matter  whether  the  fan  is  a  large 
one,  running  slowly,  or  small  one,  travelling  at  high  velocity,  the Y 

--- Page Break ---
338  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
work  done  depends  on  the  speed  of  the  periphery,  or  tangential 
velocity.  The  theoretical  depression  which  a  perfect  fan  would 
produce  is  determined  by  the  formula  — 
where  H  is  expressed  in  feet  of  air  column  required  to  overcome 
the  resistance  of  the  mine,  and  u  =  tangential  velocity  in  feet  per 
second.  This  depression  is  never  realised  in  practice,  owing  to- 
several  causes,  the  chief  of  which  is  the  resistance  of  the  machine 
itself  to  the  passage  of  the  air  through  it.  The  theory  of  venti- 
lators now  generally  accepted  is  that  of  Mr.  Murgue,*  the  third 
part  of  which  has  been  translated  into  English  by  Mr.  A.  L. 
Steavenson,f  to  which  the  student  is  referred  for  the  reasoning 
by  which  the  following  formulae  are  deduced. 
Mr.  Murgue  assimilates  every  mine  to  an  orifice  in  a  thin  plate, 
which  he  calls  the  "  equivalent  orifice"  that  is  to  say,  all  mines requiring  a  certain  water  gauge  for  the  production  of  a  certain 
volume  of  air  are  exactly  equivalent  to  an  orifice  in  a  thin  plate 
which  requires  the  same  water  gauge  to  pass  the  same  volume. 
By  this  means  all  existing  mines  can  be  compared  by  the  sizes  of their  orifices. 
The  equivalent  orifice  depends  upon  the  well-known  laws  relat- 
ing to  the  flow  of  fluids,  being  chiefly  affected  by  what  is  known  as- 
the  vena  contracta,  or  the  quantity  which  passes  through  an  orifice 
in  a  thin  plate  is  0.65  that  of  the  quantity  due  to  the  area  of  the 
full  orifice.  If  it  is  assumed  that  the  normal  densities  of  air  and 
water  are  respectively  1.2  and  1000  and  expressing  Y,  the  volume^ 
in  thousands  of  cubic  feet  per  minute  and  h  in  inches  of  water  gauge,. 
the  equivalent  orifice  a  will  be  found  from  the  formula  — 
V 
0=0.403  —  = 
V/i 
The  second  point  of  Mr.  Murgue  is  that  the  ventilator  even 
while  exhausting  the  air  from  the  mine,  forms  at  the  same  time  an 
obstacle  to  the  passage  of  the  air,  causing  a  sensible  loss  of  duty. 
This  he  calls  the  "  orifice  of  passage." In  order  to  compare  two  machines,  they  are  regulated  to  the 
same  speed  of  periphery,  or  their  results  may  be  easily  reduced  to 
equal  speeds,  since  the  volumes  vary  as  the  revolutions,  and  the 
depressions  as  the  square  of  the  speeds. 
The  mine  is  altered  to,  say,  five  different  conditions,  first,  by 
*  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (2e  Serie),  ist  part,  ii.  445  ;  2nd  part,  iv.  747  ;  3rd  part, 
t  The  Theory  and  Practice  of  Centrifugal  Ventilating  Machines.  London. 1883. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 339 
JOOOO 
Equivalent  orifices  in 
obstructing  the  passages ;  then  in  a  normal  state ;  and  afterwards 
by  opening  some  of  the  doors. 
With  the  equivalent  orifiies  of   these  five  different  mines,  or 
conditions  of  mine,  plotted  as  abscissae,  and  the  volumes  as  ordinates, 
a  curve  is  obtained,  which 
clearly  shows  the  effective-  fIG.  390. ness    of    each   fan,   and   is 
called     its      "  characteristic 
curve" A    perfect    fan    moving 
without  friction  and  giving 
the  theoretical  water  gauges, 
produces  volumes  of  air  pro- 
portional to   its   equivalent 
orifice,    and    its     curve     is 
represented    by   a    straight 
line,   O  B,    Fig.   390,  com- mencing  from    the    origin, because     when     the     mine 
is  closed  the  volume  of  air 
is    necessarily   nil.     Owing to    the   resistances    of    the 
fan  itself   which  vary  with 
the    volume    produced,  the 
straight   line   is   never   ob- 
tained in  practice,  but  a  curved  one  takes  its  place.     The  nearer 
this  curved  line  approaches  the  straight  one  the  more  perfect  is the  fan. 
In  calculating  the  efficiency  of   fans  the  chief  error  which  is 
likely  to  arise  is  neglecting  the  amount  of  natural  ventilation,  as, 
if  this  is  large,  it  has  to  be  passed  through  the  fan,  and  in  doing 
so  little  or  no  water  gauge  is  produced. 
Under  favourable  conditions,  and  with  a  machine  designed  for 
the  work  it  has  to  perform,  the  efficiencies  of  the  Guibal  and  im- 
proved Waddle  fans  may  reach  65  to  70  per  cent.,  while  that  of  the 
Schiele  fan  is  smaller.  The  efficiency  of  the  Capell  and  Walker 
fans  is  probably  higher  than  the  above  figure.  Any  fan  dealing 
with  the  maximum  quantity  of  air  that  it  was  designed  to  pass, 
gives  better  results  than  if  the  quantity  of  air  put  into  circulation 
is  either  more  or  less  than  the  amount  for  which  it  was  designed. 
It  is  very  difficult  to  arrive  at  the  relative  merits  of  the  different 
types  of  fans,  as  comparisons  are  apt  to  be  misleading.  In  order 
to  arrive  at  a  trustworthy  conclusion,  the  fans  should  be  of  equal 
capacities  and  be  working  under  the  same  conditions.  The  latter 
condition  can  scarcely  be  fulfilled  unless  the  fans  are  applied  to the  same  mine.  In  order  to  determine  the  relative  merits  of  the 
various  types  of  fans,  the  North  of  England,  the  South  Wales, 
and  the  Midland  Institutes  of  Mining  Engineers  have  appointed 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
a  Committee,  but  unfortunately  their  report  is  not  yet  issued 
(May  1893). 
Comparison  of  Furnaces  and  Fans. — Mr.  J.  J.  Atkinson 
appeal's  to  have  been  the  only  person  to  theoretically  compare  the relative  efficiencies  of  furnace  and  mechanical  ventilation.* 
After  considering  the  varying  circumstances  of  different  mines 
and  the  conditions  under  which  furnaces  and  fans  produce  a 
ventilating  current,  he  gives  a  formula  from  which  it  appears 
that  the  depth  at  which  furnace  action  becomes  as  economical  in 
fuel  as  a  ventilating  machine,  increases  directly  as  the  volume 
assumed  by  a  given  weight  of  air  as  due  to  the  average  upcast 
temperature  required  for  the  production  of  ventilation  by  furnace 
action — that  is  to  say,  inversely  as  the  average  density  of  the 
heated  air  in  the  upcast.  This  depth,  of  course,  must  decrease  in 
the  same  proportion  that  the  fuel  per  horse-power  per  hour, 
required  to  drive  the  engine  of  a  ventilating  machine  increases. 
By  this  formula  the  following  table  was  calculated,  showing 
the  depths  at  which  furnaces  become  equal  to  ventilating  machines 
in  point  of  economy  of  fuel,  on  the  assumption  that  the  fuel  due 
to  the  temperature  lost  between  the  furnace  and  the  point  in  the 
upcast  column,  where  the  average  temperature  prevails,  is  the 
same  percentage  of  the  whole  fuel  as  that  which  arises  from  the 
application  of  ventilating  machines,  driven  by  engine  power,  to 
produce  the  same  ventilation : 
Consumption  of  Coal AVERAGE  TEMPERATURE  OF  UPCAST 
by  Engine  in  Ibs.  per COLUMNS. 
hour  per  horsi  -power 
100°  F. 150°  F. 
200°  F. 
Depth  in  Yards. Depth  in  Yards. Depth  in  Yards. 
8 
958 
1044 
1130 
10 
766 
834 
904 
12 638 
696 
752 
A  table  is  also  given  showing  that  the  average  loss  in  eleven 
cases  of  furnace  action  was  40  per  cent.  If  therefore  ventilating 
machines  lose  40  and  utilise  60  per  cent,  of  the  engine  power, 
the  depths  that  are  necessary  to  render  furnace  ventilation  as 
economical  as  such  ventilating  machines  in  the  consumption  of 
fuel  are  as  stated  above.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  many 
engines  at  the  present  day  do  not  consume  4  Ibs.  of  coal  per 
horse-power  per  hour,  and  hence  the  economy  of  fan  ventilation is  more  than  that  shown  by  the  table. 
N.  E.  I.  vi.  135. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  341 
Mr.  C.  Cockson,  after  giving  a  description  of  a  fan  at  Dairy 
Pit,  Wigan,*  stated  that  the  plant  was  erected  to  take  the  place 
of  two  underground  furnaces,  having  a  fire-bar  area  of  129  square feet  on  which  1 2  tons  1 7  cwt.  of  Arley  mine  mixture  were  burnt 
per  24  hours,  producing,  with  the  furnace  very  hard  fired,  142,570 
cubic  feet  of  air  per  minute,  the  cost  for  wages  being  igs..^d.  and 
for  fuel  £4  35.  yd.,  or  a  total  cost  of  ^5  28.  lod.  per  24  hours, 
which,  multiplied  by  365,  will  be  ^1876  per  annum.  The  fan 
gave  the  same  quantity  of  air  as  the  furnaces  when  running  at 
52  revolutions  per  minute,  burning  4  tons  2  cwt.  of  rough  buzzard 
slack  per  24  hours,  and  costing  for  wages,  ios.  6d.,  and  for  fuel, 
155.  4^.  ;  or  a  total  per  day  of  £i  55.  iod.,  which,  multiplied  by 
365,  gives  a  cost  of  ^471  per  annum,  or  a  saving  by  the  use  of the  fan  on  the  two  items  of  fuel  and  labour  of  ^1405  per  annum. 
Of  course,  from  this  an  allowance  has  to  be  made  for  interest, 
depreciation,  stores,  &c. 
Many  similar  instances  could  be  quoted  if  it  were  necessary, 
but  it  is  now  generally  admitted  that  mechanical  ventilation  is 
superior  to  furnace  ventilation,  as  it  is  more  under  control, 
cheaper,  more  enicient,  and  capable  of  being  easily  varied  in 
quantity  whenever  desired. 
DISTRIBUTION  OF  THE  AIR  CURRENT.— Having  de- 
scribed the  means  of  producing  the  air  current,  and  the  laws  which 
regulate  its  flow,  its  distribution  underground  should  be  readily 
understood.  It  has  been  mentioned  that  two  paths  are  provided  for 
the  current,  one  for  the  fresh  air  to  enter  and  the  other  for  its  return. 
The  distribution  into  the  workings  is  a  far  more  diificult  point  than 
simply  leading  it  along  two  roads.  To  reduce  resistance  and  allow 
large  Volumes  to  be  readily  passed,  it  is  necessary  that  the  air- ways should  have  as  large  a  section  as  possible.  As  the  resistance 
varies  with  the  square  of  the  velocity,  the  only  practicable  way  to 
pass  large  quantities  is  to  reduce  the  velocity,  which  may  be  done 
by  diminishing  the  rubbing  surface,  increasing  the  area  of  the  air- 
way, or  better  still,  by  what  is  known  as  splitting,  that  is  to  say, 
dividing  the  current  into  several  parts,  and  providing  a  separate 
air-way  for  each.  Supposing  one  current  of  100.000  cub.  ft. 
exists  in  the  mine,  and  passes  down  an  air-way  having  an  area  of 
100  sq.  ft.,  its  velocity  would  be  1000  ft.  a  minute.  If  this  cur- rent be  divided  into  five,  each  of  which  contains  20,000  cub.  ft., 
the  same  total  quantity  will  be  passed  through  the  mine,  and 
if  each  of  these  currents  be  provided  with  an  air- way  100  sq  ft. 
in  area  the  velocity  will  be  200  ft.  per  minute,  or  only  one- fifth  of  what  it  was  before,  consequently  the  resistance  is  reduced 
to  one  twenty-fifth  part. 
The  enormous  gain  resulting  from  splitting  the  air  is  at  onc^ 
apparent,  but  it  must  be  remarked  that  there  is  a  limit  to  the 
*  Man.  Geo.  Soc.  xvii.  231. 

--- Page Break ---
34*  TEXT-BO  DK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
number  of  splits  that  can  be  used  at  any  mine.  All  the  splits, 
however  separate  they  may  be  kept  in  the  workings,  have  to  unite 
at  the  bottom  of  the  upcast  shaft,  and  pass  through  it ;  therefore, 
when  the  resistance  of  the  shaft  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  resist- 
ance of  the  air-ways,  the  limit  of  advantageous  splitting  is reached. 
To  obtain  the  best  results  from  splitting  the  air-current  it  is 
necessary  that  every  split  should  commence  as  near  as  possible  to 
the  shaft  bottom,  and  have  a  separate  in-take  and  return,  and  that 
the  splits  should  approximately  be  of  equal  lengths,  to  avoid  the 
necessity  for  regulating  doors. 
Stoppings. — When  the  two  main  roads  are  being  driven,  one 
for  the  in-take,  and  the  other  for  the  return,  they  are  connected 
at  intervals  by  cross-drivages,  and  those  nearest  the  shaft  are 
stopped  up  again  immediately  another  one  nearer  the  face  is 
driven.  These  stoppings  are  usually  built  of  dirt  or  rubbish,  and 
a  brick  wall  put  on  the  side  nearest  the  in-take  current.  Every 
care  should  be  taken  that  this  is  air-tight,  or  a  small  quantity  will 
escape  through  and  pass  away  to  the  up-cast  shaft  without  doing 
any  good.  The  practice  is  sometimes  followed  of  leaving  a  small 
hole  through  the  stopping  to  ventilate  the  cross-road,  but  it  is  dif- ficult to  see  how  this  can  do  any  good,  as  the  quantity  of  air 
which  escapes  through  is  so  small,  that  it  cannot  effectively  venti- late the  road  ;  while  the  total  loss  occasioned  by  a  number  of  such 
outlets  seriously  reduces  the  quantity  passing  into  the  workings. 
Doors. — Where  tubs,  men,  or  animals  have  to  pass  through 
these  cross-roads,  doors  replace  the  stoppings  previously  referred 
to.  Generally  two  and  often  three  sets  of  doors  are  employed, 
the  object  of  which  is  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  all  being  open 
at  the  same  time.  The  main  doors  which  are  of  a  permanent 
character,  should  be  built  in  a  masonry  abutment,  carefully  made 
and  fitted,  and  provided  with  a  latch.  If  tubs  travel  through  the 
road  a  guard  should  be  fixed  to  each  door  to  prevent  the  tub  strik- 
ing the  woodwork;  this 
FIG.  391.  usually  consists  of  a  curved 
strip  of  flat  iron,  bent  as shown  in  plan  by  Fig.  391. 
Unless  this  precaution  Is 
taken,  sooner  or  later  the 
door  will  be  damaged,  and  leakage  of  air  follows. 
It  sometimes  happens  that  doors  have  to  be  placed  in  roads 
where  haulage  is  carried  out  by  mechanical  means,  although  such 
practice  is  by  no  means  to  be  recommended.  Either  special  boys 
have  to  be  kept  to  open  and  shut  these  doors  at  the  proper  time, 
or,  what  is  still  better,  a  self-closing  door,  illustrated  in  plan  and 
elevation  (Figs.  392  and  393),  which  is  adopted  at  Hetton  Colliery, 
can  be  used.  The  door  is  in  two  divisions,  hung  by  pulleys  travel- 
ling on  rails,  these  being  arranged  at  such  an  inclination  that  the 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 343 
two  halves  run  together  by  their  own  weight,  and  shut  close. 
Hinged  to  the  edge  of  each  half  where  it  meets  the  other,  and 
about  2  ft.  from  the  bottom  of  the  door  is  a  stout  piece  of  angle 
steel,  a  a,  about  8  ft.  long,  the  outer  end  of  which  passes  through 
an  eye  bolt  fastened  to  a  tree,  c,  this  being  placed  as  near  the 
rails  as  will  only  just  allow  the  tub  to  pass:  When  a  set  reaches 
the  door,  the  first  tub  en- 
counters  the  bars,  a,  presses  ^^ them  outwards,  and  in  doing 
so  opens  the  door,  which 
closes  again  when  the  last 
tub  has  gone  by.  As  this 
arrangement  is  similar  on 
both  sides  of  the  door,  it  is 
opened  equally  easily  which- ever way  the  set  is  travelling, 
and  the  motion  being  gradual 
there  is  a  complete  absence  of 
:shock,  so  noticeable  when  the 
tubs  strike  against  ordinary doors. 
Regulating  Doors. — If 
all  the  splits  are  of  equal 
length  and  the  air-ways  of 
equal  area,  the  same  resist- ance is  encountered  by  each, 
but  as  such  condition  scarcely 
ever  exists,  artificial  resistance 
has  to  be  added  to  regulate 
the  quantity  passing  in  each 
split  to  the  desired  amount. 
If  it  were  not,  the  shortest 
splits  would  take  the  largest 
quantity.  This  regulation  is 
effected  by  an  opening  in  a 
door,  such  being  covered  by 
a  sliding  shutter,  which  can 
be  set  at  any  point  to  give the  desired  result. 
Air  Crossings. — In  splitting  air,  one  current  has  to  pass  over, or  under,  the  other,  but  it  must  do  so  in  a  separate  conduit. 
This  is  effected  by  what  are  known  as  air  crossings.  A  temporary 
form  is  to  build,  where  two  roads  cross  each  other,  a  brick  wall 
on  each  side  of  the  intake  current,  place  two  timber  bearers  on 
the  top,  and  connect  the  two  walls  by  planks  laid  across.  The  in- 
coming current  passes  between  the  walls  underneath  the  planks, 
while  the  return  air  passes  over  the  walls  and  planks. 
This  construction  results  in  great  loss  by  leakage,  especially  if 

--- Page Break ---
344 TEXT-LOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIGS.  394  AND  395. 
yjV^-^^^v/y, 
II 
there  is  any  movement  in  the  ground.  At  Lye  Cross  pit,  cross- 
ings are  used  as  illustrated  in  Figs.  394  and  395.  In  the  in-take 
road  an  invert  of  masonry  and  two  side  walls  are  built,  girders  put across  from  one  to  the  other 
and  bricked  in  between  with 
small  arches.  The  return  air- 
way is  formed  by  carrying  two 
walls  up  to  the  roof,  this  being 
also  capped  by  girders  which  run 
at  right  angles  to  those  previ- 
ously mentioned.  The  construc- tion is  very  solid,  but  is  required on  account  of  the  movements  in 
the  strata,  which,  if  not  pre- vented, would  result  in  serious leakage. 
In  fiery  mines,  should  an 
explosion  happen,  all  stoppings 
constructed  in  the  ordinary  way 
would  be  blown  down,  the  two 
currents  intermingled  and  venti- 
lation entirely  suspended.  To  pro- vide against  such  contingency, 
it  is  often  the  practice  to  drive 
the  return  air-way  some  consi- derable distance  above  the  in- take (Fig.  396). 
Loss  in  Circulation. — By 
the  aid  of  stoppings,  doors, and  air 
crossings  the  currents  are  regu- lated and  made  to  follow  certain 
paths  at  will,  in  order  that  ventilation  shall  be  carried  into  the 
workings  and  perform  its  mission.  The  greatest  care  must  be  takei  i to  reduce  leakage 
FIG.  396.  through   cross 
roads,  but  in 
spite  of  all  pre- cautions only  a 
portion  of  the air  that  passe* 
through  the down-cast  shaft 
reaches  the  working  face.  It  is  difficult  to  believe  how  small  this 
portion  is,  but  the  following  example  given  by  Mr.  Henry 
Palmer*  may  be  quoted,  showing  the  great  loss.  A  ventilating 
current  was  measured  at  several  places  dining  its  passage  f rom 
*  Erit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xi.  46. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  345 
the  down-cast  shaft  to  the  workings.  It  is  stated  that  the  doors 
in  the  seam  in  question  were  well  fitting  and  double,  and  that  the 
stoppings  were  made  as  solid  as  possible,  and  well  stowed.  The 
first  measurement  was  taken  140  yds.  from  the  shaft,  and  the 
quantity  found  to  be  16,650  cub.  ft.  per  minute.  At  805  yards 
from  the  shaft  the  quantity  was  12,550  cub.  ft. ;  about  this  point 
a  split  of  3140  cub.  ft.  passed  away  to  ventilate  an  engine  and 
travelling  road.  At  1470  yds.  from  the  shaft  the  quantity  was 
7700  cub.  ft.,  and  immediately  after  this  point  a  second  split  of 
3510  cub.  ft.  passed  away  to  ventilate  another  district.  At  the 
face  of  the  workings,  2200  yds.  from  the  shaft,  the  quantity  was 
1560  cub.  ft. 
It  will,  therefore,  be  seen  that  while  16,650  cub.  ft.  left  the 
shaft,  only  1560  cub.  ft.  reached  the  face.  From  the  initial 
quantity,  however,  the  two  splits  alluded  to,  must  be  deducted, 
viz.,  3140  and  3510,  making  a  total  of  6650  cub.  ft.  Deducting 
this  from  16,650,  leaves  10,000  cub.  ft.  and  a  very  simple  calcula- 
tion will  show,  that  no  less  than  84.4  per  cent,  of  the  air  current 
was  lost  in  its  passage  from  the  .shaft  to  the  working  face. 
MEASUREMENT  OP  AIR  CURRENTS.— In  order  to 
determine  the  quantity  of  air  passing,  the  velocity  has  to  be 
ascertained.  This,  multiplied  by  the  area  in  sq.  ft.  at  the  point 
of  observation,  gives  the  quantity  of  cub.  ft.  of  air.  The  velocity 
may  be  determined  by  several  methods,  only  two  of  which 
need,  however,  be  considered. 
In  the  first,  some  light  body,  such  as  smoke,  is  employed,  and the  time  it  takes  to  travel  a  measured  distance  noted.  Even 
when  exercising  the  greatest  care,  the  results  obtained  are  not 
exact,  although  near  approximations  are  given.  If  the  road  is  of 
uniform  area,  some  definite  quantity,  such  as  one  cubic  inch  of 
gunpowder,  should  be  always  employed. 
Anemometers. — At  the  present  time,  the  invariable  practice  is 
to  employ  what  are  called  anemometers  for  measuring  the  velocity 
of  the  air  current.  The  common  form  is  known  as  Biram's  (Fig. 397),  which  consists  of  a  series  of  vanes,  a,  placed  obliquely  to  the 
axis  like  the  sails  of  a  windmill.  An  indicator,  or  Counter,  is 
placed  in  the  centre.  The  axis  of  the  vanes  carries  an  endless 
screw,  which  gears  into  a  wheel,  to  which  a  pointer  is  connected. 
Another  form  much  used  is  Casartelli's,  which  is  very  similar  to the  Biram,  but  usually  made  with  five  dials,  registering  units, 
hundreds,  thousands,  &c.,  and,  in  addition,  a  small  lever  or  stop 
is  provided,  by  means  of  which  the  counting  mechanism  can  be 
thrown  in  and  out  of  gear. 
With  the  two  anemometers  just  described  the  velocity  is 
measured, by  holding. tjiem  in  the, air  current  for  a  certain  length 
of  time,  and  noting  the  number  of  revolutions.  This  means  that 
two  persons  are  required,  as  one  man  cannot  hold  a  watch, 
anemometer,  and  lamp  with  two  hands.  Davis's  self-timing 

--- Page Break ---
346 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
anemometer  dispenses  with  the  use  of  a  watch  altogether,  and 
registers  at  once  the  velocity  in  feet  per  second,  and  not  the 
number  of  revolutions  of  the  vanes.  ,•  In  takipg  observations  the 
instrument  (Fig.  398),  is  held  out  at  arm's  length  for  a  short  time until  the  vanes  are  travelling  at  full  speed  due  to  the  air  current, 
fi  small  button,  a,  is  pressed,  and  the  pointer  turns  to  the  speed, 
and  is  kept  there  by  a  locking  arrangement.  Each  instrument 
being  graduated  by  experiment,  no  allowances  have  to  be  made. 
To  return  the  pointer  to  zero,  the  small  milled  head  b  is  screwed 
down  until  a  is  released,  when  as  soon  as  b  is  unscrewed,  the 
pointer  turns  to  zero,  and  the  instrument  is  ready  to  take  another 
FIG.  397. FIG.  398. 
observation.  Two  graduated  circles  are  provided,  and  a  pointer, 
c,  travelling  in  a  small  dial,  infoims  the  observer  which  one  to read. 
Messrs.  Davis  &  Son  have  recently  introduced  a  new  form  of 
anemometer  for  measuring  currents  of  high  velocity  (over  20  ft. 
per  second).  It  is  called  the  "  Capell-Davis,"  as  the  vanes  are shaped  like  those  of  the  Capell  fan.  It  differs  from  anemometers 
on  the  Biram  principle  in  having  the  vanes  rigidly  attached  to  a 
blank  disc.  As  a  result,  the  wind  pressure  bears  equally  on  the 
whole  surface,  whereas  in  the  old  construction  it  might  impinge on  one  vane  more  than  another  and  distort  one  of  the  delicate 
arms. 
Messrs.  Atkinson  &  Daglish  *  conducted  a  series  of  experiments 
with  anemometers,  and  determined  that  they  all  required  correc- 
tion, to  bring  the  velocity  they  recorded  to  the  true  velocity  at 
*  N.  E.  I.  x.  207. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 347 
--(---I — f  -•»--- 
which  the  air  is  travelling.  The  true  velocity  may  be  determined 
by  the  formula, v  =  aE  x  6 
where  a  is  a  constant  proportional  to  the  number  of  linear  feet 
travelled  by  the  air  per  revolution,  R  is  the  number  of  revolutions 
registered  by  the  anemometer,  and  b  the  losses  of  velocity  due  to 
friction  of  machine,  this  loss  being  determined  experimentally  by 
a  whirling  machine. 
Instead  of  this  formula,  the  correction  is  usually  made  by 
adding  numbers,  which  are  supplied  by  the  makers,  and  which 
vary  for  every  instrument  and  for  different  velocities.  Anemo- meters are  necessarily  of  very  light  and  fragile  construction,  and 
easily  get  out  of  order.  It,  therefore,  becomes  necessary  if  accuracy 
is  desired,  that  they  should  be  tested  from  time  to  time. 
In  order  to  obtain  trustworthy  results,  the  places  of  measurement 
must  be  of  uniform  section  and  preferably  divided,  by  a  series  of 
horizontal  and  vertical 
strings,  into  a  number  of  FIGS.  399  AND  400. 
equal  parts  (Fig.  399),  and 
the  anemometer  placed  in 
each  for  a  certain  length 
of  time.  If  a  disengaging 
gear  is  applied  to  the  in- strument, it  should  be 
placed  in  the  current,  and allowed  to  attain  the  full 
velocity  before  throwing  the  mechanism  into  gear.  For  very accurate  results  the  observations  should  be  taken  in  each  division. 
Mr.  Murgue,  however,  states,  that  the  ratio  between  the  mean 
velocity  and  the  velocity  at  any  given  point  in  the  same  section 
remains  constant,  whatever  variations  there  are  in  the  mean 
velocity.  It  is  only  necessary,  therefore,  to  find  the  ratio  between 
the  mean  velocity,  and  the  velocity  of  air  at  any  one  convenient 
point,  and  in  future  merely  measure  the  velocity  at  that  point. 
For  all  ordinary  purposes,  the  velocity  can  be  determined  by 
holding  the  anemometer  out  at  arm's  length  and  moving  it  slowly over  the  section  of  the  gallery,  following  the  course  indicated  by 
the  dotted  line  in  Fig.  400. 
Barometer  and  Thermometer. — At  every  mine. a  barometer 
and  thermometer  have  to  be  placed.  The  former  indicates  the 
pressure  of  the  atmosphere,  and  as  the  volume  of  air  varies 
inversely  as  the  pressure,  the  rise  or  fall  in  the  barometer influences  the  volume  of  air  in  the  mine.  It  is  also  contended 
that  if  the  barometer  falls,  a  certain  amount  of  pressure  is  taken 
off  the  face  of  the  strata,  and  that  the  gases  contained  in  the  coal 
are  more  freely  liberated,  or,  that  any  accumulations  contained  in 
old  goaves  may  be  liberated.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  much 

--- Page Break ---
343 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING 
ground  for  this  assertion,  as  the  gas  in  coal  exists  under  such  a 
pressure  that  the  small  variations  occasioned  by  difference  in 
height  of  the  barometer  are  unappreciable.  In  addition,  a 
barometer  is  by  no  means  delicate  enough  to  act  as  a  forewarning 
instrument ;  since  such  a  light  substance  as  air  or  gas  would 
be  affected  long  before  any  indication  of  change  is  given  by  a 
mercury  column. 
The  indications  of  the  thermometer  are  valuable,  as  they  point 
out  the  expansion  in  the  air  current ;  for,  as  the  volume  varies 
directly  as  the  temperature,  a  rise  means  that  a  smaller 
weight  or  quantity  of  ;nr  will  entpr  into  the  mine  in  a  given  time. 
Water  Gauges. — For  measuring  the  pressure  producing 
ventilation,  water  gauges  are  employed.  A  cub.  ft.  of  water  at 
62°  F.  under  30  inches  barometrical  pressure,  weighs  62.355  ^s., so  that  the  pressure  per  sq.  ft.  due  to  each  inch  in  height  is  con- 
sequently £1^1-16.  =  5.196  Ibs.,  but  in  ordinary  calculations  it  is usual  to  take  one  inch  of  water  gauge  as  being  equal  to  a  pressure 
of  5.2  Ibs.  The  ordinary  form  consists  of  a  U-shaped  tube,  with 
one  end  open  to  the  atmosphere,  and  the  other  placed  in  com- 
munication with  the  return  air- way  of  the  mine.  As  the  presssure 
of  air  inside  the  mine  is  smaller  than  that  outside,  the  weight  of  the 
atmosphere  depresses  the  column  in  one  leg  of  the  tube  and  raises 
it  in  the  other.  The  difference  in  height  is  measured  by  a  movable 
FIG.  401.  scale,  graduated  in  inches,  and  indi- 
cates the  pressure  producing  ventila- tion. 
The  variations  in  the  pressure 
which  are  constantly  going  on  with 
centrifugal  ventilators  cause  con- siderable oscillation  of  the  liquid  in 
the  tubes,  and,  in  addition,  capillary attraction  causes  the  surface  of  the 
water  to  take  a  curved  line.  It  is, 
therefore,  difficult  to  take  accurate 
observations  with  the  ordinary  water 
gauge.  The  author  has  adopted  a 
form  (Fig.  401),  the  design  of  which 
is  due  to  Messrs.  Atkinson  &  Daglish. 
In  it  the  two  tubes  are  replaced  by 
two  large  compartments,  a  and  b, 
having  sheet  glass  in  front.  These 
are  connected  by  a  very  small  copper 
tube,  c,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a 
three-way  cock.  One  compartment  is  closely  sealed,  and  connected 
by  means  of  a- pipe,  rf,  with  the  fan  drift;  while  the  other  is  open to  the  atmosphere.  Owing  to  each  compartment  being  of  large 
area  while  the  connection  between  the  two  is  very  small,  the 
column  of  the  water  remains  quite  steady  and  capillary  attrac- 
n m 
i-  -E b 
-      r IHl 
E    E vSKiv.-?; 
=2- 
1  — 
LJ 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION.  349 
tion  is  not  noticeable.     A  movable  scale  serves  to  determine  the 
difference  in  level. 
Considerable  difference  of  opinion  exists  as  to  the  proper  position 
to  take  the  water  gauge  at,  and  in  which  direction  the  end  of  the 
tube  should  be  placed  respecting  the  current. 
The  English  Fan  Commission  take  the  gauge  FIG.  402 6  ft.  from  the  entrance  to  the  fan  inlet.  This 
appears  to  be  open  to  the  objection,  where 
small  high-speed  fans  are  used,  that  the  eddies 
produced  by  rapid  revolution  are  likely  to 
give  false  results  so  near  the  machine.  The 
general  opinion  is  that  the  end  of  the  pipe 
going  to  the  water  gauge  should  be  placed  at 
right  angles  to  the  air-current  and  preferably 
covered  loosely  with  a  roll  of  felt  plugged  at 
the  top  with  wood,  to  cause  the  air  to  pass 
through  the  cloth  (Fig.  402). 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : — 
N.  E.  I.  :  Observations  on  the  greater  facility  of  Ventilating  Dip  than  Rise 
Workings,  G.  C.  Green  well,  ii.  31  ;  The  Theory  of  the  Ventilation  of 
Mines,  J.  J.  Atkinson,  iii.  73  and  iii.  321  ;  Notes  on  J.  J.  Atkinson's Paper,  T.  J.  Taylor,  iii.  347  ;  The  relative  position  of  Upcast  /Shafts 
and  loss  of  temperature  in  same,  J.  A.  Longridge,  iv.  147  ;  On  certain 
changes  ichich  take  place  in  the  condition  of  the  air  during  its  passage 
through  the  Shaft  and  Workings  of  a  Mine,  J.  A.  Longridge,  iv.  203; 
The  comparative  consumption  of  Fuel  by  Ventilating  Furnaces  and 
Ventilating  Machines,  J.  J.  Atkinson,  vi.  135  ;  On  the  proportions  in 
which  Air  in  Mines  distributes  itself  over  several  Splits  having  different 
lengths,  and  offering  different  resistances  to  currents  of  air  passing 
through  them,  J.  J.  Atkinson,  vi.  163 ;  On  tie  relative  importance  of 
certain  causes  in  producing  changes  of  Density  in  the  Air  of  Mines  as 
it  progresses  in  circulating,  J.  J.  Atkinson,  vii.  115  ;  On  the  causes  of 
the  Variation  of  the  Density  of  Air  circulating  in  Coal  Mines,  T.  J. 
Taylor,  vii.  1 29  ;  Review  of  the  results  of  the  Experiments  which  have 
been  made  to  test,  and  of  the  objections  which  have  been  advanced 
against,  certain  arguments  employed  by  the  Writer  relative  to  the  Venti- 
lation of  Mines,  J.  J.  Atkii^on,  vii.  133;  On  Ventilating  Furnaces 
and  their  elasticity  of  action,  Wm.  Armstrong,  ix.  75  ;  On  the  Con- 
struction of  Ventilating  Furnaces,  J.  Daglish,  ix.  131 ;  On  the  various 
modes  of  ascertaining  the  Velocities  of  Currents  of  Air  in  Mines  in 
order  to  determine  tJte  quantity  circulating  in  a  given  time,  J.  J. 
Atkinson  and'  J.  Daglish,  x.  207;  On  the  destructive  action  of Furnace  Gases  in  Upcast  Shafts,  J.  Daglish,  xi.  19  ;  Paradoxes  in  the 
Ventilation  of  Mines,  J.  J.  Atkinson  and  J.  Daglish,  xii.  93;  A  Com- 
parison of  the  Lemielle  and  Guibal  systems  of  Mechanical  Ventilation, 
Wm.  Cochrane,  xviii.  139;  The  economical  advantages  of  Mechanical 
Ventilation,  D.  P.  Morison,  xix.  223  ;  The  mechanical  effect  of 
*'  Blown-out "  Shots  on  Ventilation,  Messrs  Hall  and  Clark,  xxv.  239  ; On  the  advantages  of  Centrifugal  Action  Machines  for  the  Ventilation 
of  Mines,  Wm.  Cochrane,  xxvi.  161  ;  Report  of  Committee  on 
Mechanical  Ventilators,  xxx.  273  ;  On  the  use  of  Salt  for  laying  Dust 
in  Mines,  R.  Stevenson,  xxxi.  145  ;  Observations  of  Earthshakes  in 
order  to  foretell  the  issue  of  Sudden  Qutbursts  of  Fire-damp,  M. 

--- Page Break ---
350  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Walton  Brown,  xxxiii.  179  ;  Account  of  Experiments  made  at 
Co'liery,  Neunkirchen,  particularly  those  on  the  consequences  which arise  when  Coal-Dust  and  Gas  come  in  contact  with  SJwts,  T.  W. 
Banning,  xxxiv.  199  and  297  ;  Account  of  Experiments  in  France  upon 
the  possible  connection  between  Movements  of  the  Earth's  Crust  and  the issue  of  Gas  in  Mines,  M.  Walton  Brown,  xxxvi.  43  ;  Archer  and 
Robson's  Patent  Sprayer,  T.  O,  Robspn,  xxxvi.  99;  Report  of  Com- mittee appointed  to  inquire  into  the  observations  of  Earth  Tremors  with 
a  view  of  determining  their  connection  (if  any]  with  the  issue  of  Gas  in 
Mines,  xxxvii.  55 ;  A  Contribution  to  our  Knowledge  of  Coal-Dust,  P. 
Phillips  Bedson,  xxxvii.  245. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN. :  Essai  sur  ks  machines  d'afrage,  D.  Murgue  (2e  Serie)r ii.  445,  iv.  747,  et  ix.  5  ;  Aerage  des  mines  :  Rapport  de  la  Commission 
chargte  par  le  district  de  Sud-Est  de  la  comparison  des  divers  appareils 
de  ventilation  en  usage  dans  le  Bassin  houiller  du  Gard  (2°  Serie), vii.  477  et  713  ;  Commission  Prussienne  du  grisou  :  Traduction  et 
resume'  du  rapport  de  la  sous-commission  des  ventilateurs,  MM, Murgue  et  Brun  (3e  Serie),  iii.  5,  391  et  453. 
SO.  WALES.  INST. :  On  the  Sanitary  Condition  of  Mines,  M.  Fryar,  iii.  3  ; 
Blowers  and  Outbursts  of  Gas,  &c.,  G.  Wilkinson,  ix.  179  ;  Natural 
and  Furnace  Ventilation,  H.  Begg,  x.  90;  Colliery  Ventilation,  &c., 
G.  Wilkinson,  xi.  129  ;  Air  .Friction  in  Colliery  Shafts,  H.  K.  Jordan r 
xi.  208 ;  The  Watering  of  Dusty  Mines,  A.  Hood,  xiv.  357  ;  On 
Damping  Dust  in  Mines,  H.  W.  Martin,  xv.  267. 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Ventilation  of  Mines  economically  considered,  J.  C, 
Simpson,  i.  10  ;  Experiments  with  Forcing  and  Exhausting  Fans,  R. 
Beith,  v.  1 36  and  154. 
INST.  C.  E.  (For.  Abs.)  :  Machine  Ventilation  in  driving  Levels  at  Dudweiler, 
G.  Engeleke,  ciii.  466 ;  On,  a  Capell  Fan  at  Berge-Borbeck,  M. Kattwinkel,  ciii.  468. 
COLLIERY  GUARDIAN  :  The  Effects  of  Coal-Dust  on  Colliery  Explosions,  H . 
Hall,  Ix.  875;  The  French  Fire-damp  Committee:  Report  on  the various  Suggestions  addressed  to  it  by  Inventors,  Ixi.  103. 
BRIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Notes  on  Experiments  with  a  Guibal  Fan,  A.  H. 
Leech,  i.  490;  The  Schiele  Ventilator,  A.  Mirfin,  iv.  168;  Engine  Sets 
reversing  an  Air  Current,  J.  Douglas,  Jun.,  vi.  101  and  168  ;  Coal- 
Dust  and  Colliery  Explosions :  A  Review,  R.  A.  S.  Redmayne,  xi.  87  ; 
A  Reply,  J.  B.  Atkinson,  xii.  55  ;  A  Rejoinder,  R.  A.  S.  Redmayne, 
xiii.  36  ;  Capell  Fan  at  East  Howie  Colliery,  E.  Graham,  xii.  157. 
CHES.  INST. :  The  Guibal  Fan  Experiments  at  Staoeley,  and  the  comparative 
economy  of  Furnace  and  I1  an  Ventilation,  R.  Howe,  i.  46;  Guibal Fans :  their  detailed  construction  and  maintenance,  R.  F.  Martin, 
v.  217;  Coal- Dust  Experiments:  Report  of  Committee,  Appendix, 
Tables,  &c. ,  and  Extracts  from  numerous  sources,  x ;  Mechanical 
Ventilation  of  Collieries,  G.  M.  Capell,  xvii. 
EBV.  UNIV.  :  Note  sur  les  avantages  comparatifs  des  ventilateurs  d,  capacite 
variable  et  a  force  centrifuge,  Em.  Harze  (2e  Serie),  i.  52  ;  Essai  d'une 
iheorie,  des  ventilateurs  d  force  centrifuge,  J.  Henrotte  (2e  Serie), 
xxii.  99,  et  (3e  Serie)  ii.  35  ;  Note  sur  la  theorie  des  ventilateurs  a  force 
centrifuge,  D.  Murgue  (2e  Serie),  xxii.  564  ;  Le  ventilateur  souterrain 
du  charbonnage  de  Shamrock  (  Westphalie],  L.  Graeff  (3e  Serie),  iii.  109 
Note  sur  la  theorie  des  pompes  rotatives  servant  a  Vaerage  des  mines, 
J.  Henrotte  (3°  Serie),  iii.  124;  Note  sur  le  ventilateur  Ptlzer,  J. 
Henrotte  et  E.  Kelecom  (3e  Serie),  ix.  151. 
N.  STAFF.  INST.  :  Furnace  v.  Fan  Ventilation,  J.  Williamson,  ii.  168,  and 
,     T.  E.  Storey,  ii.  190. 

--- Page Break ---
VENTILATION. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC.  :  Centrifugal  Fans :  their  relative  efficiency  and  useful  effect, 
C.  Cockson,  xvi.  381  ;  On  a  new  Ventilating  fan,  C.  Cockson,  xvii. 
229  ;  On  the  effect  of  Goaf  Stowing  on  Sadden  Outbursts  of  Gas,  H. 
Fletcher,  xx.  173. 
FED.  INST.  :  The  Waddle  Patent  (1890)  Fan,  M.  Walton  Brown,  ii.  173: 
On  a  Duplex  Arrangement  of  Centrifugal  Ventilating  Machines,  Wm. 
Cochrane,  11.483;  the  Chandler  Patent  Fan,  R.  B.  Williamson,  iii. 
171  ;  Notes  on  Fan  Gauges  in  connection  with  Fan  Ttsting  and  the 
Adoption  of  Fans  to  Mines  ;  and  Comparison  of  Fan  and  Furnace  at 
Sdverhill  Colliery,  G.  M.  Capell,  iii.  196  ;  Notes  on  the  Gases  enclosed  in 
Coal  and  Coal  Dust,  P.  Phillips  Bedson  and  W.  McConnell,  iii.  307  ; 
An  Enquiry  into  the  cause  of  the.  two  Seaham  Explosions,  1871  and  1880, 
and  the  Pochin  Explosion,  1884,  T.  H.  M.  Stratton,  iii.  385;  The 
Eateau  Ventilator,  M.  Walton  B:own,  iii.  410. 
ANN.  DES.  MINES:  Sur  les procfdes  propre  a  dicker  la  presence  du  orison 
dans  I'atmosphere  des  Alines,  MM.  Mallard  et  Le  Chatelier  (7°  Serie), xix.  1 86;  Hecherches  experimental  et  theoriques  sur  la  combustion  des 
melanges  gazeux  explosifs,  MM.  Mallard  et  Le  Chatelier  (8e  Serie),  iv. 274  ;  Sur  le  travaux  de  la  Commission  Prussienne  du  grisou,  MM. 
Mallard  et  Le  Chatelier  (8®  Serie)  ix.  638 ;  Memoire  sur  Vatrage  des mines  dans  le  bassin  houiller  de  la  Euhr  ( Westphalie),  L.  Bochet 
(8e  Serie),  x.  143  ;  Sur  I'inflamabilite  du  grisou  par  les  ttincelles 
venant  du  choc  de  I'acier,  Report  of  a  Commission  (8e  Serie),  xviiL 
APPENDIX. 
Table  slwwing  tlie  /Specific  Gravities,  Molecular  Weights,  &c.,  of  Various  Gases. 
r*" Symbol Specific Gravity. 
Weight  of  looo  c.  ft. 
at  o°  C.  and  baro- 
meter 76om.m. 
Molecular 
Weight. 
Air        ... 1.  000 80.712  Ibs. Nitrogen N 09713 78.395     » 
Oxygen O 1.1056 89-235     » 
Carbonic  Oxide     . CO 0.9678 78.H3     „ 
12  +  16  =  28 Carbonic  Acid 
C02 
1.52901 123.409     „ 12  +  32  =  44 
Marsh  Gas    . 
CH4 0-559 
45-II8     „ 12+     4=16 
Sulphuretted 
Hydrogen  . 
SH2 1.1749 
94.828     „ 32+   2  =  34 

--- Page Break ---
(    35*    ) 
CHAPTER   XIL 
LIGHTING. 
Naked  Lights. — The  original  and  most  successful  method  of 
lighting  the  miner  at  his  work  was  to  employ  the  ordinary  tallow 
candle,  or  small  oil-lamp.  The  illumination  given  is  far  better 
than  that  of  any  enclosed  lamps;  indeed,  naked  lights  are  so 
superior  in  this  respect,  that  the  inducement  to  use  them  some- 
times oversteps  discretion.  In  some  mines,  fire-damp  is  found  in 
small  quantities,  and  through  using  naked  lights  accidents  happen 
at  rare  intervals.  To  secure  the  maximum  safety  the  enclosed 
type  of  lamp  should  be  adopted,  but  it  is  an  open  question 
whether,  owing  to  the  smaller  amount  of  light  yielded,  the increase  in  the  number  of  accidents  from  falls  of  roof  and  sides 
will  not  more  than  counterbalance  those  due  to  explosions,  be- 
cause even  with  safety  lamps  absolute  security  is  not  obtainable. 
Miners  much  prefer  working  at  collieries  where  naked  lights  are used. 
Ordinary  tallow  candles  of  16  or  18  to  the  lb.,  of  the  proper 
hardness  to  withstand  the  heat  of  the  mine,  are  the  common 
illuminant  in  non-fiery  seams.  They  are  usually  stuck  in  a  ball 
of  clay,  which  allows  them  to  be  attached  to  timber  or  coal  in  any 
required  position.  In  Scotland  a  small  oil-lamp  is  very  largely employed.  It  gives  a  good  light  and  can  be  carried  about  easily, 
but  cannot  be  attached  to  the  timber  or  sides  in  the  same  ready 
way  that  a  candle  can. 
SAFETY  LAMPS. — At  the  beginning  of  this  century  so  many 
accidents  took  place  through  the  employment  of  naked  lights,  that 
an  attempt  was  made  to  devise  some  arrangement  for  insulating 
the  flame  of  a  lamp,  and  for  preventing  it  from  producing  an 
explosion  in  the  surrounding  atmosphere. 
Davy's  Invention. — Perhaps  what  might  be  called  the  first safety  lamp  was  that  invented  by  Dr.  Clanny,  in  which  a  current 
of  air  was  passed  into  a  lamp  through  a  stratum  of  water  below, 
while  the  products  of  combustion  escaped  through  a  similar  layer 
of  water  at  the  top;  but  to  Sir  Humphry  Davy  belongs  the 
credit  of  not  only  designing  the  first  safety  lamp  in  a  practical  form, 
but  also  of  discovering  the  principle  which  is  still  retained,  and 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 
353 
FIGS.  403  AND  404. 
which  forms  the  main  element  of  security  in  every  modern  safety 
lamp.  He  found  that  an  explosion  would  not  pass  through  small 
apertures  and  tubes,  and  before  the  close  of  the  year  1815  gave 
to  the  world  a  wire-gauze  lamp.  The  Davy  lamp  (Fig.  403  *), 
as  originally  and  still  constructed,  consists  of  a  cylindrical  gauze,  a, 
screwed  to  a  brass  ring, 
which,  in  its  turn,  is  attached 
to  the  oil  vessel,  b.  The 
gauze  is  protected  from  acci- 
dental blows  by  three  iron 
pillars,  c,  passing  upwards from  the  brass  base  to  an 
annular  ring  at  the  top,  to 
which  is  further  attached  a 
metal  cap  or  hood,  d,  above 
which  a  loop  is  placed  to 
enable  the  lamp  to  be  carried 
about.  As  an  additional  se- 
curity, a  second  cylinder  of 
gauze  is  attached  at  the  top 
of  the  first  one  forming  a 
cap,  e.  To  trim  the  wick 
and  to  regulate  its  height 
without  opening  the  lamp, 
a  thin  piece  of  wire,/,  called 
a  "  pricker,"  passes  up  a closely  fitting  tube  through 
the  oil  vessel.  The  gauze 
should  not  contain  less  than  784  apertures  to  the  square  inch. 
Clanny. — In  this  lamp  a  portion  of  the  gauze  of  the  Davy  is 
replaced  by  a  glass  cylinder,  a,  protected  by  metal  bars,  b  (Fig. 
404).  The  other  arrangements  are  similar  to  the  Davy.  The 
feed-air  which  supplies  the  flame  has  to  enter  the  lamp  above  the 
glass,  and  hence  gets  mixed  with  the  products  of  combustion,  the 
result  being  that  the  light  afforded  is  very  little  superior  to  the 
Davy. 
Stephenson. — The  celebrated  engineer,  George  Stephenson, 
then  at  Killingworth  Colliery,  was  experimenting  upon  safety 
lamps  simultaneously  with  Sir  Humphry  Davy,  and  indeed  con- 
structed one  where  the  ingoing  current  was  passed  through  small 
tubes.  As  soon  as  the  wire  gauze  was  proposed,  he  adopted  it  in 
his  lamp,  which  then  took  the  form  shown  in  Fig.  405.  A 
cylinder  of  glass,  a,  is  placed  inside  the  wire  gauze,  and  is  covered 
*  In  all  the  lamp  illustrations,  the  various  parts  are  shown  thus  : — 
i    £rasa  Tttin  SHeelMetob 

--- Page Break ---
354 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MJOTNG. 
FIGS.  405  AND  406. 
over  by  a  perforated  copper  cap,  b.  The  feed-air  is  admitted 
through  a  number  of  small  perforations,  c,  below  the  bottom  of 
the  wire  gauze  and  glass  cylinder.  If  the  lamp  is  to  burn  well,  it 
is  very  necessary  that  these  small  perforations  should  be  kept  free from  dust,  which  is  rather 
a  difficult  matter. 
Mueseler. — This  lamp 
resembles  the  Clanny,  as 
it  consists  of  a  glass  cylin- der at  the  bottom  and  a 
wire  gauze  one  above,  but 
its  main  feature  is  the  in- troduction of  a  central 
metal  chimney,  a,  sup- 
ported byahorizontalgauze 
diaphragm,  b,  placed  at  the top  of  the  glass  (Fig.  406). 
The  products  of  combus- tion pass  up  the  chimney 
and  induce  a  strong 
draught  so  that  the  feed-air is  drawn  smartly  down  on 
to  the  flame,  and  produces 
good  combustion.  This 
lamp,  by  a  Royal  Edict  in 
1876,  is  alone  permitted  to  be  used  in  the  fiery  collieries  of  Belgium, 
and  only  three  modifications  of  a  typical  form  are  allowed.  The 
total  height  of  the  chimney  must  be  4.6  inches,  it  has  to  have  3.55 
inches  of  its  height  above  the  gauze  diaphragm,  and  its  base  must 
be  0.85  inch  above  the  top  of  the  wick  tube. 
Design  of  Lamps. — The  modifications  introduced  into  safety lamps  have  all  been  with  a  view  of  rendering  them  safer  in 
currents  travelling  at  high  velocities.  Davy  himself  pointed  out 
that  his  lamp  should  be  guarded  by  a  shield  when  exposed  to  a 
rapid  current  of  explosive  air,  as  if  not,  the  flame  would  be  forced 
through  the  gauze.  The  safety  is  also  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
small  holes  offer  such  a  large  extent  of  cooling  surface,  that  when 
the  flame  impinges  on  the  gauze,  the  heat  is  conveyed  away  so 
rapidly  and  the  temperature  so  reduced,  that  flame  cannot  pass 
from  one  side  to  the  other.  If  the  gauze  becomes  hot,  it  loses  its 
power  of  isolating  flame,  and  hence  it  is  most  important  that  gases 
should  not  be  allowed  to  continue  burning  in  the  lamp,  or  they 
will  inevitably  ignite  the  external  atmosphere. 
Experiments  made  in  this  country  and  abroad,  determined  that 
the  Davy  lamp  would  pass  flame  if  exposed  to  a  current  having 
a  velocity  of  8  ft.  a  second,  and  that  none  of  the  other  lamps  just 
described  were  safe  if  the  velocity  exceeded  12  ft.  a  second,  with 
the  exception  perhaps  of  the  Mueseler,  which  has  a  slightly  higher 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING.  355 
limit,  if  the  current  meets  the  lamp  horizontally,  but  it  passes 
flame  far  more  readily  than  the  others,  if  the  current  strikes  it 
obliquely.  Although  this  danger  was  often  pointed  out,  no 
official  action  was  taken  in  the  matter  until  the  Royal  Com- 
mission on  Accidents  in  Mines  reported  that  such  was  the  case, 
and  the  result  of  which  is  that  the  Coal  Mines  Regulation  Act, 
1887,  contains  a  clause  (General  Rule  9)  which  practically  pro- 
hibits the  use  of  the  lamps  just  described  in  the  form  illus- 
trated. At  the  same  time,  such  lamps  form  the  basis  of  all  the 
modern  ones,  but  the  latter  are  safeguarded  by  the  addition  of shields. 
It  should,  however,  be  pointed  out  that  something  more  is 
needed  in  a  safety  lamp  than  the  fact  that  it 'is  safe  in  explosive currents  .of  high  velocity.  Experiments  at  the  surface  are  car- 
ried out  with  lamps  perfectly  clean ;  the  experimenter's  hands  are in  the  same  condition,  the  currents  to  which  they  are  exposed  are 
of  high  velocity  and  are  composed  of  fresh  air  mixed  with  gas, 
while  coal-dust  is  conspicuous  by  its  absence.  Underground,  the conditions  are  essentially  different ;  no  matter  how  high  the 
velocity  is  in  the  gate-roads,  it  is  considerably  reduced  when  it 
passes  into  the  working  place  ;  powder  smoke  hangs  about,  and 
small  quantities  of  carbonic  acid  gas  are  mixed  with  the  air 
current.  .  From  the  nature  of  his  avocation,  the  miner's  hands  are 
by  no  means  clean,  he  handles  lamps  in  a  rather  rough-and-ready style,  with  the  result  that  dirt  and  grease  are  transferred  to  them. 
Coal-dust  also  clogs  the  inlet  holes  and  gauze.  It  therefore  follows 
that  the  behaviour  of  some  of  the  modern  types  of  safety  lamps 
after  they  have  been  some  hours  underground,  and  in  the  return 
air  current,  is  not  what  one  would  desire.  This,  however,  is  exactly 
what  might  be  expected  from  the  nature  of  the  conditions 
which  the  lamps  are  constructed  to  withstand.  In  order  to  be 
safe  in  the  highest  velocity  of  air  current,  they  must  be  enclosed 
in  one  or  two  shields,  and  the  inlet  area  for  feed-air  must  be 
reduced  to  the  smallest  dimensions.  So  long  as  they  are  clean,  and 
remain  in  a  strong  current,  the  requisite  amount  of  air  for  proper 
combustion  is  delivered  to  the  flame,  but  when  the  velocity  is 
small  and  the  lamp  gets  dirty,  or  is  used  in  impure  currents,  the 
light  given  is  of  a  very  inferior  character. 
Another  point  of  considerable  importance  is  that  demonstrated 
by  Mr.  Marsaut,*  and  confirmed  by  several  other  observers,  that every  type  of  lamp  facilitates  more  or  less  easily  the  passage  of 
flame  resulting  from  an  internal  explosion.  It  is  necessary  that a  certain  relation  should  exist  between  the  volume  contained  in  a 
lamp  and  the  surface  open  for  the  escape  of  the  products  of 
combustion  resulting  from  the  internal  explosion,  as  experiments 
proved  that  exterior  explosions  or  the  ignition  of.  the  mixture 
*  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (2®  Serie),  xii.  321  ;  translation  in  Ches.  Inst.  xii.  179. 

--- Page Break ---
356 
TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
outside  the  lamp  were  more  rare  as  the  open  surface  of  the  gauze 
was  enlarged. 
Mr.  Marsaut  proved  that — (i)  A  small  diameter  lamp  (such  as  a 
Davy)  does  not  readily  pass  an  explosion,  as  the  volume  susceptible 
to  explosion  is  insignificant.  (2)  A  lamp  without  a  glass  is  more 
secure  against  the  effects  of  internal  explosions  than  a  lamp  with 
a  glass  cylinder,  as  the  glass  in  the  lamp  confines  the  gases  there 
at  the  time  of  an  explosion  and  acts  like  a  cannon ;  it  is  therefore 
both  advisable  to  reduce  the  height  and  diameter  of  the  glass. 
(3)  A  wire  gauze  of  conical  shape  of  the  same  capacity  is  more 
secure  against  the  transmission  of  internal  explosion  than  is  one 
of  cylindrical  shape.  (4)  Gases  resulting  from  combustion  play  a 
certain  part  in  preventing  external  explosions,  and  it  might  there- 
fore not  be  advisable  to  guide  them  by  a  chimney.  (5)  A 
descending  current  of  feed-air  prevents  the  filling  up  of  glass lamps  with  an  explosive  mixture,  and  occasions  the  formation  of 
an  unexplosive  and  elastic  cushion  at  the  bottom  of  the  lamp. 
MODERN  LAMPS. — In  describing  some  typical  forms  of 
lamps,  the  remarks  concerning  them  must  be  taken  as  applying  to 
their  behaviour  in  practical  working  underground.  Only  such  lamps 
are  referred  to  as  have  been  proved  by  numerous  experiments  to 
be  safe  in  all  velocities  which  ordinarily  occur  in  coal  mines.  As 
previously  stated,  this  is  not  the  only  point  required  in  a  lamp. 
Knowing  them  to  be  safe,  the  great  thing  is  to  select  some  form 
which  will  keep  burning  all  through  the  length 
of  a  shift,  and  which  will  also  detect  gas  in 
small  quantities  quickly  and  distinctly. 
Hepple white- Gray. — The  Report  of  the 
Royal  Commission  on  Accidents  in  Mines  first 
drew  attention  to  the  original  form  of  this  type. 
The  lamp  then  reported  on  so  favourably  is  so 
different  in  construction  to  its  modern  represen- 
tative that  the  drawing  of  it  is  reproduced  in 
Fig.  407,  with  a  view  of  clearly  showing  the 
successive  developments  which  have  taken  place. 
Its  chief  peculiarity  (and  in  which  it  differs  from 
all  modern  safety  lamps)  is  the  admission  of 
free  air  from  the  top  down  four  tubes,  and 
through  an  annular  chamber,  b,  situated  imme- 
diately over  the  oil  vessel.  It  is  impossible  for 
a  current  to  rush  directly  down  the  inlet  tubes, 
as  they  are  protected  by  the  projecting  top  of 
the  lamp.  The  only  gauze  employed  is  that 
covering  the  outlet,  c,  and  the  annular  inlet 
chamber.  The  first  improvement  consisted 
in  introducing  a  gauze  cylinder  above  the  glass,  which  now 
took  a  conical  form,  and  adding  a  cone  to  the  discharge 
orifice.  The  importance  of  the  latter  cannot  be  over-estimated. 
FIG.  407. 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 
357 The  outlet  arrangements  of  most  lamps  are  haphazard,  and  bear 
no  relative  proportion  to  the  area  of  inlet.  With  the  discharge 
regulated  in  such  a  manner  the  top  of  the  gauze  is  kept  in  a  bath 
of  carbonic  acid  gas,  and  should  internal  explosions  occur,  gas  will 
not  continue  burning  in  the  lamp.  Sliding  shutters  were  also 
placed  at  the  lower  end  of  two  tubes,  by  which  means  the  feed- 
air  could  either  be  taken  from  the  top  or  the  base  of  the  tubes, 
an  improvement  properly  appreciated  by  any  one  regularly  testing for  gas. 
In  the  form  now  generally  adopted,  three  inlet  tubes  instead  of 
four  are  used  (Fig.  408).     The  third  tube  is  considerably  broader than   the   others,   and   acts  as  a  reflector. 
The  shield-plate,  a,  in  the  hood  is  made  of  FIG.  408. 
such  a  size  as  to  completely  cover  the  inlet 
holes.  \This  is  an  important  point,  as  it  was 
found  that  if  such  was  not  done  the  lamps 
were  often  extinguished  in  an  unaccountable 
manner.  The  height  of  the  outlet  cone  must 
be  such  as  to  just  reach  the  level  of  the 
shield-plate,  when  it  then  occupies  a  position intermediate  between  the  two  horizontal 
rings  of  holes,  b  b,  which  are  placed  in  the 
hood  for  the  products  of  combustion  to 
escape  by.  A  row  of  circular  holes  is 
put  in  the  top  crown  of  the  lamp,  and  is 
covered  by  a  thin  sheet  brass 
plate  i  f  in.  diam.  To  stiffen  FIG.  409. 
the  covering  plate  it  is 
crimped  in  three  places,  the 
crimped  parts  touching  the 
crown,  as  shown  at  c.  These 
improvements  remove  the  defect  of  the  light  being  suddenly 
extinguished  from  no  apparent  cause.  The  ?ame  result  is 
obtained  with  the  form  of  hood  shown  in  Fig.  409 ;  here  the 
outlet  cone  and  inlet  tubes  are  covered  by  a  piece  of  brass  bent 
into  the  shape  illustrated.  One  hole,  J  in.  in  diam.,  serves  for 
the  escape  of  the  products  of  combustion,  this  being  protected 
from  direct  currents  by  a  piece  of  sheet  brass  crimped  as  before 
mentioned.  This  shape  of  hood  scarcely  appears  of  such  a  safe 
character  as  the  former  one,  but  a  large  number  of  lamps  have 
been  constructed  to  this  design.  Another  improvement  which 
facilitates  cleaning  is  that  the  ring  securing  the  glass  in  position 
is  screwed  on  to  the  vertical  plate  forming  the  air  inlet  chamber, 
d  (Fig.  408),  instead  of  the  frame  of  the  lamp. 
It  follows  from  this  that  when  the  lower  gauze  ring  is 
unscrewed  all  the  inside  parts  of  the  lamp  at  once  fall out. 
In  <he  lamp  of  latsst  design  the  portion  of  oil  vessel  supporting 

--- Page Break ---
358  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  wick  tube  has  been  lowered,  but  the  wick  tube  itself  has  been 
lengthened,  so  that  the  flame  is  only  slightly  lower  than  in  the 
old  types.  The  breadth  of  the  wick  has  been  increased,  and  now 
stands  at  T9F  inch  full. The  numerous  small  improvements,  which  may  not  separately 
seem  of  much  importance,  but  which  in  conjunction  materially 
affect  the  practical  working,  certainly  make  the  present  design 
superior  to  the  earlier  ones.  Taking  first  its  lighting  capacity ; 
under  ordinary  conditions  it  gives  more  useful  illumination  than 
any  other  lamp.  Photometric  tests  conducted  at  the  surface  are 
misleading,  for  the  same  reasons  as  were  referred  to  when  dealing 
with  velocity  trials.  In  addition,  one  other  fact  must  be  pointed 
out.  With  the  photometer,  either  when  testing  against  another 
lamp  or  against  a  standard  candle,  the  two  articles  are  placed  011 
the  same  level,  and  it  is  the  horizontal  rays,  or  those  that  are 
nearly  so,  which  reach  the  screen  and  decide  the  result. 
Collieries  require  light  to  be  thrown  in  all  directions,  especially 
upwards,  and  hence  naked  lights  are  often  used  under  conditions 
which  may  at  any  time  become  dangerous.  They  are  not 
actually  unsafe,  but  no  one  can  say  whether  they  may  become  so. 
All  ordinary  shielded  lamps  suffer  from  the  great  disadvantage 
of  giving  practically  no  illumination  on  the  roof.  Their  shields 
are  necessarily  of  larger  diameter  than  the  glass,  and  really  act 
like  a  shade,  preventing  any  light  striking  upwards.  'The  conical 
glass  of  the  Hepplewhite-Gray  performs  just  the  contrary  action, as  it  deflects  the  light  towards  the  roof,  and  as  the  shield  above 
is  of  smaller  diameter  than  the  lower  part  of  the  glass,  nothing 
prevents  the  rays  reaching  the  place  where  they  are  specially 
useful  and  desirable.  The  examination  of  the  roof  can  be  rapidly 
and  satisfactorily  carried  out  with  this  lamp,  as  the  illumination 
given  is  far  superior  in  that  direction  to-  any  other  design. Ordinary  lamps  must  be  tilted,  and  when  in  that  position,  the 
light  obtained  is  of  a  very  inferior  character. 
With  respect  to  its  power  to  detect  small  quantities  of  gas  it 
ranks  superior  to  all  others.*  All  ordinary  forms,  with  the  inlet above  the  glass,  will  miss,  say,  4  in.  of  gas  lying  immediately 
against  the  roof,  except  when  they  are  tilted  very  much,  and  then 
there  is  great  danger  of  their  going  out.  Many  lamps  are  now 
constructed  to  take  air  if  desii  able  from  the  top,  like  the  Gray, 
and  then  they  will  detect  thin  layers  also ;  but  even  then  they 
will  not  do  so  rapidly.  It  is  possible  to  put  some  modern  lamps 
into  gas,  and  take  them  out  again  without  any  indication  being 
given — that  is  to  say,  if  it  is  done  hurriedly.  This  is  quite 
impossible  with  th6  Gray,  as  the  flame  immediately  "  spires  "  up. In  comparison  with  the  unbonneted  Davy  or  Clanny  it  readily 
*  As  the  Pieler  lamp  cannot  be  used  in  ordinary  every-day  working  it  is not  taken  into  consideration. 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING.  359 
shows  a  cap  on  the  flame  where  those  lamps  fail  to  show  the 
slightest  indication. 
Numerous  experiments  have  proved  the  safety  of  this  type  in 
currents  of  high  velocity.  The  risk  of  internal  explosions  passing 
outwards  is  practically  absent,  owing  to  the  small  quantity  con- tained in  the  lamp,  the  regulation  of  the  outlet  of  the  products  of 
combustion,  and  the  conditions  under  which  feed-air  is  introduced. 
Theoretically  an  internal  explosion  is  impossible,  as  owing  to  the 
admission  being  below  the  flame,  any  fire-damp  is  burnt  as  it 
arrives,  and  the  inside  of  the  lamp  is  filled  entirely  with  the 
products  of  combustion ;  but  this,  however,  is  not  absolutely  the case. 
A  statement  was  once  made  to  the  author  that  this  lamp  went 
out  so  soon  when  introduced  into  gas  that  it  was  impossible  to 
clearly  ascertain  whether  such  gas  was  fire-damp  or  black-damp,  if 
only  small  quantities  were  present.  On  the  other  hand,  he  has 
been  assured  by  an  overman,  who  has  specially  been  working 
and  examining  places  with  this  lamp  for  over  twelve  months, 
that  not  the  slightest  difficulty  has  been  experienced  in  this 
respect.  With  black-damp  the  flame  drops  and  fades  away,  but  if 
any  gas  is  present,  a  slight  "  spiring  "  of  the  flame  is  immediately noticed,  and  this  takes  place  once  or  twice  before  the  light  is  lost. 
Of  course  it  is  possible  to  abuse  anything.  If  the  lamp  be  pushed 
bodily  and  suddenly  into  gas  it  certainly  goes  out  before  any 
definite  indication  is  obtained  ;  but  if  it  be  introduced  slowly  and 
steadily,  and  withdrawn  as  soon  as  gas  is  indicated,  the  light  is not  often  lost. 
Bonneted  Mueseler.— This  type  of  lamp  has  deservedly  been 
held  in  good  repute  for  many  years,  and  the  report  of  the  Mines 
Accidents  Commission  on  the  shielded  variety  was  very  favourable. 
As  a  detector  of  gas  it  ranks  a  very  good  second  to  the  Gray ;  it 
shows  gas  in  a  clear  delicate  manner,  the  cap  produced  being  very distinct. 
Owing  to  the  presence  of  a  chimney  in  this  lamp,  when  it  is 
tilted  the  products  of  combustion  pass  outside  the  chimney  and 
foul  the  inlet  air,  with  the  consequent  result  that  the  light  is 
extinguished.  This,  in  combination  with  the  shield  acting  as  a 
shade,  make  the  examination  of  the  roof  a  matter  of  difficulty. 
This  disadvantage  of  the  Mueseler  lamp  appears  to  have  been  rather 
exaggerated,  as  it  stands  a  fair  amount  of  tilting,  especially  if  the 
time  during  which  this  is  done  be  not  of  long  duration. 
Ashworth's  Mueseler,  shown  in  Fig.  410,  is  one  of  the  safest of  all  lamps,  as  it  has  been  tested  in  explosive  currents  of  100  ft. 
per  second  without  failure.  It  differs  from  the  ordinary  forms  of 
Mueseler  type  in  having  a  gauze  chimney  instead  of  a  metal  one,  and 
the  diaphragm  is  conical  instead  of  horizontal,  b.  Its  safety  is  due 
to  the  double  shield  employed,  the  inner  one  of  which  is  provided 
with  a  conical  outlet ;  the  exit  of  the  products  of  combustion  is 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
retarded ;  the  upper  part  of  the  gauzes  is  kept  in  a  bath  of  car- 
bonic acid  gas,  and  in  case  of  any  internal  explosion,  the  light  is 
immediately  extinguished  and  the  inlet  air  fouled.  The  arrows 
in  the  figure  show  the  direction  taken  by  the  supply  air  and  the 
products  of  combustion,  and  that  the  gauzes  are  protected  from all  violent  currents.  There  are  ten  holes  in  the  inside  shield  and 
seven  in  the  outer  one,  the  latter  being  placed  near  the  top.  A 
gas-testing  shutter,  «,  is  placed  above  the  horizontal  inlet  holes 
near  the  top  of  the  glass,  and  when  this  is  closed,  the  feed-air  is 
compelled  to  enter  through  the  holes  in  the  outer  shield  near  the 
top  and  pass  downwards,  thin  layers  of  gas  near  the  roof  being 
thereby  easily  detected. 
This  lamp  does  not  burn  well  in  "dampy"  or  slow  currents, and  great  difficulty  is  experienced  in  lighting  it,  as  from  the 
winding  path  pursued  by  the  feed-air,  proper  circulation  does  not take  place  until  the  lamp  gets  hot. 
Morgan. — Prominent  attention  was  drawn  to  this  lamp 
immediately  after  the  report  of  the  Accidents  in  Mines  Com- 
mission was  published.  Experiments  showed  that  it  would  not 
pass  flame  in  explosive  currents  of  the  highest  velocities. 
An  inner  and  outer  shield  are  provided  (Fig.  411),  the  latter 
having  a  series  of  five  horizontal  rows  of  circular  holes  punched 
through  it,  while  the  former  is  similarly  supplied  with  six 
horizontal  rows  of  slits.  The  openings  in  one  shield  are  opposite 
the  solid  portions  of  the  other.  Three  gauzes  are  used  ;  an  outer 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 
361 
cylindrical  one  without  a  top,  a  middle  one  of  the  Clanny  type, 
and  an  inner  one,  really  built  up  of  two  gauzes  and  a  chimney. 
This  lamp  detects  gas  readily,  burns  well  in  a  good  current  of 
air,  but  badly  in  a  "dampy"  one,  does  not  get  hot  (probably owing  to  its  large  internal  volume),  and  stands  a  fair  amount  of 
tilting  without  the  light  being  extinguished.  After  being  in  use 
several  hours  underground  the  light  gets  very  defective.  The 
author  is  not  aware  that  this  type  has  been  used  extensively  at 
any  colliery.  It  is  composed  of  six  parts,  neglecting  washers,  and 
is  of  complicated  construction.  As  there  are  many  lamps  per- 
fectly safe  under  ordinary  conditions  it  seems  improbable  that  this 
form  will  come  into  general  use. 
Marsaut. — The  report  of  the  Committee  of  the  Ellis'  Lever Prize,  and  of  the  Accidents  in  Mines  Com- 
mission  brought  this,  then  new,  lamp  very 
prominently  before  the  mining  public,  and 
results  obtained  in  practical  use  increased 
the  favourable  opinion.  It  has,  however, received  a  few  small  modifications  from  the 
form  in  which  it  was  experimented  upon  by the  two  Commissions  referred  to  above.  As 
originally  constructed,  two  rows  of  inlet  holes 
were  supplied,  one  at  the  bottom  of  the  bonnet, 
a  (Fig.  412),  and  the  other  in  the  horizontal 
flange,  6,  forming  the  base  of  this  part.  The Accidents  in  Mines  Commission  recommended 
doing  away  with  the  holes  in  the  base  of  the 
bonnet,*  and  in  most  of  the  lamps  now  con- structed in  this  country  this  is  carried  out. 
In  the  form  illustrated,  three  slightly  conical 
gauzes  are  employed,  but  often  two  only  are 
used.  They  are  protected  by  a  sheet-iron shield.  After  considerable  experience  with 
this  lamp,  the  author  expressed  an  opinion 
that  it  appeared  to  be  the  most  suitable  for 
the  working  miner ;  its  construction was 
simple  and  strong,  and  it  gave  a  reliable  indication  of  gas,  and  a 
good  light. 
Further  experience  has  not  materially  altered  that  opinion,  as, 
although  the  lamp  finding  most  favour  does  not  go  by  Mr.  Mar- 
saut's  name,  yet  it  is  practically  a  lamp  of  his  type,  with  an  addi- tion which  increases  its  efficiency  and  lighting  power  in  the  impure 
currents  of  return  air-ways. 
Deflector. — During  an  excursion  in  Lancashire,  the  author's attention  was  called  to  this  lamp,  and  as  complaints  had  been  made 
of  the  difficulty  in  getting  some  of  the  other  forms  to  burn  brightly, 
*  Final  Report,  p.  84. 

--- Page Break ---
362 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  413. 
a  few  lamps  of  this  type  were  obtained  and  placed  in  the  hands  of 
the  miners  at  one  of  the  collieries  under  his  charge. 
Fig.  413  illustrates  the  lamp,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Mar- saut  is  followed,  so  far  as  the  arrangement  of  gauzes,  shield,  oil 
vessel,  and  glass  are  concerned.  The  distinctive  difference,  how- ever, consists  in  the  guiding  of  the  inlet 
air ;  this  is  admitted  through  a  row  of 
holes  in  the  horizontal  flange,  support- 
ing the  shield,  and  is  prevented  from 
impinging  on  the  gauze  by  a  vertical 
cylinder  of  brass,  a,  ij  inches  high, 
which  acts  as  a  guide,  and  directs  the 
in-going  current  vertically  upwards.  At 
a  point  about  ij  inch  above  the  hori- zontal ,  flange  supporting  the  shield,  an 
angle-ring,  5,  is  introduced,  the  horizontal part  of  which  completely  fills  up  the  space 
between  the  outside  gauze  and  the  inside 
of  the  shield.  The  other  flange  projects 
downwards  close  against  the  gauze,  ter- 
minating just  before  reaching  the  vertical 
cylinder  which  proceeds  from  the  hori- zontal flange  forming  the  base  of  the 
shield.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  ver- 
tical cylinder,  a,  is  not  placed  close  to 
the  gauze,  but  occupies  an  intermediate 
position  between  that  part  and  the  shield . 
The  inlet  air  after  being  directed  upwards  meets  this  "deflector," and  is  thus  thrown  on  to  the  flame.  As  the  lamp  gets  hot,  more 
air  is  sucked  in,  and  passed  onto  support  combustion.  This  forms 
the  explanation  why  such  good  illumination  is  obtained.  At  the 
end  of  a  shift  the  light  given  is  nearly  as  good  as  it  was  at  the 
beginning.  After  burning  a  short  time  and  getting  hot,  the 
illuminating  power  sensibly  increases,  and  no  difficulty  is  experi- enced in  lighting  the  lamp  when  all  the  parts  are  cold. 
In  all  ordinary  lamps  a  rapid  circulation  is  obtained  as  soon  as 
the  parts  get  hot,  but  no  appliances  are  introduced  to  properly 
direct  the  inlet  current,  and,  as  a  result,  the  greater  part  passes 
away  at  once  with  the  products  of  combustion,  only  a  portion 
going  downwards  to  supply  the  flame.  In  the  "  Deflector,"  all  the air  which  enters  reaches  the  flame,  and  before  doing  so  is  heated 
by  contact  with  the  warm  deflecting  ring  and  gauzes.  To  this 
heating  of  inlet  air  and  proper  directing  of  current  is  due  the  fact 
that  this  lamp  will  burn  in  an  air  containing  such  a  quantity  of 
carbonic  acid  gas  that  all  ordinary  forms,  even  unbonneted  ones, 
are  extinguished. 
The  lamp  is  supplied  with  a  solid  top,  c,  and  the  shield  is 
secured  by  a  lead  rivet,  d.  This  is  an  advantage,  as  the  locking 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 
of  the  bonnet  can  be  left  to  the  last  minute,  and  until  the  miner 
has  satisfied  himself  that  all  the  parts  are  in  their  proper  position. 
Tin  Can  Davy.  —  In  the  North  of  England  the  ordinary  Davy 
is  enclosed  in  a  tin  case,  provided  with  a  window  (Fig.  414).  If this  case  extends  the FIG.  414 FIG.  415. entire  height  .of  the 
lamp,  the  security 
afforded  is  greatly  in- creased. Indeed,  the 
Royal  Commission  on 
Accidents  in  Mines* stated  that  the  addition 
caused  the  lamp  to become  one  of  the 
safest  tested,  but  they 
also  point  out  that  at 
high  velocities  a  very small  difference  in  the 
form  of  the  case,  or 
in  the  position  of  the 
lamp  with  respect  to 
the  current,  greatly affects  the  behaviour 
of  the  lamp. 
Thorneburry .  —  A 
lamp  which  has  at- tracted considerable  attention  lately  is  that 
invented  by  Dr.  Thorne,  in  which  a  heavy 
petroleum  oil,  having  a  flashing  point  of 
250°,  is  burnt  in  a  cone  similar  to  those employed  in  paraffin  lamps  (Fig.  415)- 
Two  concentric  glasses,  a  and  6,  are  em- 
ployed, which  are  not  disturbed  when  the  lamp  is  taken  to  pieces 
for  cleaning.  A  metal  chimney,  d,  which  carries  away  the  pro- 
ducts of  combustion,  leads  directly  from  the  inner  glass,  while 
the  gauze,  h,  leads  from  the  outer  glass,  and  as  a  further  protec- 
tion in  currents  of  high  velocity,  a  second  piece  of  short  gauze,  e, 
is  attached.  The  whole  is  enclosed  in  a  metal  shield.  The  feed-air 
enters  at  the  point,  c,  passes  down  between  the  two  glasses,  and 
through  the  gauze,  f,  into  the  combustion  chamber,  g. 
The  light  given  is  of  a  very  superior  character,  and  the  height  of 
the  flame  can  be  easily  regulated  by  a  pinion  and  milled  disc.  This 
is,  however,  a  source  of  annoyance,  as  the  small  watch-key  which tits  on  to  the  square  shaft  of  the  pinion  very  easily  wears  round, 
and  just  at  the  moment  when  it  is  wished  to  be  put  into  operation, 
the  key  turns  and  the  lowering  arrangement  does  not.  So  far  as 
*  Final  Keport,  p.  75. 

--- Page Break ---
364  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
safety  is  concerned  this  lamp  gives  excellent  results,  and  in  the 
hands  of  an  official  of  the  colliery  may  be  used  underground  in 
strong  currents  of  air,  but  it  has  a  tendency  to  get  very  hot, 
especially  if  it  stands  anywhere.  It  is  very  complicated,  and 
weighs  more  than  any  other  lamp,  and  requires  more  delicate 
handling  than  an  ordinary  miner  will  give  it. 
Sight  Lamp. — An  improvement  of  considerable  importance  has 
recently  been  introduced  by  the  Sight  Lamp  Company,  who  employ 
a  shield,  having  a  great  number  of  perforated  holes  through  it, 
but  which  has  a  glass  lining  especially  made  for  the  purpose.  In 
this  way  the  shield  does  not  obstruct  the  light  to  anything  like  the 
same  amount  as  a  solid  one  does.  Breakages  are  not  of  frequent 
occurrence,  as  the  glass  is  well  protected  by  the  perforated  shield  ; 
there  is  no  space  between  the  metal  and  glass  shield. 
Conclusions. — Owing  to  the  large  amount  of  useful  light 
given  by  the  Hepplewhite-Gray,  the  way  this  is  directed  on  to the  roof,  and  the  delicate  indication  of  gas  given  by  tliis  lamp,  it 
is  preferred  to  all  others  for  use  by  deputies,  firemen,  and 
timberers.  It  requires,  however,  very  careful  handling ;  and  the 
light  is  easily  extinguished  even  when  gas  is  absent.  Men  are 
apt  to  get  careless,  and  carry  it  about  with  the  lower  slide  holes 
open,  and  when  in  that  state,  if  the  current  impinges  suddenly 
on  the  lamp,  the  light  is  lost.  The  distribution  of  light  on  the 
roof  is  due  to  the  truncated  cone  form  of  glass,  which  is  claimed 
to  be  stronger  than  a  cylindrical  one,  and  to  automatically  accom- 
modate itself  to  sudden  changes  of  temperature.  The  rapidity 
with  which  gas  is  detected  is  a  great  point  in  its  favour.  With 
this  lamp  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  miss  the  smallest  quantity,  even 
when  passing  hurriedly  from  one  place  to  another,  which  can 
easily  be  done  with  any  other  form,  as,  unless  there  is  an  ap- 
preciable quantity  of  gas  present,  they  require  to  be  held  a  definite 
time  in  it  before  any  indication  is  given. 
For  the  ordinary  miner  who  requires  something  a  little  less 
delicate  than  the  Gray,  the  Deflector  lamp  gives  excellent  results. 
The  light  given  in  impure  air  is  superior  to  that  obtained  from 
any  other  form,  and  it  will  continue  to  burn  even  when  the 
unbonneted  varieties  will  not.  It  gives  as  good  an  indication  of 
gas  as  any  other  lamp,  with  the  exception  of  the  Gray  and  Mueseler. 
The  author  obtained  a  number  of  different  types  of  lamps  for  use 
at  one  of  the  collieries  under  his  charge,  and  after  an  experience 
of  two  years  there  is  not  a  miner  at  the  pit  who,  if  he  had  his 
choice,  would  not  select  a  Deflector  lamp  in  preference  to  any 
other,  his  reasons  for  this  being  that  it  burns  brightly  in  slow  and 
impure  currents,  gives  a  good  light  for  a  long  time,  and  will  endure 
a  great  deal  of  rough  usage. 
Oil. — The  report  of  the  Accidents  in  Mines  Commission  first 
drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  a  mixture  of  one-third  petroleum 
and  two-thirds  rape  or  seal  oil  \vos  more  suitable  for  safety  lamps 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING.  365 
than  best  refined  colza.  It  is  necessary  that  the  petroleum  should 
be  of  the  best  quality,  and  that  no  more  than  the  quantity  given 
above  should  be  used.  The  mixture  is  considerably  cheaper  than 
best  colza,  and  gives  equal  illuminating  power,  and  the  wick  has 
not  such  a  tendency  to  form  a  hard  cake  on  the  top. 
Mineral  oils  are  but  rarely  employed  for  safety  lamps,  although 
attempts  have  been  made  from  time  to  time  to  utilise  them  for  this 
purpose.  Benzoline  is  used  in  some  of  the  lamps  made  by  the 
Protector  Company  and  by  Wolff,  of  Zwickau,  Saxony.  It  is  a 
volatile  substance  and  requires  the  greatest  care  in  its  application. 
No  free  oil  is  allowed  to  remain  in  the  oil  vessel,  which  is  filled  with  a 
sponge,  and  as  the  wick  itself  does  not  burn  an  asbestos  one  is  pro- 
vided. In  filling  the  lamp  a  small  quantity  of  benzoline  is  poured 
into  the  vessel  and  the  sponge  saturated,  all  excess  is  then  emptied 
back  again  into  the  tanks.  It  certainly  gives  a  nice  clear  light  and 
produces  no  smoke,  but  requires  so  many  precautions  in  the  filling- 
room  that  it  has  never  been  largely  employed  in  this  country.  A 
special  charging  apparatus  has  to  be  provided,  and  no  naked  lights 
can  be  introduced  into  the  room  where  the  lamps  are  replenished. 
The  employment  of  mineral  oil  is  not  allowed  in  the  fiery  mines  of 
Belgium. 
Wick. — In  the  lamps  of  recent  introduction,  flat  wicks  are 
invariably  employed.  The  illuminating  power  of  the  old  forms  of 
safety  lamps,  when  the  wick  was  round,  varied  from  0.3  to  0.5 
of  a  standard  candle,  but  where  a  flat  wick  is  employed  it  may 
rise  as  high  as  0.7.  With  a  view  of  further  improvement  Mr. 
A.  H.  Stokes  has  introduced  a  wick  tube  which  is  guttered  along 
one  side  and  the  wick  is  supplied  rather  wider  than  the  tube,  so 
that  it  takes  a  corrugated  form.  A  longer  surface  of  flame  is 
obtained  and  the  supply  of  oil  to  the  wick  is  better.  Mr.  Ash- 
worth  obtains  a  similar  result  by  making  the  wick  wider  than  the 
wick  tube  and  the  tube  broader  than  the  wick. 
A  point  to  which  little  attention  has  been  drawn  is  the  material 
of  which  the  oil  vessel  is  constructed.  In  England  it  is  invariably 
made  of  brass,  while  on  the  Continent  it  is  just  as  regularly  made 
of  iron.  Mr.  Miarsaut's  experiments  proved  that  the  lighting  power is  influenced  by  the  material  of  which  the  lamps  are  constructed, 
and  that  a  brass  lamp  only  gave  70  per  cent,  of  the  luminous  in- 
tensity of  the  same  lamp  in  iron.  The  explanation  of  this  seems 
to  be  found  in  the  superior  heat  conductivity  of  the  former,  as 
the  lamp  bottom  gets  very  hot  and  the  oil  becomes  viscous. 
Brass  oil  vessels  seem  to  be  cheaper  than  if  made  of  iron,  owing  to 
the  ease  with  which  they  can  be  cast.  To  remove  the  objection 
Mr.  Ash  worth  coats  the  top  of  his  oil  vessels  with  a  bad  conductor 
of  heat  (tin). 
Glasses. — Glasses  having  their  edges  polished  are  now  more 
extensively  used  than  any  other  form.  It  is  very  important  that 
all  gaps  should  be  closed,  and  therefore  the  edges  must  be  ground 

--- Page Break ---
366  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
approximately  parallel,  for  if  they  are  chipped,  or- not  parallel,  no matter  what  washers  are  used,  some  opening  is  left.  Asbestos 
mill-board  washers  should  always  be  introduced  between  the  parts where  metal  and  glass  meet.  Rubber  and  leather  are  liable  to 
perish. Locking  Lamps. — The  original  device  employed  was  that  of a  screw  bolt  turned  by  a  key  till  its  head  was  concealed  below  the 
surface  of  the  metal  into  which  it  was  inserted.  This  can  scarcely 
be  called  a  lock  at  all,  as  it  may  readily  be  opened  by  any  one  with an  old  nail. 
Magnetic  Locks. — In  several  types  of  lamps  a  lock  has  been 
designed  which  requires  the  application  of  a  powerful  magnet  to 
open  it.  The  general  arrangement  consists  in  employing  a  bolt 
which  fits  into  notches  in  a  circular  plate  and  is  kept  there  by  a 
spring.  When  a  magnet  is  placed  in  a  certain  position  it  attracts 
the  bolt,  withdrawing  it  from  the  notch,  compresses  the  spring, 
and. allows  the  oil  vessel  to  be  unscrewed.  The  shape  of  the  spring 
and  notches  is  such  that  the  magnet  is  not  necessary  to  enable  the bottom  to  be  screwed  on. 
Lead  Rivets. — Magnetic  locks  possess  one  advantage,  that  the lamp  cannot  be  opened  without  suitable  appliances,  but  they  are 
apt  to  get  out  of  order  and  are  cumbersome.  By  far  'the  com- monest, and  indeed  the  simplest,  method  of  securing  safety  lamps 
is  that  of  employing  a  pin  of  lead,  which  is  riveted  into  place  and 
has  a  device  punched  upon  it.  It  is  impossible  to  open  the  lamp 
without  breaking  this  pin,  and  although,  of  course,  any  one  so 
desiring  can  open  the  lamp,  it  cannot  be  done  without  detection. 
The  common  locking  arrangement  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  413,  and 
is  performed  by  a  hasp,  e,  dropping  over  a  projecting  boss,  f, 
through  which  a  hole  is  bored  for  the  reception  of  a  lead  rivet. 
The  hasp,  e,  is  fitted  to  a  loose  collar,  g,  surrounding  the  oil  vessel, 
which  can  easily  be  turned  round,  giving  compensation  for  the 
wear  on  the  screw  and  the  oil  vessel,  and  enabling  the  projection, 
/,  and  hasp,  e,  to  be  always  brought  exactly  together. 
The  locking  arrangement  of  the  Morgan  lamp  possesses  several 
points  of  novelty.  Two  projections,  one  on  the  oil  vessel,  the  other 
on  the  upper  part  of  lamp,  with  vertical  holes,  are  provided,  a  and  b 
(Fig.  411),  but  the  passage  in  the  upper  projection  does  not  go 
completely  through  it.  A  small  spring  catch,  c,  is  situated  in  the 
lower  projection  and  will  allow  a  cylinder  of  equal  diameter  to  the 
hole  to  pass  by  if  the  direction  of  motion  be  vertically  upwards. 
The  lead  plug  employed,  d,  consists  of  a  cylinder  with  a  >  -shaped 
piece  cut  out.  To  lock  the  lamp  the  cylinder  of  lead  is  pushed  in 
through  the  lower  hole :  it  cannot  go  out  at  the  top,  as  the  cover- 
ing prevents  it,  and  it  cannot  be  drawn  back  again,  as  the  small 
spring  catches  under  the  > .  This  arrangement  seems  to  be  an 
improvement  on  the  ordinary  lead  rivet,  as  time  is  saved. 
Ryder 's  Lock. — In  order  to  allow  the  shield  to  be  removed  after 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 
367 
FIGS.  416,  417  AND  418. 
the  internal  parts  have  been  fitted  together,  a  sliding  pillar  is 
employed,  which,  when  the  oil  vessel  is  screwed  up,  projects  into 
the  base  of  the  shield  and  prevents  its  being  removed,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  when  the  oil  vessel  is  taken  off,  the  pillar  can  be 
pulled  down  a  short  distance,  thus  releasing  the  shield. 
This  has  recently  been  improved ;  it  now  locks  both  shield  and 
oil  vessel.  In  Figs.  416-18,  a  is  the  upper  horizontal  ring  of  the 
cage  of  a  lamp  on  to  which 
the  shield  is  screwed,  and 
b  is  the  bottom  one  that 
receives  the  oil  vessel.  The 
sliding-bar,  c,  occupies  the 
position  shown  in  Fig.  416 
while  the  shield  is  being 
screwed  on,  and  as  soon  as 
this .  is  done,  the  bar  is 
pushed  upwards  and  takes 
the  position  illustrated  in 
Fig.  417,  locking  the  shield. The  oil  vessel  is  now  screwed  U 
on  and  then  the  sliding- 
bar  is  lowered  a  little,  its 
bottom  end  going  into  a  recess  in  the  oil  vessel.  This  motion  is 
not  sufficient  to  take  the  pin  entirely  out  of  the  shield,  and,  as  a 
result,  both  shield  and  oil  vessel  are  locked,  and  the  sliding-bar 
is  then  secured  in  this  position  by  a  lead  rivet  (Fig.  418). 
Casting  Rivets. — A  machine  largely  employed  for  casting  lead 
FIGS.  419  AND  420. 
k 1 s^ 
r 
NS^SX\ 
rivets  is  that  of  Howat's,  which  consists  of  a  series  of  recesses (c  c,  Figs.  419  and  420)  of  the  exact  size  of  the  rivet,  arranged  in  a 
circular  manner  around  central  spindles,  d  d,  which  have  a  mush- 
room-shaped head.  These  spindles  can  be  moved  vertically  upwards 
by  means  of  the  cross-bar,  e,  and  lever,  f.  The  top  is  covered  by  a 
lid,  g  g,  having  holes  through  it  at  h  h.  Molten  lead  is  poured  in 
through  these  holes,  and  fills  up  the  recesses,  c  c,  the  lid  is  lifted 
off  by  the  handle,  j9  and  by  depressing  the  handle,  /,  the  bunches 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  421. 
Perspective  view  of  CLCU and/  &tr 
of  rivets  are  raised  out  of  their  bed.  To  remove  them  from  the 
central  core  to  which  they  are  attached,  they  are  placed  over  a 
special  die,  and  with  one  blow  of  a  punch  the  central  block  of  lead 
is  detached,  and  the  rivets  are  left  ready  for  use.  Each  machine casts  three  sets  of  twelve  rivets  at  a  time. 
Relighting  Lamps. — An  arrangement  is  sometimes  provided to  put  out  the  flame  if  the  lamp 
be  unscrewed,  but  this  affords  no 
security,  as  it  tempts  the  miner  to 
carry  matches  about  with  him  to 
relight  the  lamp,  which  may  be done  without  detection.  With  the 
Protector  lamp,  however,  by  means 
of  a  locking  bolt,  after  being  once 
unscrewed  the  lamp  cannot  be 
relighted  without  unlocking.  If 
the  oil  vessel  (c,  Fig.  421)  is  with- 
drawn, the  wick  passes  down  the 
sides  of  the  tube,  a,  and  the  flame 
is  put  out  and  cannot  again  be 
lighted  and  replaced  in  position 
until  the  tube,  a,  is  taken  from 
the  lamp  and  put  in  its  proper 
position  in  the  oil  vessel.  The 
tube,  a,  is  locked  by  the  bolt,  6, 
which,  when  pushed  home,  is  kept  in  position  by  a  small  spring. 
The  number  of  lamps  which  become  extinguished  from  different 
causes  in  the  workings  is  very  great,  and  amounts,  according  to 
statistics,  at  many  collieries  to  as  much  as  20  per  cent.,  which 
have  to  be  either  relighted,  or  other  ones  served  out  to  the  men. 
The  general  practice  is  to  provide  special  lighting  stations,  and  to 
insist  on  men  taking  their  lamps  to  these  places  when  they 
become  extinguished.  Such  a  station  must  be  situated  at  some 
point  where  a  naked  light  is  allowable,  and  as  this  is  often  only 
at  or  near  the  pit-bottom,  men  have  to  travel  a  considerable 
distance  when  their  lights  become  extinguished,  which  acts  in  a 
very  salutary  way  in  causing  them  to  take  every  precaution  to 
prevent  losing  their  lights.  As  in  some  mines  naked  lights  are 
not  allowed  at  all,  a  certain  number  of  extra  lamps  are  taken 
down,  which  replace  those  that  become  extinguished. 
Where  a  volatile  illuminant  like  benzoline  is  employed,  a  relight- 
ing arrangement  can  be  applied.  In  the  Wolff  lamp  *  a  strip  of paper  is  employed,  provided  with  fulminating  spots,  each  of  which 
can  be  brought  opposite  the  wick  by  a  step  movement,  and  at  the 
same  time  be  struck  by  a  trigger  released  by  a  spring;  the 
fulminating  compound  explodes  and  ignites  the  benzoline  vapour. 
*  Man.  Geo.  Soc.  xvii.  280. 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING. 369 
The  process  can  be  repeated  until  the  whole  of  the  caps  are  ex- 
hausted, when  the  paper  containing  them  is  removed  and  a  fresh 
piece  put  in  its  place. 
A  similar  device  is  that  of  Mr.  H.  Elsom,*  but  is  applicable  to 
vegetable  oil  lamps.  A  small  wire  rod  is  fixed  in  the  lamp  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  wick  trimmer,  and  carries  one  or  more 
ordinary  matches,  which  can  be  lighted  by  friction.  When  the 
light  is  extinguished,  one  of  these  matches  is  rubbed  on  a 
roughened  plate  and  ignites,  the  lamp  being  tilted  so  as  to  bring 
the  wick  over  the  match.  A  guard  plate,  or  shield,  is  fixed  against 
the  adjacent  match  to  prevent  the  flame  of  one  accidentally 
igniting  the  other. 
The  objection  to  any  such  appliance  is,  that  supposing  any 
lamp  has  been  extinguished  through  the  presence  of  an  explo- 
sive mixture,  when  one  of  the  matches  was  struck,  an  internal- 
explosion  would  be  produced  which  might  result  in  the  passage 
of  flame  to  the  external  atmosphere. 
Cleaning  Lamps. — Where  a  large  number  of  safety  lamps  are 
FIG.  423. 
•employed  they  are  now  generally  cleaned  by  machinery,  which 
•consists  of  a  series  of  revolving  brushes  fitting  the  several  parts.  To 
remove  the  oil  adhering  to  the  gauze,  powdered  magnesian  lime- 
stone is  generally  sprinkled  on  the  brushes.  In  some  cases  to 
obtain  a  similar  result  the  gauzes  are  steeped  at  intervals  in  a 
.solution  of  caustic  potash. 
For  removing  the  internal  fittings  of  lamps,  a  simple  arrange- 
ment (Fig.  422)  can  be  employed.  It  consists  of  a  nut,  a,  which 
fits  into  the  projecting  lugs  on  the  lamp-glass  ring,  and  on  turning the  handle  this  ring  is  unscrewed. 
A  more  elaborate  machine  is  that  of  Howat's  (Fig.  423),  which both  rivets  the  lead  plugs  and  unscrews  the  various  parts  of  lamps. 
It  consists  of  a  cup,  A,  containing  a  number  of  slots,  which  can  be 
Fed.  Inst.  ii.  35. 
2  A 

--- Page Break ---
370  TEXT-BOOK  OF   COAL-MINING. 
rotated  by  turning  the  handle,  B.  The  lamp  bottom  can  be* unscrewed  by  placing  it  in  the  cup,  with  the  projecting  boss  in 
one  of  the  slots,  and  then  turning  the  handle.  In  order  to  remove 
the  internal  fittings,  the  cup  A  is  taken  off,  and  the  lamp  placed 
on  a  square  nut  thus  exposed,  which  fits  into  the  projecting  lugs 
on  the  ring  securing  the  lamp  glass,  &c.,  in  their  proper  position. 
A  few  turns  of  the  handle  removes  everything,  and  after  cleaning,. 
a  reversal  of  the  above  operations  soon  puts  the  parts  together. 
To  rivet,  the  lamp  is  placed  on  the  platform,  C,  with  one  head  of 
the  rivet  against  the  stop,  D,  when  half  a  turn  of  the  handle 
brings  the  movable  bar,  E,  forward,  and  locks  the  lamp.  To  unlock 
the  lamp,  it  is  placed  on  the  platform,  F,  with  the  head  of  the 
rivet  under  the  cutter,  G,  which  on  being  depressed  cuts  off  the 
rivet.  The  lamp  is  then  removed,  placed  at  the  other  end  of  the 
platform,  F,  and  the  handle,  B,  reversed  when  the  eccentric  block, 
H,  pushes  the  rivet  out. 
Electric  Light  Underground. — Many  collieries  are  now  pro- vided with  the  electric  light  underground,  but  the  system  extends 
only  a  short  distance  from  the  shaft.  The  ordinary  incandescent 
light,  if  worked  direct  from  the  dynamo,  requires  two  conducting 
wires  to  convey  the  current,  and  as  illumination  is  specially 
required  in  the  working  places,  it  seems  improbable  that  the  direct 
system  of  lighting  as  is  employed  on  the  surface  will  ever  be  used 
underground.  The  working  places  are  naturally  moving  day  by 
day,  falls  of  roof  are  common,  and  as  the  space  is  confined,  con- 
ducting wires  would  be  quite  out  of  place  there. 
Secondary  Batteries. — By  employing  what  are  known  as 
secondary  batteries,  or  accumulators,  a  charge  of  electricity  can  be 
stored  up  to  be  given  out  as  required.  These  secondary  batteries 
consist  of  a  series  of  lead  plates  covered  with  spongy  lead,  arranged 
in  cells  and  surrounded  by  a  solution  of  dilute  sulphuric  acid. 
Various  elements  are  employed,  and  the  cells  are  arranged  differ- 
ently by  several  makers,  all  with  a  view  of  reducing  weight  and 
increasing  efficiency  and  luminosity.  "With  a  lamp  weighing about  4  Ibs.,  a  light  equal  to  i  or  ij  standard  candles  can  be  pro- 
duced for  about  twelve  hours.  The  lamps  are  charged  by  connect- 
ing them  to  a  dynamo,  and  passing  in  a  current  for  from  eight  to 
ten  hours,  or  for  such  a  length  of  time  as  is  necessary.  It  generally 
takes  as  long  to  charge  as  to  uncharge.  The  lamp  itself  is  a  small 
incandescent  one,  and  the  light  can  be  turned  on  and  off  by  a switch. 
Accumulators  require  constant  care,  even  when  made  of  large 
size,  and  still  more  is  this  the  case  when  they  are  of  small  dimensions. 
During  the  progress  of  discharging  and  re-charging,  gas  is  given off  by  the  cells,  and  it  is,  therefore,  impossible  to  hermetically  seal 
them.  A  small  hole  has  to  be  left  for  the  escape  of  this  gas,  and 
as  the  cells  contain  a  liquid,  this  liquid  also  escapes,  and  being  an 
acid,  attacks  the  connections  and  eats  them  away ;  sooner  or  later 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING.  371 
short-circuiting  results.  There  is  also  considerable  difficulty  in 
determining  when  the  cells  are  charged ;  they  often  appear  to  be 
so,  and  yet  after  taking  the  lamp  underground,  the  light  goes  out in  a  few  hours. 
Primary  Batteries — If  some  form  of  battery  can  be  designed  at a  low  working  cost,  which  will  provide  in  itself  electricity  of 
sufficient  concentration  to  work  an  incandescent  lamp,  it  will,  no 
doubt,  meet  with  considerable  favour.  The  disadvantage  of  primary 
batteries,  by  which  is  meant  a  battery  which  is  replenished  by 
putting  fresh  plates  and  fresh  chemicals  into  it,  is  that  they  are 
expensive  to  keep  in  action,  as  they  consume  a  lot  of  material 
and  involve  considerable  trouble  in  emptying  and  charging  them. 
Probably  the  most  successful  up  to  the  present  is  that  of 
Mr.  A.  SchanschiefF,*  which  has  for  its  elements  carbon  and  zinc, 
the  exciting  fluid  being  a  solution  of  basic  sulphate  of  mercury  in 
the  acid  sulphate,  one  part  of  the  salt  being  dissolved  in  three  parts 
of  water.  In  one  form,  the  elements  occupy  a  little  less  than  one 
half  of  the  cell  (the  top  part)  and  the  solution  a  little  less  than  the 
other  half.  The  top  and  bottom  of  the  lamp  being  hermetically 
sealed,  on  turning  the  battery  upside  down  the  solution  flows  on  to- 
the  elements  and  the  lamp  begins  to  work.  The  great  advantage 
is  that  no  gas  is  given  off.  A  second  form  is  so  arranged  that 
the  plates  are  electrically  disconnected  by  lifting  them  out  of 
the  liquid.  Lord  Kelvin  reports  that  the  battery  has  a  high 
E.  M.  F.  (1.39  volts)  and  a  very  low  resistance  (0.15  ohm  for 
10  sq.  inches  of  zinc  surface).  Its  disadvantages  are,  the  cost  of 
the  exciting  fluid  (45.  a  gallon,  although  it  is  stated  that  35.  >jd.  a gallon  would  be  allowed  for  the  spent  liquid  with  its  solid  residue 
and  free  mercury,  but  the  loss  at  collieries  would  be  considerable), 
and  that  the  liquid  is  also  exceedingly  corrosive  and  attacks  every- 
thing. The  consumption  of  zinc  is  about  ^  Ib.  in  forty-eight  hours. 
As  constructed  at  the  present  time,  both  forms  of  portable 
electric  lights  are  far  too  delicate  to  be  employed  by  the  ordinary 
every-rlay  miner.  They  will  not  give  good  results  even  in  the hands  of  the  officials. 
Delicate  Indicators. — The  ordinary  safety  lamp  will  not 
detect  a  smaller  amount  of  gas  than  2\  per  cent.,  and  in  dry  and 
dusty  mines  it  is  desirable  that  a  smaller  amount  than  this  should 
be  discovered  if  present.  To  do  this,  what  are  known  as  delicate 
indicators  are  employed.  Several  forms  are  very  complicated,  but 
others  exist  which  give  good  results  in  the  hands  of  miners. 
Pieler  Lamp.\ — The  most  successful  is  the  Pieler  Lamp.  It  con- sists of  an  ordinary  oil  vessel,  but  the  illuminant  is  pure  alcohol. 
The  wick,  which  is  composed  of  silk,  can  be  raised  or  lowered  in 
the  wick  tube  in  the  ordinary  manner.  To  prevent  the  observer 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xv.  373. 
t  N.  E.  I.  xxiv.  285,  and  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (3*  Serie),  i.  299. 

--- Page Break ---
372  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
seeing  the  flame  of  the  burning  alcohol,  a  conical  shield  is  pro- vided, covering  the  flame.  The  wire  gauze  is  of  the  Davy  type, 
but  much  larger,  to  allow  for  the  increased  height  of  the  flame 
produced.  In  the  later  lamps  a  shield,  having  a  door  on  one  side, 
has  been  added  as  a  protection,  as  in  its  original  form  the  lamp 
was  very  unsafe  even  in  currents  of  the  most  ordinary  velocity. 
When  moving  about,  the  door  in  the  shield  is  shut,  but  when  an 
observation  is  being  taken  it  is  opened.  With  this  lamp  J  per 
cent,  of  fire-damp  produces  a  cap  of  i  J  inches  long,  with  J  per cent,  the  cap  reaches  2  inches,  and  when  i  J  per  cent,  is  present 
the  cap  reaches  the  top  of  the  lamp,  and  is  of  a  deep  blue  colour. 
This  lamp  is  only  useful  for  detecting  low  percentages  of  gas,  and 
must  not  be  taken  where  gas  might  be  present  until  a  previous 
examination  has  been  made  with  an  ordinary  safety  lamp.  The 
Pieler  lamp  should  only  be  used  by  persons  of  experience  and discretion. 
AshwortJis  Lamp.* — In  tins  form,  which  is  a  modification  of 
the  Hepplewhite-Gray  lamp,  benzoline  is  used  as  the  illuminant, which  not  cnly  gives  an  excellent  light,  but  when  reduced  and  a 
special  burner  employed  produces  a  very  hot  flame,  which  aids  the 
detection  of  fire-damp.  The  glass  of  the  lamp  is  ground  dead  for 
over  two-thirds  of  its  inner  surface,  and  completely  deadens  all reflection.  This  materially  assists  the  detection  of  the  cap.  It  is  said 
to  give  an  indication  of  \  per  cent.,  and  to  detect  gas  better  than 
any  other  lamp,  with  the  exception  of  the  Pieler.  Its  advantage  con- 
sists in  the  fact  that  it  gives  a  good  light  when  not  used  for  test- 
ing purposes.  The  Pieler  lamp  is  simply  a  gas-tester,  and  another 
lamp  has  to  be  carried  about  to  light  the  miner  on  his  way. 
Coloured  Glass. — Mr.  A.  L.  Steavenson  f  proposes  to  apply  the law  of  the  absorption  of  light,  and  employs  a  piece  of  coloured 
glass,  which  shuts  off  the  flame  of  the  safety  lamp,  and  renders 
evident  the  pale  blue  cap  in  a  more  distinct  manner  than  is  pos- 
sible with  the  unassisted  eye.  Either  a  slip  of  blue  pot  opal  is 
adjusted  on  a  lamp  whenever  it  is  desired  to  make  an  examination, 
or  a  pair  of  spectacles  may  be  fitted  with  glass  of  this  colour.  He 
states  that  such  addition  is  most  beneficial,  enabling  an  observer 
to  detect  the  presence  of  gas  when  quite  invisible  to  the  unaided 
eye. 
Liveing's  Indicator. % — When  a  coil  of  platinum  is  heated  in contact  with  marsh  gas,  the  combustion  of  the  gas  adds  some  heat 
to  the  platinum,  which  consequently  glows  more  brightly  than  if  it 
were  in  air.  This  is  the  principle  which  Mr.  E.  H.  Liveing  has 
utilised  in  his  indicator.  It  consists  of  two  coils  of  platinum  wire 
through  which  an  electric  current  is  passed  by  turning  the 
handle  of  a  small  magneto  machine.  One  of  these  spirals  is 
*  Fed.  Insc.  ii.  352.  f  N.  E.  I.  xxvi.  133. $  N.  E.  I.  xxvii.  287  and  xxviii.  167. 

--- Page Break ---
LIGHTING.  373 
enclosed  in  a  tube  made  air-tight  and  filled  with  pure  air,  the other  is  surrounded  by  a  cylinder  of  wire  gauze.  One  end  of  each 
spiral  is  provided  with  a  glass  cover,  the  two  facing  each  other, 
while  in  between,  a  small  screen,  such  as  is  used  in  photometric 
experiments,  is  placed.  When  the  air  of  the  mine  is  quite  free 
from  fire-damp,  both  spirals  glow  equally,  and  the  screen  would 
be  midway  between  them,  but  when  fire-damp  is  present,  one 
spiral  glows  more  than  the  other,  and  the  screen  has  to  be  moved 
farther  from  it  to  equalise  the  amount  of  light  on  the  two  faces. 
A  graduated  scale  is  provided  which  points  out  the  percentage  of 
gas  present  due  to  any  position  of  the  screen. 
After  one  spiral  has  been  heated  more  than  the  other  on  several 
occasions,  its  electrical  conductivity  becomes  altered  and  the  two 
will  not  glow  to  an  equal  extent,  even  when  a  trial  is  made  in 
pure  air.  To  allow  the  instrument  to  accommodate  itself  to  this 
change,  it  is  possible  to  move  the  zero  point  of  the  scale.  After 
using  the  instrument  several  times,  before  taking  it  into  the  mine 
the  sliding  screen  is  moved  until  its  two  sides  appear  equally 
bright  on  turning  the  handle.  The  screen  should  then  stand 
opposite  zero  on  the  scale  of  percentages,  but  if  it  does  not  the 
scale  should  be  moved  slightly  until  it  is  right,  which  is  done  by 
loosening  a  small  thumb-screw  that  holds  it.  This  instrument 
readily  detects  \  per  cent,  of  gas,  and  with  a  little  practice  any 
intelligent  person  can  operate  it. 
Hydrogen  Flame. — Messrs.  Mallard  and  Le  Chatelier  pointed 
out  in  1 88 1  the  delicate  indication  of  gas  given  by  a  hydrogen 
flame,  as  little  as  \  per  cent,  being  clearly  shown,  but  the  difficulty 
of  producing  an  apparatus  sufficiently  portable  to  be  workable  has 
only  recently  been  overcome  by  the  researches  of  Prof.  F.  Clowes,* from  whose  paper  the  following  remarks  are  abstracted  : 
At  first  the  hydrogen  was  introduced  into  the  lamp  from  a 
small  cylinder  slung  by  a  strap  from  the  shoulder,  connection  with 
the  lamp  being  made  by  a  flexible  tube.  The  maximum  degree  of 
portability  is  now  secured  by  making  the  cylinder  of  small  dimen- 
sions and  arranging  that  it  may  be  quickly  attached  directly  to  the 
lamp  so  as  to  form  a  convenient  handle  for  supporting  it.  The 
cylinder  weighs  a  little  over  a  pound,  and  when  charged  with 
hydrogen  under  a  pressure  of  100  atmospheres  it  furnishes  a 
standard  flame  (10  m.m.,  =0.4  inch,  high)  burning  continuously for  40  minutes.  The  cylinder  is  attached  to  and  detached  from  an 
ordinary  safety  lamp  instantaneously  by  a  quarter  turn.  The  new 
hydrogen-oil  lamp  presents  the  advantage  of  enabling  any  ordinary 
efficient  illuminating  safety  lamp  to  be  converted  in  the  simplest 
way  into  a  delicate  gas  detector,  this  being  effected  without 
permanently  adding  to  its  weight,  the  hydrogen  supply  being 
attached  only  at  the  spot  where  delicate  tests  are  to  be  made. 
*  On  the  Detection  and  Estimation  of  Small  Proportions  of  fire  Dampt Petroleum  Vapour,  and  other  Inflammalde  Gas  or  Vapour  in  the  Air. 
Journal  of  the  Society  of  Arts,  xli.  307.  Feb.  17,  1893. 

--- Page Break ---
374  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
The  whole  proceeding  of  passing  from  the  bright  oil  flame  to  the 
hydrogen  flame,  making  a  test  and  passing  back  to  the  luminous 
flame,  can  be  effected  in  30  seconds. 
The  lamp  will  probably  be  used  as  follows  : — If  the  percentage of  gas  is  unknown,  the  oil  flame  will  first  be  reduced,  and  a  cap 
looked  for  over  it.  If  the  gas  amounts  to  3  per  cent.,  or  more, 
it  may  be  detected  and  estimated  by  this  flame.  If  no  cap  is  seen 
and  low  percentages  of  gas  have  to  be  looked  for,  the  hydrogen 
cylinder  is  attached,  the  standard  hydrogen  flame  obtained  in  the 
Limp,  and  the  percentage  of  gas  can  be  seen  and  estimated  if  it 
is  between  0.2  and  3  per  cent. 
The  hydrogen-oil  lamp  fulfils  the  primary  conditions  of  an 
efficient  testing  apparatus ;  it  is  convenient,  safe,  a  good  illumi- 
nant,  and  combines  delicacy  with  accuracy  and  with  a  wide  range of  indications. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : 
so.  WALES.  INST.  :  TV/e  Fire-damp  Cap,  Wm.  Galloway,  x.  284 ; 
Sclianschieffs  Portable  Primary  Baitery,  A.  Schanschieff,  xv.  373  ; 
Large  Incandescent  Electric  Lamps  v.  Arc  Lamps,  S.  F.  Walker, xvi.  370. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Safety  Lamps,  J.  B.  Marsaut  (translated  by  W.  H.  Eoutledge 
and  J.  A.  Verner),  xii.  179. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC.  :  Oit  the  Pie'er  Safety  Lamp,  C.  Le  Neve  Foster,  xvii.  252  ; On  the  Wolff  Safety  Lamp  and  the  Contrivance  for  Relighting  it,  C. 
Le  Neve  Foster,  xvii.  280;  On  a  New  Lead  Rivet  Mould,  H.  Bramall, 
xix.  364. 
FED.  INST.  :  Notes  on  Safety  Lamps,  H.  W.  Hughes,  i.  255  ;  Detection  of 
Fire-damp,  J.  Ashworth  and  F.  Clowes,  ii.  352 ;  The  Thorneburry 
Safety  Lamp,  E.  B.  Wain,  iii.  226. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Etude  sur  la  lampe  de  stirete  des  mineurs,  J.  B.  Marsaut 
(2e  Serie),  xii.  321  ;  Note  sur  la  lampe  Pielcr,  A.  Simon  (3°  Serie), 1.299. 
REV.  UNIV.  :  Note  sur  les  lampes  electrigves  port atives  pour  mines,  E.  Masson 
(3e  Serie),  xvi.  139. 
.  U.  E.  I. :  On  an  Improved  Method  of  Detecting  Small  Quantities  of 'Inflammable Gas,  A.  L.  Steavenson,  xxvi.  133  ;  On  a  New  Method  of  Determining 
very  Small  Quantities  of  Inflammable  Gas,  E.  H.  Liveing,  xxvii.  287  and 
xxviii.  167  ;  Notes  on  tlie  Mueseler  Lamp,  A.  K  Sawyer,  xxix.  141  ; 
On  the  Principles  of  Electric  Lighting  and  the  Construction  ar,d  Arrange- went  of  Ehctric,  Uahting  Apparatus,  S.  F.  Walker,  xxxiv.  3;  The 
Marsaut  Lamp,  M.  Walton  Brown,  xxxiv.  161  ;  Tlie  Pieler  Lamp  and 
Mode  of  Indicating  small  Quantities  of  Eire-damp,  T.  W.  Bunning, 
xxxiv.  285  ;  Testing  of  Safety  Lamps  :  Account  of  Experiments  made 
by  Profs.  Ereitcher  and  WinJder,  P.  Phillips  Bedson,  xxxv.  3  ;  Cuveller's 
Lock  for  Safety  Lamps,  E.  L.  Dumas,  xxxvi.  5(  ;  Ackroyd  and  Best'* Safety  Lamp  Cleaning  Machine,  Wm.  Ackroyd,  xxxvii.  121. 
ANN.  DEB.  MINES.  :  Sur  Vemploi  des  lampes  electriques.  Report  of  a  Com- 
mission (8e  Serie),  xviii.  699. 
BIUT.  spc.  MIN.  STUD.  :  Safety  Lamps,  A.  H.  Leech  and  W.  H.  Routledge, 
vi.  119;  Heath  and  Frost's  Shot  Firing  Lamp,  E.  S.  Hope,  xi.  42  ; How  to  Liyld  a  Colliery  with  Electricity,  S.  F.  Walker,  xiii.  147. 

--- Page Break ---
(    375    ) 
CHAPTER    XIII. 
1 
WORKS    AT    SURFACE. 
Boilers. — The  generation  of  steam  at  a  colliery  is  a  point  of 
considerable  importance.  Not  so  long  ago  the  argument  was 
often  put  forth  that  coal  at  a  colliery  cost  nothing.  Certainly,  a 
quantity  of  unsaleable  mineral  is  produced,  but  this  bears  a  small 
proportion  to  the  total  output.  When  labour  was  cheap,  little 
machinery  was  employed,  requiring  only  a  limited  quantity  of 
steam.  The  tendency,  however,  at  the  present  day  is  to  do 
nothing  by  hand  that  can  be  performed  by  machinery,  and,  as  a 
result,  greatly  increased  quantities  of  steam  have  to  be  used ;  the 
consumption  of  coal  has  correspondingly  increased,  and  in  addition 
to  the  portion  of  unsaleable  produce,  the  better  quality  of  coal 
has  also  to  be  used.  In  consequence  of  this,  fuel-saving 
appliances  are  becoming  quite  common ;  indeed,  many  of  the 
more  modern  collieries  are  as  well  designed  in  this  respect  as  any 
other  branch  of  engineering. 
Under  the  old  regime,  cylindrical  externally  fixed  boilers  were 
invariably  applied,  and  a  great  deal  may  still  be  said  in  favour  of 
them.  They  certainly  do  not  raise  steam  economically,  but  to  a 
great  extent  this  failing  is  counterbalanced  by  their  low  cost  of 
repairs,  and  the  facility  with  which  they  may  be  cleaned  from 
incrustation  resulting  from  bad  water.  This  is  the  chief  recom- 
mendation of  boilers  of  this  type,  and  where  the  water  is  very 
bad  they  cannot  be  surpassed. 
The  tendency  at  the  present  day  is  to  employ  high  pressure 
steam.  Its  advantages  are  numerous,  as  superiority  in  economy 
is  not  its  only  recommendation.  Its  use  from  the  beginning 
materially  affects  the  capital  outlay  at  any  colliery.  If  instead  of 
using  50  Ibs.  pressure,  150  Ibs.  is  employed,  which  is  now  be- 
coming common,  not  only  is  the  size  of  every  engine  on  the  place 
less,  and  the  cost  also,  but  the  buildings  are  smaller,  the  size  of 
the  steam-pipes  is  reduced,  and  the  whole  installation  can  be made  more  compact. 
The  generation  of  high  pressure  steam  requires  tubular  boilers, 
•of  which  there  are  numerous  types.  That  well-known  form 

--- Page Break ---
376  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
called  the  Lancashire  boiler,  which  consists  of  a  cylindrical  shellr 
having  two  longitudinal  tubes  running  the  entire  length,  may  be 
taken  as  the  type  upon  which  other. designs  are  based.  Two  fires 
are  employed,  one  in  the  front  end  of  each  flue,  and  the  products 
of  combustion,  after  passing  through  the  boiler,  are  conveyed 
along  each  side,  and  finally  returned  beneath  the  bottom  to  the 
chimney. 
In  the  Galloway  boiler,  the  two  main  tubes  in  which  the  fires 
are  situated,  merge  into  one  of  elliptical  form,  in  which  are  placed 
taper  vertical  tubes,  the  circulation  of  water  and  heating  surface 
being  thereby  increased.  This  boiler  is  in  extensive  use,  and  for 
the  past  fifteen  years  has  stood  in  the  foremost  rank  as  an 
efficient  and  cheap  steam-producer. In  the  Arnold  boiler,  a  longitudinal  tube  extends  for  some 
distance  along  the  flue  behind  the  bridge,  and  connects  the  upper 
and  lower  parts  of  the  boiler  through  the  flue.  The  introduction 
of  this  tube  is  claimed  to  increase  the  effective  heating  surface 
and  to  split  up  the  flame  of  the  heated  gases,  so  that  more  of 
their  heat  is  imparted  to  the  water.  Another  patented  feature  of 
this  boiler  is  the  barrel  shape  of  the  rings  forming  the  flues. 
This  construction  gives  a  greater  area  of  heating  surface  than  the 
cylindrical  shape  and  more  strength. 
The  final  division  under  which  boilers  may  be  classed  is  that  of 
the  multitubular  or  locomotive  type,  in  which  a  series  of  small 
tubes  placed  longitudinally  are  arranged  within  the  shell,  but 
such  class  is  capable  of  further  subdivision.  In  one  type,  the  hot 
gases  pass  through  the  tubes,  which  are  surrounded  by  water  'r while  in  the  other,  the  tubes  are  full  of  water,  and  the  hot  gases 
circulate  on  the  outside.  In  the  latter  type,  the  tubes  are  placed 
in  an  inclined  position  and  are  connected  with  each  other  and  with  a 
horizontal  cylinder  by  vertical  passages  at  each  end.  The  upper 
cylinder  is  kept  half  full  of  water,  and  steam  forms  in  the 
remaining  portion.  Multitubular  boilers  have  not  received  much, favour  at  collieries. 
All  high  pressure  boilers  should  be  provided  with  two  safety 
valves,  which  are  best  of  the  dead- weight  type,  a  common  form  being 
shown  in  Fig.  424.  The  valve,  a,  which  is  ball-shaped,  is  attached 
by  brackets  to  a  cylinder,  &,  upon  which  a  number  of  weights,  c,  are- 
threaded.  The  advantage  of  this  construction  is,  that  there  is  no- 
fear  of  any  of  the  parts  rusting  and  sticking.  Instead  of  em- 
ploying only  one  set  of  weights,  sometimes  the  valves  are  arranged 
in  groups,  the  discharge  aperture  of  each  being  made  exactly  one- square  inch  in  area. 
Economical  and  quick  generation  of  steam  is  considerably  assisted 
by  delivering  feed-water  into  the  boiler  as  hot  as  possible.  The 
general  procedure  is  to  employ  the  exhaust  steam  to  supply  the 
necessary  heat.  At  East  Howie  Colliery,  Durham,  the  exhaust 
steam  is  turned  into  an  old  boiler.  Cold  water  enters  at  the  top,. 

--- Page Break ---
WORKS   AT  SURFACE. 
377 and  is  allowed  to  fall  on  to  a  series  of  horizontal  trays  placed  one 
below  another  in  step  form.  The  feed-water  is  heated  to  200°,  and is  then  forced  by  a  donkey  pump  into  the  boiler. 
Exhaust  injectors  are*  becoming  largely  employed,  these,  as  their name  implies,  use  exhaust  not  live  steam,  and  as  they  automatically 
commence  working  they  can  be  used  with  intermittently  running 
engines.  The  practice  of  bringing  the  exhaust  steam  into  contact 
with  the  feed-water  is  open  to  the  objection  that  the  greater  part 
of  the  oil  and  grease  which  is  used  in  the  engines  is  carried  back into  the  boilers. 
To  overcome  this,  at  Abram  Colliery,  Lancashire,  the  arrange- 
1'iG.  424. FIG.  425. 
wetter 
ment  shown  in  Fig.  425  is  employed.  The  exhaust  steam  is  turned 
into  a  vertical  chamber  which  is  in  free  communication  with  the 
atmosphere  through  an  opening  at  the  top.  Feed-water  enters 
near  the  bottom  through  a  pipe  and  is  forced  to  circulate  through 
a  spiral  tube,  and  on  reaching  the  upper  extremity  passes  by 
another  pipe  into  the  boilers.  The  exhaust  steam  which  is  in  con- tact with  the  outside  of  the  tube  heats  the  water  to  nearly  boiling 
point,  and  as  the  steam  has  free  passage  through  the  appliance,  no 
back  pressure  is  pu^  on  the  engine. 
Mechanical  Stoking.* — Firing  by  hand  being  a  very  laborious 
*  Consult  Machine-stoking,  J.  F.  Spencer,  Inst.  C.E.  civ.  55. 

--- Page Break ---
378  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
operation,  numerous  attempts  have  been  made  to  supersede  it  by 
mechanical  means,  and  at  the  present  time  many  successful  devices 
are  in  operation.  They  may  be  divided  into  two  types — (a)  where 
the  fuel  is  fed  from  a  hopper  on  to  a  plate,  and  then  carried  for- 
ward on  to  the  bars ;  (b)  where  the  coal  is  thrown  on  to  the  fire  in 
small  quantities  at  a  time,  by  either  a  small  revolving  fan  or  a 
shovel  moved  by  a  spring. 
It  may  now  be  regarded  that  the  claim  made  for  such  machines 
of  using  an  inferior  class  of  coal  and  raising  steam  cheaper  may 
be  conceded.  With  them  the  fire  is  added  to  by  the  smallest 
quantities  at  a  time,  and  the  operation  is  perfectly  regular,  which 
can  never  take  place  with  hand  firing,  unless  one  man  is  kept  to 
each  boiler.  A  saving  also  results  from  the  fact  that  the  fire  doors 
FIGS.  426  AND  427. 
are  rarely  if  ever  open.  Not  only  does  this  prevent  smoke,  but 
it  reduces  the  wear  of  the  boiler,  as  cold  air  is  prevented  from 
getting  on  to  the  hot  plates. 
The  bars  in  both  types  of  stokers  are  movable,  usually  arranged 
to  all  move  forward  together,  to  carry  with  them  the  fire,  and 
to  return  by  ones  and  twos  at  a  time,  leaving  the  fire  behind,  but 
at  the  same  time  breaking  it  up.  In  this  way  the  fire  is  gradually 
carried  forward  into  the  boiler,  finally  dropping  over  the  bridge 
at  the  end  with  the  coal  wholly  consumed. 
A  mechanical  stoker  of  the  coking  class  is  shown  in  Figs.  426 
and  427.  A  trough,  A,  runs  across  the  front  of  the  boiler,  and 
the  slack  for  consumption  is  placed  there.  The  projecting  ends 
of  the  movable  bars  form  the  bottom  of  the  trough,  and  as  they 
travel  forward  carry  with  them  a  certain  proportion  of  fuel  at 
each  stroke.  The  bars  run  on  rollers,  r  r,  and  are  all  moved 
forward  some  3  in.  at  the  same  time  by  tappets,  t,  the  thickness 
of  the  layer  of  slack  carried  onward  being  regulated  by  the 
distance  between  the  bottom  of  the  trough  and  the  plate,  p,  which 

--- Page Break ---
WOKKS  AT  SURFACE. 379 
•can  be  either  raised  or  lowered  by  revolving  the  wheel,  c.  The 
slack  passes  underneath  a  fire-brick  arch,  e,  which  is  red  hot,  and 
is  ignited  ;  the  bars  return  in  twos,  leaving  the  fire  where  it  was 
taken  to  by  the  forward  motion. 
This  operation  is  repeated  twice  a  minute,  or  as  often  as  is 
•desired,  the  rate  being  so  arranged  that  when  the  charge  reaches 
the  end  of  the  bars  complete  combustion  has  taken  place.  The 
clinker  drops  off  at  the  end  of  the  bars,  and  when  fit  to  be  pulled 
out  is  removed  through  the  door,  d. 
Coal  Conveyors. — Mechanical  stokers  reduce  labour  to  a 
•certain  extent.  They  take  off  cleaning  and  feeding  the  fires,  but 
still  require  manual  labour  to  fill  the  hoppers,  and  as  these  are 
usually  some  distance  above  the  ground  level,  their  feeding 
requires  considerable  labour,  as  the  coal  has  to  be  thrown  upwards 
to  a  height  of  at  least  six  feet.  The  advantages  of  mechanical 
stoking  are,  therefore,  not  fully  realised  unless  some  automatic 
means  are  provided  for  conveying  the  coal  into  the  hoppers,  and 
the  economy  is  still  more  marked  if,  at  the  same  time,  the  ashes 
are  also  conveyed  away  automatically.  The  latter  is  of  consider- 
able importance,  because  the  coal  employed  with  mechanical 
stokers  is  generally  of  a  far  inferior  character  to  that  used  with 
hand  firing,  and  conse- 
quently makes  a  larger  pro-  FIG.  428. 
portion  of  ashes,  this  being 
•especially  the  case  when  very 
inferior  qualities  are  burnt. 
An  arrangement  for  auto- matically conveying  the  coal 
and  removing  the  ashes,  as 
adopted  at  a  large  colliery, 
is  shown  in  Fig.  428.  The 
-coal,  after  being  freed  from 
all  large,  is  raised  by  a 
bucket  elevator,  or  Jacob's lacldar,  and  delivered  on  to  a 
channel  formed  of  iron  plates,  in  the  bottom  of  which,  opposite  each 
hopper  of  the  mechanical  stoker,  are  fixed  sliding  doors,  which  are 
under  the  control  of  the  stoker,  who  can  open  and  shut  them  by 
means  of  suitably  arranged  levers.  Below  each  hole  is  a  reversible 
trap  which  either  directs  the  coal  into  the  shoot  going  to  the 
hoppers,  or  into  a  storage  bin.  Travelling  along  the  channel  is 
an  arrangement  known  as  a  "  conveyor,"  which  consists  of  a  series of  plates  fastened  at  intervals  to  a  chain  (Fig.  429).  As  the 
chain  moves  along,  the  coal  is  carried  forward  in  front  of  each 
scraper,  and  passes  down  through  any  of  the  openings  which  are 
not  closed  by  the  sliding  doors,  and  thence  by  the  shoot  into  the 
feed  hoppers. 
A  culvert  with  a  similar  conveyor  running  in  it  is  arranged 

--- Page Break ---
380 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
along  the  front  of  the  boilers.  The  ashes  are  raked  into  this 
culvert,  and  are  carried  along  by  the  creeper  to  the  end,  where 
they  fall  into  a  trough  and  are  raised  by  a  Jacob's  ladder  into  a truck,  and  then  pass  away  to  the  refuse  heap. 
Another  form  of  conveyor  consists  of  a  spiral  revolving  in  a. 
FIG.  429. 
FIG.  430. 
semicircular  trough.  If  the  spiral  is  made  strong  enough  the- 
appliance  works  very  smoothly  and  gives  good  results  with  small 
particles,  but  unless  the  shaft  of  the  spiral  is  well  supported  by 
bearings,  it  has  a  tendency  to  "sag,"  and  soon  wears  out  the- bottom  of  the  trough. 
Coating  Steam  Pipes. — To  prevent  condensation  and  loss  of 
heat  by  radiation,  boiler  houses  are  often  roofed  in,  not  perhaps 
so  often  at  collieries  as  they  should  be.  The  pipes  conveying 
steam  to  the  different  engines 
should  also  be  protected  by  some 
external  covering.  A  very  good 
cheap  kind  is  to  bind  on  a  series 
of  rough  wood  bars  all  the  way 
round  the  pipes.  At  Mariemont, 
the  covering  employed  possesses 
the  advantage  of  being  movable. 
A  zinc  or  sheet-iron  tube  sur- 
rounds the  steam  pipe,  and  a  layer 
of  ashes  is  placed  between  (Fig. 
430).  These  tubes  are  made  in 
halves  with  a  hinge,  a,  at  one  side,  and  a  clasp,  b,  at  the  other. 
A  great  many  different  kinds  of  non-conducting  materials  for covering  steam  pipes  are  in  existence.  The  subject  has  been  most 
carefully  gone  into  by  the  late  Mr.  W.  J.  Bird,  who  states  that  in, 
an  actual  case  the  loss  of  steam  was  reduced  fron  12.16  per  cent, 
when  the  pipes  were  uncovered  to  1.86  per  cent,  with  covered 
pipes.  The  saving  is  increased  by  increasing  the  thickness  of  the- covering,  but  this  thickness  has  an  economical  limit.  It  may 
broadly  be  stated  that  the  great  majority  of  the  compositions 
give  very  satisfactory  results,  and  that  the  worst  of  them  is  better 
than  nothing  at  all.  They  are  liable  to  deterioration  from  damp 
and  heat,  and  should  be  protected  by  a  covering  of  tar ;  in  places 
where  the  covering  is  liable  to  receive  blows  it  is  further  protected 
by  a  layer  of  felt,  followed  on  the  outside  by  a  sheeting  of  zinc. 

--- Page Break ---
WORKS   AT  SURFACE.  381 
Workshops. — As  the  great  majority  of  collieries  are  situated 
away  from  towns,  it  is  very  necessary  that  they  should  be  provided 
with  mechanics'  shops,  either  of  a  simple  or  elaborate  character, depending  on  the  size  of  the  mine.  At  the  largest  collieries 
nearly  everything  is  made  on  the  ground,  indeed,  in  many  cases, 
new  engines  are  built  there,  and  the  shops  rival  those  of 
•engineering  establishments.  At  all  mines  a  certain  staff  of 
mechanics  have  to  be  retained  to  attend  to  breakages,  and  if 
good  men  are  to  be  kept,  they  must  have  regular  employment. 
It  is  far  better  to  do  repairs  on  the  spot  than  to  send  them  away. 
Not  only  is  time  saved,  but  the  cost  is  reduced,  as  urgency  work 
has  always  to  be  paid  for  at  increased  rates.  In  all  cases  a  small 
lathe  and  drilling  machine  should  be  put  down ;  in  the  smith's shop,  the  fires  should  be  blown  by  fans,  and  a  steam  hammer 
erected,  this  tool  being  perhaps  the  most  useful  about  any 
colliery. 
The  practice  of  building  and  repairing  railway  waggons  at  the 
mine  is  now  becoming  common,  and  elaborate  wood-working 
machinery  is  put  down  for  the  purpose.  Boring  and  morticing 
machines  and  band  saws  are  then  required,  but  in  all  cases  the 
introduction  of  wood-boring  machines  results  in  economy.  If performed  by  hand,  the  operation  is  a  most  laborious  one,  while 
a  small  machine  with  revolving  auger  can  be  purchased  very 
•cheaply. 
For  sawing  timber,  either  for  sleepers  or  for  props  and  bars, 
circular  saws  are  invariably 
put  down.   For  cross  cutting,  FiG.  431. these  are  either  fixed  to  a 
swinging  arm  and  drawn 
against  the  piece  of  timber 
placed  in  front,  or,  what  is 
better  still,  the  arrangement 
shown  in  Fig.  43 1  is  adopted. 
Motion  is  given  to  the  belt- 
driven  pulley,  a,  fixed  on  the 
shaft,  b,  in  which  a  long  key- 
way  is  cut,  and  through  bevel  gearing  a  movement  of  rotation  is 
given  to  the  circular  saw,  c.  By  means  of  levers,  the  saw  can  be 
pulled  forward  by  the  attendant  in  the  direction  shown  by  the 
arrow,  cutting  through  the  timber  placed  before  it.  The  pulley, 
a,  remains  in  its  place,  but  the  key  slides  in  the  long  key-way, 
and  the  shaft,  bt  continues  revolving. 

--- Page Break ---
(    3S2     ) 
CHAPTER   XIV. 
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET. 
General  Considerations. — No  operation  connected  with  mining- has  passed  through  greater  changes  during  the  past  few  years 
than  that  of  cleaning  and  sorting  the  coal.  In  this  country  so- 
many  good  coals  existed  that  a  ready  sale  was  found  for  them  in 
the  state  they  came  from  the  mine.  Naturally  the  best  seams 
were  worked  first,  but  as  they  became  exhausted,  the  inferior 
qualities  had  to  be  mined.  It,  therefore,  became  necessary  not 
only  to  adopt  a  more  equal  division  into  sizes,  but  to  employ  some 
means  for  removing  the  impurities,  in  order  that  the  dirty  coal  in 
its  clean  state  may  become  equal,  if  possible,  to  the  good  coal  in 
its  dirty  condition. 
The  trade  of  the  present  day  requires  a  more  careful  division 
into  sizes  than  it  did  a  few  years  ago,  and  for  such  reason  the 
means  employed  to  obtain  such  division  have  become  much  more 
elaborate  and  made  to  perform  their  work  more  accurately.  The 
coal  coming  out  of  the  mine  has  first  to  be  emptied  on  to  a  screen, 
an  operation  which  is  performed  by  various  machines  called 
"tipplers."  After  passing  over  and  through  the  screen,  the mineral  is  received  on  travelling  bands  or  belts,  and  the  dirt 
picked  out  of  it  by  attendants.  It  passes  from  the  belts  into 
shoots  and  thence  to  waggons,  in  which  it  leaves  the  colliery. 
So  long  as  the  coal  is  large,  the  stones  and  dirt  mixed  with  it  can 
be  picked  out  fairly  easily,  but  in  the  smaller  qualities  where  the 
refuse  is  fine,  other  means  have  to  be  adopted,  either  dry  or  wet 
cleaning,  called  "washing."  Both  methods  depend  on  the  different specific  gravities  of  dirt  and  coal.  In  the  former,  a  current  of  air 
is  directed  on  to  the  mixed  material,  and  blows  the  lighter  coal 
farther  than  the  heavier  refuse.  In  the  latter,  moving  water  is 
employed,  which  has  the  same  effect.  The  former  has  not  received 
a  very  extended  application,  but  the  latter  is  not  only  largely 
employed,  but  is  becoming  more  and  more  used  every  day. 
Although  it  would  be  impossible  to  give  here  anything  like  a 
complete  description  of  the  many  varied  types  of  installations which  are  carried  out  in  different  countries  to  suit  different 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF  COAL  FOR   MARKET.        383 
conditions,  yet  the  main  features  of  the  various  parts  of  the  appa- 
ratus used  for  coal  cleaning  will  be  considered  under  their  respective 
heads,  and  an  outline  given  of  the  way  several  plants  are  arranged. 
One  important  point  must  be  dwelt  on  at  the  outset — viz. ,  that 
it  is  impossible  to  force  the  trade  of  any  district  to  take  a  certain 
class  of  coal,  and  that  cleaning  and  sorting  appliances  must  be 
put  down  at  each  colliery  to  suit  the  trade  of  that  district. 
What  is  acting  very  well  at  one  place  with  economical  results 
might  work  just  as  economically  at  another  place,  but  if  the 
sizes  and  qualities  made  are  not  suited  to  the  trade  of  the  second 
district,  the  result  of  its  application  would  be  a  failure.  Before, 
therefore,  adopting  anything,  it  is  essential  that  the  conditions- 
under  which  it  is  Working  should  be  compared  with  the  condi- tions under  which  it  will  have  to  work  in  its  new  situation. 
Circulation  of  Tubs. — As  soon  as  the  tubs  leave  the  cage  at the  surface,  they  have  to  be  conveyed  to  the  tipplers,  and,  after 
emptying,  returned  again  to  the  pit  mouth.  If  the  screens  are 
near  the  shaft,  the  heapstead  will  be  covered  with  iron  plates 
called  "  flat  sheets,"  upon  which  the  tubs  can  be  turned  about  in any  direction.  A  better  plan  is  to  lay  lines  of  rails  and  ensure 
movement  taking  place  in  definite  paths.  The  tubs  can  then  be 
pushed,  or  the  rails  placed  at  such  an  inclination  that  the  tubs 
gravitate  towards  the  discharging  place.  As  they  are  generally 
taken  off  the  cage  on  one  side,  and  put  on  it  again  from  the 
other,  if  it  is  downhill  to  the  tipplers,  it  must  be  uphill  going 
back,  and  consequently  a  more  or  less  greater  expenditure  of 
labour  is  required  to  perform  the  haulage,  the  amount  depending 
on  the  size  and  weight  of  the  tubs. 
No  better  appliance  has  been  introduced  for  minimising  the 
cost  of  conveying  tubs  about  the  heapstead  than  that  known  as 
the  "  finger  "  or  "  creeper  "  chain,  which  was  originally  designed  by a  Belgian  engineer.  It  consists  of  an  endless  chain  travelling 
under  the  tubs,  provided  at  intervals  with  vertical  projecting 
pieces  of  iron  (a  a,  Fig.  432)  fastened  to  the  links.  The  entire 
length  of  the  top  half  of  the  chain  rests  on  a  girder  of  wood,  b,. 
which  acts  both  as  a  support  and  guide.  It  is  driven  by  a  sprocket, 
FIG.  432.  FIG.  433. 
or  cogwheel,  the  teeth  of  which  have  a  pitch  equal  to  that  of  the chain.  When  a  tub  is  conducted  to  the  commencement  of  this 
chain,  the  first  passing  hook  seizes  the  axle  and  drags  on  the  tub, 
which  is  released  at  the  other  extremity. 
Such  apparatus  is  generally  arranged  as  in  Fig.  433.     The  tubs- 

--- Page Break ---
384 TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
leave  the  cage  at  the  shaft,  and  after  being  weighed  on  the 
machine  at  a,  gravitate  to  the  tippler  at  b,  the  road  being  suitably 
inclined.  The  tippler  is  horizontal,  and  so  placed  that  the  tubs  stop 
on  arriving  there.  They  are  emptied,  and  then  pushed  on  by  the 
next  following  tub,  and  proceed,  still  by  gravitation,  to  the  point 
c  ;  the  road  here  is,  therefore,  at  a  lower  level  than  the  pit  top. 
From  c  tod  the  tubs  are  carried  along  by  a  creeper  chain,  the  road 
rising  in  the  direction  they  travel,  until  at  d  the  level  of  the  rails 
is  at  such  a  height  above  the  pit's  mouth  that  the  tubs  gravitate there  as  soon  as  they  are  released  from  the  chain.  Any  desired 
variation  in  this  arrangement  can  be  made,  the  common  one  being 
that  instead  of  the  tubs  gravitating  to  the  tippler  they  are  lifted 
there  by  a  creeper,  and  then 
FIG.  434.  gravitate  back  to  the  shaft. 
This  is  perhaps  the  preferable 
arrangement,  as  more  height 
is  obtained  from  the  screen- 
ing level  to  the  ground. 
In  some  cases  the  screening 
establishment  is  not  at  the 
pit's  mouth  but  farther  away, and  the  banking  level  is  at 
the  surface  of  the  ground.  If 
the  screens  are  any  distance 
away,  the  tubs  can  be  con- 
veyed there,  and  lifted  the 
required  height  by  any  of 
the  forms  of  haulage  which 
have  been  described,  but 
instead  of  doing  this,  it  is common  to  raise  them  direct 
by  an  ordinary  steam  lift. With  a  steam  lift  for  a 
height  of,  say,  20  ft.,  the 
piston  would  have  to  be 
equally  long,  and  would  be- come not  only  costly  but 
expensive  to  work.  To  over- come this  difficulty  a  shorter 
piston  is  used,  but  the  piston 
rod  is  connected  through  a 
rope  to  a  small  wheel  keyed 
on  a  shaft,  on  which  a  larger 
wheel  is  also  fixed  (Fig.  434)  To  the  latter  is  attached  one  end 
of  a  rope,  while  the  other  end  is  connected  to  a  cage  in  which  the 
tub  is  placed.  The  piston  travelling  a  short  distance,  hut  attached 
to  the  smaller  wheel,  raises  the  cage  a  much  greater  distance,  as 
this  is  connected  to  the  larger  diameter  wheel. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET. 
After  the  tubs  have  been  raised  this  height  they  can  gravitate 
back  to  the  shaft,  but  if  the  horizontal  distance  is  small  they  attain 
too  high  a  velocity,  unless  their  progress  is  checked  by  some  means. 
Such  is  done  by  placing  wooden  planks  between  the  rails,  as  shown 
in  Fig.  435,  and  as  the  tub  in  passing  over  has  to  depress  the  end, 
a,  its  velocity  is  retarded.  These  planks  may  also  be  placed  to 
engage  the  sides  of  the  tub. 
A  creeper  chain  as  ordinarily  constructed  cannot  work  round  a 
curve.  At  Clifton  Colliery,  instead  of  employing  flat  links  as  is 
usual,  a  creeper  is  constructed  of  ordinary  round  iron  chain  and 
works  in  guides,  which  not  only  govern  the  direction  but  also  keep 
the  chain  down.  A  section  through  the  guide  is  given  in  Fig. 
436.  It  will  be  seen  that  only  enough  space  is  left  open  at  the 
FI3.  435- FIG.  436. 
FIG.  437. 
FIG.  438. 
top  for  the  projecting  piece  to  work  through.  It  was  found  that 
something  of  this  kind  was  necessary,  as  the  chain  was  continually 
going  out  of  an  ordinary  guide  open  at  the  top. 
TIPPLERS. — Three  classes  of  this  machine  are  in  vogue — (a) those  discharging  the  coal  forward ; 
(b)  where  the  tub  is  turned  back- 
wards ;  and  (c)  where  the  discharge 
is  sideways. 
Front  Tipplers. — The  ordinary 
construction  is  shown  in  Fig.  437. The  tub  runs  on  and  is  locked  in 
position  by  the  hoop  part,  a,  which catches  over  the  axles.  The  machine 
is  pivoted  about  a  centre,  b ;  when 
the  tub  is  full,  equilibrium  is  un- 
stable, arid  the  machine  turns  round 
the  centre  point  in  the  direction 
indicated  by  the  arrow,  emptying 
out  the  coal,  the  rate  of  turning 
being  regulated  by  a  brake.  As 
soon  as  the  coal  is  discharged,  the 
centre  of  gravity  falls  below  the 
axis,  and  the  tippler  returns  to  its  former  position. 
The  disadvantage  of  this  class  is  the  distance  coals  have  to  fall 
on  to  the  screen,  occasioning  considerable  breakage.  Several 
devices  are  in  use  for  minimising  such  objection.  In  Riggs'  tippler (Fig.  438)  the  front  is  enclosed  by  an  upright  plate  hinged  along 
2  B 

--- Page Break ---
386  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
its  upper  sMe,  and  during  the  revolution  the  coal  is  not  discharged 
until  this  plate  nearly  rests  on  the  screen  bars. 
At  Cowpen  Colliery,  Northumberland,*  a  sliding  door  is provided  at  the  top  of  the  end  tipplers  to  prevent  breakage  of 
coal  when  emptying.  Half  the  tippler  is  covered  in  with  a  fixed 
plate  (a  b,  Fig.  439),  the  other  portion,  b  c,  sliding  on  rollers. 
When  the  tub  is  pushed  into  the  tippler,  the  whole  revolves  about 
the  axis,  d,  and  no  coal  is  discharged  until  the  end,  c,  of  the 
sliding  door  drops  on  to  the  fixed  projecting  stop,  e,  which  pushes 
it  open  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrow.  The  opening  so 
made  is  small  at  the  commencement,  when  the  coals  have  to  be 
dropped  furthest,  and  reaches  its  maximum  when  the  tub  is  just above  the  screen  bars. 
Back  Tipplers  — With  the  object  of  reducing  the  distance 
through  which  the  coals  have  to  fall,  back  tipplers  were  designed. 
In  these,  the  tubs  run  on  in  the  direction  of  the  arrow,  A  (Fig. 
440),  and  are  prevented  going  too  far  by  the  stop,  B.  By  a 
FIG.  439.  FIG.  440. 
movement  of  the  lever,  C,  the  catch  keeping  the  tippler  in 
position  is  withdrawn,  and  revolution  takes  place  in  the  direction 
of  the  arrow  D,  the  speed  at  which  this  is  done  is  controlled  by  a 
strap  brake,  upon  which  pressure  is  exerted  in  the  direction  of  the 
arrow,  E,  and  during  the  revolution  the  tubs  are  kept  in  their 
proper  position  by  the  stop,  F  G  H,  consisting  of  two  links, 
F  G  and  G  H,  each  pivoted  near  its  centre.  As  soon  as  the 
contents  are  emptied,  the  tippler  returns  to  its  proper  position, 
the  catch  is  put  on  by  the  lever,  C,  and  the  end,  F,  of  the  second 
stop  is  depressed  as  indicated  by  the  arrow,  this  raising  the  end, 
H,  and  allowing  the  tub  to  be  removed. 
Side  Tipplers. — With  the  tipplers  just  described,  the  coal  only falls  a  short  distance  from  the  tub  on  to  the  screen,  and  breakage 
is  small.  The  same  result  can  be  obtained  by  sliding  doors,  &c., 
applied  to  forward  tipplers,  but  both  have  two  objections,  which 
are  serious  ones — (i)  the  tub  has  to  leave  the  tippler  by  the 
*  Fed.  Inst.  i.  95. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET1.       387 
same  path  as  it  went  in,  which  occasions  considerable  waste  of 
time ;  (2)  the  discharge  of  coal  takes  place  from  the  end  of  the  tub, 
which  is  comparatively  speaking  of  small  dimensions,  and  the 
tendency  is  to  deposit  the  coal  in  heaps  on  the  screen,  such  action 
being  unfavourable  to  perfect  removal  of  the  small. 
To  remove  these  disadvantages,  side  tipplers  have  been  designed. 
They  consist  of  two  circles  of  iron  con- nected together,  resting  on  grooved  wheel  FIG.  441. 
bearings,  two  of  which  support  each  hoop 
(A  A',  Fig.  441).  The  tubs  run  in  from one  side  of  the  appliance,  and  are  sup- 
ported in  their  inverted  position  by  two 
side  pieces,  B  B,  which  project  over  the wheels.  The  revolution  can  either  be 
completed  or  return  in  the  same  direc- tion, and  the  tub  can  either  be  pushed 
through  the  tippler  or  pulled  back  into 
the  place  it  originally  came  from. 
The  advantages  are,  that  if  the  tub  comes  out  at  the  opposite 
end  to  which  it  enters,  loss  of  time  in  manoauvring  is  avoided,  and 
as  the  tipping  takes  place  sideways  and  throughout  the  entire 
length  of  the  waggon,  the  coal  distributes  itself  equally  over  the 
whole  surface  of  the  screen.  Tipping  is  easy,  because  when  the 
tippler  is  in  its  normal  position,  the  centre  of  gravity  is  above  the 
centre  of  rotation  when  the  waggon  is  full ;  whereas  it  is  below 
after  the  tipping.  Equilibrium  is  unstable  when  the  tub  is  full, 
but  stable  when  it  is  empty. 
A  circular  plate,  terminating  in  a  movable  platform  resting  on 
the  bars  of  the  screen,  prevents  the  coal  from  falling  during  the 
tipping,  and  conducts  it  without  shock  on  to  the  screen. 
When  these  tipplers  are  revolved  by  hand  the  operation  is 
rather  slow,  and,  in  addition,  the  rough  unregulated  movements 
resulting  from  handwork  are  prejudicial  to  the  preservation  of  the 
coal.  To  increase  the  efficiency,  side  tipplers  revolved  by  machinery 
are  now  used  in  the  majority  of  cases.  If  one  of  the  rollers 
supporting  the  tippler  be  made  to  engage  with  another  wheel 
keyed  on  to  a  shaft  which  is  constantly  revolving,  its  motion  is 
communicated  to  the  tippler,  which  commences  to  revolve  and 
discharges  its  contents,  not  with  a  sudden  rush,  but  with  a  slow 
regulated  movement. 
The  two  wheels  can  be  connected  by  an  ordinary  friction  or 
cone  clutch,  which  is  thrown  in  and  out  of  gear  by  an  attendant. 
This  means  is  used  at  Harton  Colliery.  An  attendant  depresses 
a  foot  treadle  and  throws  the  clutch  gear  into  action.  When  the 
tippler  has  made  a  revolution,  he  moves  his  foot  and  disengages 
the  apparatus.  The  disadvantage  here  is  that  the  attendant  has 
to  remain  at  the  tippler  all  the  while  it  is  revolving,  as,  if  he  moves 
his  foot,  the  motion  stops. 

--- Page Break ---
388 
TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
At  Bascoup  Colliery,  this  inconvenience  has  been  avoided  by  the 
adoption  of  a  friction  coupling  arrangement,  represented  in  Fig. 
442,  which  makes  the  tipping  automatic.  On  the  shaft,  a,  carry- 
ing the  bearing  rollers  of  the  tippler,  is  keyed  a  friction  wheel,  5, 
and  a  second  friction  wheel,  d,  is  also  keyed  upon  the  shaft,  c,  this 
being  constantly  revolving  in  the  direction  indicated  by  the  arrow. 
If  a  third  parasite  roller,  e,  is  put  into  contact  with  the  two  first 
by  a  given  movement,  it  is  clear  that  the  movement  of  the  shaft, 
c,  will  be  transmitted  to  the  hoop  of  the  tippler,  which  will  turn 
in  the  direction  shown  by  the  arrow.  Upon  the  shaft,/,  opposite 
FIG.  442. 
to  one  of  the  hoops  of  the  tippler,  is  wedged  a  lever,  g,  carrying  a 
counterpoise,  h,  and  a  small  roller,  i,  the  latter  being  able  to  bind 
itself  in  a  mortise  cut  in  the  hoop,  and  prevent  the  tippler  from 
turning  when  in  its  normal  position.  The  lever,  j,  is  also  keyed 
upon  the  axle,/.  This  is  double,  and  includes  the  bent  or  elbow 
lever,  k,  one  of  whose  branches  carries  the  counterpoise,  £>.  This 
lever  can  turn  upon  the  axle,  /  by  slight  friction,  and  can  be 
raised  by  the  propping,  supporting,  screw  of  the  lever,  j.  The 
parasite  roller,  e,  is  bound  to  the  elbow,  k,  by  means  of  the  crank, 
lt  which  cannot  fall,  as  it  is  propped  at  m.  This  support  is 
necessary,  as  when  the  tippler  is  not  turning,  the  roller,  e,  does  not 
touch  the  wheel,  a.  The  counterpoise,  h,  having  a  greater  weight 
than  the  counterpoise,  jp,  will  maintain  it  (p)  raised  when  the 
small  wheel,  i,  is  in  the  notch  of  the  hoop,  and,  therefore,  the 
roller,  e,  will  not  touch  either  of  the  wheels,  b  or  d.  But,  on  the 
contrary,  if  the  counterpoise,  h,  is  raised,  the  lever,  k,  becomes 
free,  the  counterpoise  pushes  the  parasite  roller  upon  the  two 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF  COAL    FOR   MARKET.       389 
friction  wheels,  and  the  tippler  revolves.  The  counterpoise,  h,  is 
not  held  by  the  workman  who  conducts  the  tipping  during  the 
whole  time  this  takes  place.  He  merely  raises  it  to  such  an 
extent  that  the  little  wheel  comes  out  of  the  notch,  and  afterwards 
lets  go.  The  small  wheel  then  runs  over  the  hoop  until  it  again 
falls  into  the  notch,  the  tippler  having  then  made  an  entire revolution. 
The  levers  are  placed  at  such  an  angle  in  their  normal  position 
that  the  arm,  k,  is  free,  and  at  the  same  time  sufficient  friction  can 
be  obtained  on  the  wheels  without  touching  the  regulating  screw 
of  the  lever,  j,  so  that  wear  is  taken  up.  The  friction  wheels  are 
designed  so  that  only  the  smallest  pressure  has  to  be  exercised 
against  the  parasite  roller  to  cause  it  to  grip.  An  equally  small 
effort  frees  it,  for  if  at  any  part  the  V  grooves  of  the  wheel 
FIGS.  443  AND  444. 
coincide,  the  points  of  contact  change  constantly,  and  separation 
is  easily  made.  This  advantage  does  not  exist  in  other  forms  of 
disengaging  apparatus. 
Duplex  Tippler. — Mr.  Henry  Fisher  has  introduced  a  tippler 
at  Clifton  Colliery  by  means  of  which  two  tubs  are  emptied  each 
revolution.  It  consists  of  two  duplicate  parts,  a  and  b  (Figs.  443 
and  444),  placed  diametrically  opposite  each  other,  and  both  carried 
by  the  central  shaft,  c,  journalled  in  bearings,  c'.  The  two  parts, a  and  6,  balance  each  other  in  all  positions,  but  when  a  loaded  tub, 
shown  at  d,  is  run  on  the  upper  part  the  weight  turns  the  tippler 
over,  empties  the  tub,  and  brings  the  lower  part  and  the  empty 
tub,  shown  at  e,  into  the  upper  position,  so  that  the  latter  may  be 
removed,  and  be  replaced  by  a  full  one. 
The  shaft,  c,  is  provided  with  a  brake  wheel,  ft  for  locking  the 
tippler  in  position  while  the  empty  tubs  are  being  replaced  by  full 
ones.  The  brake  band  is  actuated  by  the  lever,  g,  pivoted  at  </*, 

--- Page Break ---
390  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
which  automatically  applies  the  brake  by  the  action  of  the 
weight,  gl.  The  outer  end  of  the  lever,  g,  is  raised  to  release  the brake  by  the  lever,  h,  pivoted  at  its  centre,  connected  at  one  of  its 
ends  to  the  lever,  g,  and  at  the  other  end  to  a  lever,  j.  The  latter 
turns  about  a  centre  at  one  end,  while  the  other  is  connected  to  a 
foot  treadle,  k,  which  can  be  depressed  by  the  attendant. 
The  chief  advantage  claimed  for  the  appliance  is  that  the  speed 
of  tipping  is  greater  than  with  machines  of  ordinary  construction, 
as  one  tub  is  emptied  for  each  half  revolution.  This  advantage 
can  be  obtained  with  any  side  tippler  by  constructing  it  to  hold 
two  tubs,  end  to  end ;  appliances  of  this  type  are  by  no  means  un- 
common, indeed,  at  the  No.  3  pit,  Lens  Colliery,  a  side  tippler  is  in 
use  holding  four  tubs,  all  of  which  are  emptied  by  one  revolution. 
A  disadvantage  of  the  machine,  as  at  present  constructed,  is 
that  the  tubs  have  to  be  withdrawn  by  the  same  way  as  they  go 
on  to  the  tippler,  occasioning  loss  of  time  in  manoeuvring.  In 
addition,  the  revolution  is  effected  by  the  weight  of  the  loaded 
tub,  and  is  more  or  less  a  rapid,  unregulated  one,  tending  more  to 
throw  the  coal  out  of  the  tub  than  to  empty  it.  Machine-driven 
tipplers  are  certainly  preferable  with  tender  coal. 
The  latter  disadvantage  is,  to  a  great  extent,  removed  by  an 
excellent  arrangement  of  a  balance-shoot.  The  upper  end  of  the 
shoot  is  formed  of  transverse  segments  of  convenient  lengths, 
arranged  so  that  their  inner  surfaces  form  a  curve  approximating 
to  that  described  by  the  tippler.  The  two  segments,  I  and  m,  are 
carried  by  the  shafts,  p  and  r.  The  segment,  I,  is  counterweigh  ted 
by  the  weight,  p',  at  the  end  of  the  lever,  0,  and  m  by  a  weight,  n, connected  to  a  chain  passing  over  the  pulley,  s.  By  the  action  of 
these  counterweights  the  segments,  Zand  m,take  the  position  shown 
by  dotted  lines  at  I1  and  m'  when  they  carry  no  load.  When  the tippler  is  overturned,  the  segments,  I  and  w,  break  the  fall  of  the 
load  until  this  overcomes  the  action  of  the  counterbalancing 
weights,  pr  and  n ;  the  segments  than  recede  from  the  tippler, and  permit  the  mineral  to  pass  down  the  shoot. 
SCREENS. — The  old  type  of  screen  consisted  of  a  number  of  bars 
placed  side  by  side,  at  equal  distances  apart,  at  such  an  inclination 
that  the  coal,  if  emptied  on  to  the  top  portions,  slides  down  the 
bars  to  the  lower  end,  and  during  its  passage  the  fine  is  removed. 
The  width  between  the  bars  depends  on  the  size  of  the  coal  to  be 
made.  The  form  of  the  screen  bar  is  of  importance.  They  are 
often  made  of  a  simple  rectangular  section,  but  bars  of  this  form 
possess  no  advantage.  They  soon  become  choked  up,  and  do  nothing 
to  direct  the  coal  into  the  apertures.  After  considerable  experience 
the  section  shown  in  Fig.  445  has  been  adopted  at  Bascoup.  The 
top  of  each  bar  is  triangular-shaped ;  the  two  sides  are  parallel  for 
a  short  distance,  and  then  converge  towards  the  centre.  The 
triangular  ridge  on  the  top  directs  the  pieces  of  coal  into  the 
openings,  and  as  soon  as  any  piece  gets  a  short  distance  through 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET.      391 
it  readily  falls  away,  for  the  space  between  the  bars  gradually  gets wider. 
If  large  quantities  are  to  be  dealt  with  on  ordinary  fixed  bar 
screens,  the  screens  either  have  to  be  placed  at  a  high  inclination,  or 
increased  in  number,  and  the  slope  made  less.  In  the  former 
case  separation  is  not  only  imperfect,  but  the  coal  travels  at  a 
high  velocity,  especially  towards  the  bottom  of  the  screen,  with  the 
FIG.  445. FIG.  446. 
result  that  it  is  not  only  broken  on  the  screen,  thereby  increas- 
ing small,  but  with  a  tender  coal,  a  further  breakage  results  in 
passing  into  the  waggons,  sometimes  producing  as  much  slack  as 
is  taken  out  by  the  screen.  The  velocity  may  be  either  reduced  by 
decreasing  the  inclination,  or  by  placing  movable  doors  at  certain 
points,  an  ordinary  form  of  this  being  shown  at  Fig.  446. 
The  effect  of  reducing  the  velocity  is  to  diminish  the  quantity 
passing  over  each  screen,  and  to  increase  the  cost  of  cleaning, 
because  a  larger  amount  of  labour  is  required  to  assist  the 
screening  by  raking  the  coal  over  the  bars.  For  such  reasons 
screens  worked  by  mechanical  power  have  received  extended 
application  during  recent  years.  Either  the  bars  may  be  movable, 
or  the  entire  screen  may  receive  a  reciprocating  motion.  . 
Movable  Bar  Screens. — A  simple  but  effective  device  for 
increasing  the  sorting  capacity  of  bar  screens  is  that  adopted  at 
Brinsop  Hall  Colliery,  where  an  up-and-down  motion  is  obtained 
from  two  eccentrics,  having  a  throw  of  about  8  in.,  one  being  fixed 
on  each  side  of  the  screen.  The  screen  consists  of  two  sets 
of  bars  arranged  alternately,  one  being  fixed,  and  the  other 
movable.  The  movable  bars  are  about  4  in.  longer  than  the 
fixed  ones,  and  while  the  top  ends  of  the  latter  are  bolted  to 
the  framework  of  the  screen,  the  former  are  fastened  to  a  cross- 
piece  of  iron,  the  ends  of  which  are  turned  and  rest  on  a  lever. 
This  lever  turns  about  a  centre  at  its  lower  end,  but  the  top 
portion  resfs  on  the  eccentric,  so  that  during  the  revolution  of 

--- Page Break ---
392  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
this  eccentric,  the  lever  is  alternately  raised  and  lowered, 
carrying  with  it  the  movable  bars. 
Fig.  447  shows  the  arrangement. FIG.  447.  All  the  lower  bars  are  threaded  on 
the  spindle,  A,  the  fixed  ones  are 
secured   at   B,   while   the   movable 
— P»^     ^      w  ones  project  above,  and  are  fastened — — ^  to  the  bar,  C,  which  rests  on  the lever,  D  E,  working  about  the  fixed 
centre,  D.  By  the  motion  of  the  eccentric,  F,  the  movable  bars 
are  raised,  but  only  to  a  proportionate  extent,  as  the  bar,  C,  is 
fixed  about  15  in.  from  the  fulcrum  of  the  lever. 
The  most  successful  screen  of  this  class  is  that  employed  so 
largely  on  the  Continent,  the  design  of  which  is  due  to  Mr.  Briart. 
In  its  original  form  it  consisted  of  alternate  rows  of  fixed  and 
movable  bars,  which  when  at  rest  lay  in  the  same  plane.  All  the 
movable  bars  were  fixed  in  a  framework,  carried  at  its  lower  end 
by  two  cranks,  at  its  upper  extremity  by  two  eccentrics  keyed  on 
a  shaft,  to  which  a  rotary  movement  is  given.  The  arrangement 
was  so  constructed  that  during  the  first  half  of  the  revolution  of 
the  eccentric,  the  movable  bars  were  carried  forward  above  the 
fixed  bars,  while  in  the  latter  half  of  the  revolution  they  returned 
below  the  fixed  bars,  the  result  being  that  the  coal  when  tipped 
on  to  the  screen  was  lifted  by  the  movable  bars  and  carried  forward 
a  distance  equal  to  the  throw  of  the  eccentric,  and  then  rested  on 
the  fixed  bars  while  the  latter  half  of  the  stroke  was  being  made. 
To  increase  the  capacity  of  each  screen,  both  sets  of  bars  were 
soon  made  movable,  this  being  effected  by  driving  each  set  by 
eccentrics  keyed  on  shafts  180  degrees  apart,  with  the  result 
that  each  set  of  bars  not  only  moves  backwards  and  forwards,  but 
one  set  is  above  the  other  when  moving  forward,  and  below  when 
moving  back,  while  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  forward 
motion  they  are  level. 
The  screen  as  at  present  constructed  is  shown  in  Figs.  448,  449 
and  450,  which  are  respectively  a  side  elevation,  plan,  and  cross 
section  on  line  a  b  (Fig.  448).  It  consists  of  two  sets  of  bars,  A 
and  B,  threaded  on  shafts,  D  D.  The  driving  shaft,  C,  is  cranked 
at  two  points,  and  two  links,  G  G,  are  provided,  one  being  con- 
nected to  bars,  A,  and  the  other  to  bars,  B.  These  links  are  sus- 
pended at  the  far  end,  as  shown  in  Fig.  448.  Distance  shafts,  F, 
are  provided  for  the  purpose  of  keeping  the  driving  levers,  G,  pro- 
perly spaced,  and,  in  addition,  it  is  to  one  of  these  shafts  that  the 
central  bar  of  the  screen  is  wedged,  when  the  construction  is  such 
that  the  distance  between  the  bars  is  capable  of  variation.  Fig. 
451,  which  is  a  reproduction  of  a  photograph  of  a  model,  clearly 
shows  the  two  sets  of  bars,  and  the  way  they  are  connected  to  the 
driving  levers. 
The  great  advantages  of  the  Briart  screen  are :  that  it  may  be 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOE   MARKET.       393 
FIGS.  448  AND  449. 
FIG  450. 
Section  civ  CC  6 
FIG.  451. 

--- Page Break ---
394  TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
placed  horizontal,  thus  diminishing  the  height  of  the  heapstead ; 
by  regulating  the  speed  of  the  driving  shaft  the  quantity  passing 
over  them  can  also  be  varied  within  certain  limits,  as  the  coal  is 
moved  forwards  double  the  throw  of  the  eccentrics  for  each  revo- 
lution ;  manual  labour  is  diminished;  in  addition,  as  the  bars  have 
an  up-and-down  motion,  the  coal  is  shaken  throughout  its  mass, 
and  perfect  removal  of  the  small  is  obtained. 
Its  only  disadvantage  is  that  common  to  all  bar  screens — viz., 
that  the  longitudinal  slits  between  the  bars  allow  long  thin  pieces 
of  coal  to  pass  through,  and  such  perfect  sizing  is  not  obtained  as 
is  given  by  a  sieve  made  of  wire  netting.  In  the  form  constructed 
in  Germany  even  this  objection  has  been  removed,  as  the  bars, 
instead  of  being  formed  of  strips,  are  made  of  channel  iron,  having 
perforations  in  the  horizontal  side.  At  Bascoup,  the  driving 
eccentrics  originally  employed  have  been  replaced  by  elbows, 
which  absorb  less  work.  The  two  systems  of  bars  are  movable, 
and  driven  from  the  same  axle,  on  which  the  elbows  or  knees  are 
keyed  diametrically  opposite  each  other.  This  modification,  pre- 
viously employed  in  Germany,  allows  the  stroke  to  be  diminished 
by  one-half,  and  to  balance  one  system  of  bars  by  the  other. 
Jigging  Screens. — Reciprocating  screens  are  easily  and  cheaply 
constructed,  and  size  the  coal  very  completely.  They  consist  gene- 
rally of  woven  iron  netting  carried  in  a  frame  and  suspended  from 
stays,  two  on  each  side.  A  rocking  motion  is  imparted  to  the 
whole  structure  by  means  of  eccentrics  keyed  on  a  shaft,  which  is 
revolved  by  a  small  steam  engine  (see  Fig.  478).  In  general  the 
direction  of  motion  is  the  longway  of  the  screen,  but  in  others  it 
is  sideways.  As  the  travel  of  the  coal  is  assisted  by  the  shaking, 
a  jigging  screen  can  be  placed  at  a  smaller  inclination  than  a  fixed 
bar  screen,  but  the  slope  must  be  steeper  than  with  the  Briart 
screen.  Instead  of  wire  netting,  plates  having  holes  punched 
through  them  are  used,  and  if  these  Loles  be  circular  instead  of 
square  the  sizing  is  perfect. 
Recently  Mr.  E.  B.  Coxe*  has  designed  a  screen  which  receives 
a  gyratory  motion  similar  to  that  of  an  ordinary  hand  sieve.  The 
chief  problem  was  to  support  the  screen  in  such  a  manner  that  it 
will  gyrate  easily  and  safely,  and  at  the  same  time  to  counter- 
balance the  centrifugal  force  and  prevent  its  shaking  the  building. 
This  has  been  done  successfully  by  a  method  which  consists  essen- 
tially in  supporting  one  horizontal  plate  upon  another  by  means 
of  three  or  more  double  cones  (Fig.  452),  while  the  motion  of  gyra- 
tion is  given  to  the  upper  plate  by  a  crank,  a,  upon  a  shaft  pass- 
ing through  and  journalled  in  the  lower  plate.  The  cones  roll 
freely  in  a  prescribed  path  on  the  lower  plate,  while  the  upper 
plate  moves  upon  the  other  end  of  the  double  cone. 
These  cones  are  guided  in  various  ways,  but  when  the  screens 
*  Amcr.  Inst.  H.  E.  xix.  398. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET.       395 
are  run  at  high  speeds  there  is  a  tendency  in  the  double  cone  to 
fly  from  the  centre,  and  the  surface  in  such  case  on  which  the 
FIG.  452. 
FIG.  453. 
cones  roll  is  made  conical,  so  that  the 
weight  of  the  screen  has  a  tendency 
to  force  the  cone  towards  the  centre, 
thus  counteracting  the  centrifugal 
force  to  a  great  extent. 
Fig.  453  illustrates  the  appearance 
of  a  single  gyrating  screen.  The 
lower  plate  of  Fig.  452  has  here  be- 
come a  box  bed-plate,  and  the  upper 
plate  a  screen  box,  provided  with  a 
number  of  trays,  one  above  the  other  and  inclined  as  shown.  A 
pulley,  a,  is  fixed  to  the  shaft,  6,  above  which  is  a  crank  driving the  screen  box. 
Kevolving  Screens. — Instead  of  giving  the  screen  a  recipro- 
cating motion,  cylinders  revolving  about  an  axis  are  often 
employed.  If  the  openings  between  the  bars,  or  the  mesh,  if  the 
cylinder  is  of  wire  gauze,  vary  through  different  lengths  of  the 
cylinder,  several  sizes  can  be  made  on  one  of  these  screens.  They 
are  rarely  employed  for  large  coal  as  their  capacity  is  small,  only 
a  few  inches  of  the  circumference  being  at  one  time  in  action. 
If  any  quantity  is  passed  through,  the  screen  becomes  over- 
crowded and  acts  like  an  elevator,  lifts  the  coal  a  part  of  the  way 
up  the  sides  and  throws  it  back  into  the  screen,  producing  a  con- siderable amount  of  small.  For  separating  the  smallest  sizes,  as 
required  for  coal  washing,  such  screens  are,  however,  largely 
employed. 
Spiral  Screens. — In  the  coal  districts  of  Germany  a  spiral 
revolving  screen  is  used  with  success.*  It  consists  of  a  long  strip of  plate,  perforated  throughout  its  length  with  holes  of  different 
sizes.  This  strip  is  wound  into  a  spiral,  and  the  ends  closed  and 
mounted  on  a  shaft.  Their  diameter  is  greater  than  their  length, 
in  some  cases  nearly  double,  and  screening  is  often  assisted  by 
blows  from  a  wooden  hammer,  or  jerks  from  springs.  The  con- 
struction will  be  understood  from  Figs.  454  and  455. 
*  N.  E.  I.  xxxviii.  183. 

--- Page Break ---
396 
TEXT- BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
The  coal  to  be  separated  is  delivered  into  the  central  part, 
which  is  a  cone-shaped  circle  larger  in  diameter  in  its  outer  end, 
to  facilitate  the  delivery  of  the  larger  pieces  of  coal  which  do  not 
pass  through  the  first  series  of  holes.  The  coal  passing  through 
the  first  holes  falls  into  the  second  division,  2,  and  by  the  revolu- 
tion of  the  screen  is  separated,  the  pieces  too  large  to  pass  through 
the  second  series  of  holes  being  retained  upon  the  plate  until  they 
reach  a  point  in  the  circumference  where  a  channel  receives  them, 
down  where  they  are  discharged  out  of  the  side  of  the  screen. 
The  coals  passing  through  the  holes  in  division  2  are  further 
separated,  a  portion  passing  through  plate  3.  All,  however,  that 
remains  on  this  plate  is  discharged  when  the  point  3  comes 
FIGS.  454  AND  455. 
opposite  the  channel  in  the  circumference.  The  same  process 
goes  on  until  finally  all  the  remaining  coal  is  discharged  through 
plate  4. 
It  is  claimed  for  this  device  that  it  is  smaller  than  an  ordinary 
revolving  screen,  that  the  space  occupied  is  less,  that  the  coal  is 
not  broken  nearly  so  much,  a  saving  of  from  6  to  7  per  cent, 
being  experienced  as  compared  with  old  types,  and  that  the 
screening  into  the  required  sizes  is  most  effectively  done.  The 
speed  of  rotation  varies  from  6  to  8  times  a  minute,  and  with  a 
screen  7  ft.  6  in.  diameter,  by  4  ft.  long,  50  tons  an  hour  can  be treated. 
Greenwell's  Screen. —  This  screen*  consists  of  a  number  of 
parallel  endless  chains  which  travel  between  angular  bars  of 
varying  sections  suitable  for  the  size  of  coal  to  be  made,  and 
diminishing  from  the  top  of  the  screen.  The  bars  are  fixed,  but 
the  chain  travels  at  a  speed  of  70  feet  per  minute,  and  as  the  coal 
is  carried  forward  it  falls  between  the  chains  and  fixed  bars. 
The  dirt  is  picked  out  as  the  coal  travels  along.  The  advantages 
*  Brit.  Soc.  Min.  Stud.  xiii.  95. 

--- Page Break ---
FIG.  456. 
\   J3?ettx 
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET.       397 
claimed  are  (i)  small  first  cost  and  the  small  cost  of  repairs; 
(2)  the  small  height  taken  up;  (3)  as  the  chains  are  level  there 
is  little  breakage. 
Varying  the  Sizes  made  by  Screens. — In  consequence  of the  exigencies  of  trade,  different  sizes  of  coals  are  often  required, 
and  such  change  cannot  be  made  exact  by  varying  the  spaces 
between  the  bars  or  altering  the  size  of  the  mesh.  With  wire 
netting  screens,  the  only  way  to  make  the  change  is  to  stop  the 
screen,  take  out  the  one  riddle  and  replace  it  by  another. 
Plating. — It  sometimes  happens  that  unscreened  coal  is  re- 
quired— that  is  to  say,  in  the  state  it  comes  from  the  mine,  with 
none  of  the  fine  removed.  In  such  cases  a  method  of  "  plating  " the  screen  is  employed.  At  Hilda  Colliery  this  is  done  by  an 
arrangement  of  cranks,  a  b,  c  d 
(Fig.  456),  turning  about  cen- tres, a  and  c.  These  cranks 
support  a  plate  which,  when 
not  in  use,  stands  6  or  7  in. 
above  the  screen  grating.  If 
these  cranks  are  turned,  the 
plate  is  lowered  on  to  the  screen 
and  closes  up  all  the  openings. 
The  guides  for  the  plate  are  curved,  as  the  cranks  in  rising  or 
falling  necessarily  describe  the  arc  of  a  circle. 
Combs. — With  the  ordinary  bar  screen,  if  one  size  is  being 
made  and  another  required,  the  screen  has  to  be  stopped,  and  the 
bars  pulled  out  and  replaced  by  others.  To  render  this  operation 
easy,  the  bars  are  usually  threaded  in  a  kind  of  comb  which,  in 
its  turn,  is  dropped  into  and  held  in  position  by  a  shoe  on  each 
end.  To  alter  the  size  of  coal  being  made,  the  bars  are  lifted  out 
of  the  comb,  which  is  then  replaced  by  another  one  having 
openings  of  a  different  width,  into  which  the  bars  are  replaced. 
A  better  plan  than  this  is  that  of  employing  a  square  bar,  on 
each  side  of  which  is  attached  a  comb  having  different  sized  slots. 
Here  to  make  an  alteration,  the  screen  bars  are  lifted  out,  and the  comb  bars 
turned  over  until  FIG.  457. 
the  proper-sized 
openings  are  up- wards. 
In  other  places 
a  circular  piece  is cut  out  of  the 
end  of  each  bar 
which  rests  on  a 
circular  shaft,  b  (Fig.  457).  The  spaces  between  the  bars  are  kept 
03*-  horseshoe  washers,  a,  which  can  be  added  to  or  removed  quite easily.  One  of  these  washers  is  shown  enlarged  at  A. 

--- Page Break ---
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Variable  Cross-bars. — All  the  preceding  arrangements  possess 
some  objectionable  points.  Not  only  is  there  a  considerable  loss 
of  time,  but  in  putting  up  or  pulling  down,  the  bars  often 
become  altered  and  get  bent  and  strained.  To  avoid  these 
inconveniences,  Messrs.  Guinotte  and  Briart  have  designed  the 
arrangement  represented  in  Figs.  458-460,  by  means  of  which the  spaces  between  the  bars  can  be  instantaneously  varied  without 
stopping  work. 
The  screen  bars,  a  a  (Figs.  458  and  459),  are  carried  by  spindles, 
b  £>,  threaded  with  right-  and  left-hand  screws,  which  carry  the 
sleeves  or  nuts,  c  c,  having  threads  cut  in  the  opposite  direction. 
FIGS.  458  AND  459. 
The  direction  is  the  same  for  all  the  screws  and  nuts,  and  all  the 
sleeves  are  threaded  on  the  shaft,  d,  common  to  the  whole  system 
(see  Figs.  448-451),  the  two  being  connected  together  by  the 
key,  e,  fitted  into  a  key-way  running  along  the  whole  length  of the  shaft.  The  sleeves,  c  c,  are  otherwise  free  ;  they  turn  with  the 
shaft,  but  can  glide  longitudinally  upon  it.  If  the  shaft,  d,  is 
turned,  the  sleeves  and  spindles  rotate,  and  consequently  the 
separation  of  two  consecutive  bars  will  augment  and  diminish 
according  to  the  direction  of  rotation. 
If  one  of  these  nuts  is  bolted  upon  the  shaft,  the  bars  would 
be  displaced  on  either  side  of  it,  in  amounts  proportional  to  their 
distance  from  the  fixed  point,  or  the  same  thing  may  be  done  by 
fixing  one  bar. 
Fig.  460  shows  how  the  bars  are  connected  amongst  themselves, and  renders  clear  how  the  same  relative  distance  is  retained  after 
varying  the  original  opening.  To  prevent  confusion,  the  two  sets 
of  bars  are  drawn  one  above  the  other.  Taking  the  upper  set 
first :  the  middle  bar,  A,  is  wedged  in  the  centre  of  the  screen  as  it 
is  keyed  to  the  shaft,  E ;  consequently,  when  the  shaft,  d  (Fig. 
458),  is  rotated,  this  bar  does  not  move,  and  the  nut,  b  (Fig.  458), 
remains  at  rest,  but  as  the  shaft  turns,  it  necessarily  follows  that 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET.       399 
the  screw,  c,  enters  the  nut,  while  at  the  same  time,  the  other  end 
of  the  screw,  c,  enters  the  nut,  b  (Fig.  458),  of  screen  bars,  B(Fig. 
460).  As  a  result,  bars  B  move  towards  A,  a  distance  double 
that  due  to  the  pitch  of  the  screw.  That  is  to  say,  if  the  pitch  is 
i  inch,  and  the  shaft,  d  (Fig,  458),  make  one-fourth  of  a  revolution, 
the  bars,  B  (Fig.  460),  will  move  a  total  distance  of  J  an  inch. 
These  bars,  however,  are  not  the  ones  nearest  to  the  central 
bar  A,  as  those  of  the  lower  set,  D  D,  adjoin  A.  If  this  set  be 
now  considered,  it  will  be  noticed  that,  instead  of  a  bar  being 
fixed,  the  screw,  c  (Fig.  458),  is  wedged  on  the  shaft  by  a  bolt,  C 
(Fig.  460),  passing  through  it.  Consequently,  when  the  shaft  is 
rotated,  the  screw  turns  with  it  and  travels  into  the  nuts  on  bars, 
D  D,  dragging  them  towards  the  centre.  Here  the  shaft  makes 
FIG.  460. 
one  fourth  of  a  revolution  as  with  the  first  set,  and  as  the  screw 
only  works  into  the  nuts  on  each  side,  these  will  move  J  of  an 
inch,  and  bars  D  are  only  displaced  J  of  an  inch. 
Assuming,  therefore,  that  the  original  distance  between  the 
bars  was  3  inches,  the  result  of  turning  the  shaft  is  that  the 
centre  bar  of  the  screen,  A,  does  not  move,  but  that  the  bars,  D, 
immediately  adjoining  close  in  J  inch  each,  reducing  the  space 
between  the  bars  to  2j  inches.  The  bars,  B,  which  are  the  next 
adjoining  ones  to  D,  were  originally  6  inches  from  A,  but  as  they 
move  ^  an  inch,  are  now  5!  inches  away.  D  is  2f  inches  away 
from  A,  and,  consequently,  2f  inches  away  from  B.  Thus  the 
distance  between  the  bars  has  been  altered  from  3  to  2f  inches. The  other  bars  of  each  set  move  towards  the  centre  in  amounts 
proportional  to  their  distance  from  it.  The  further  they  are 
away,  the  greater  is  their  motion,  as  they  are  dragged  a  distance 

--- Page Break ---
400  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  motion  of  all  the  right-  and  left-hand screws. 
The  distance  between  the  bars  is  indicated  at  the  extremity  of 
the  shafts  by  a  graduated  dial.  With  the  aid  of  these  cross-bars, 
without  stopping  the  working,  any  variation  in  size  required  for 
trade  purposes  can  be  readily  obtained,  within  the  limits  allowed 
for  in  construction,  this  being  determined  beforehand,  and  as  the 
movement  is  performed  by  simply  pulling  a  lever  and  noting  a 
finger  on  a  dial,  any  workman  can  do  it. 
The  cost  is  high,  owing  to  careful  construction  and  fitting 
required,  but  there  is  little  wear,  and  the  results  obtained  com- 
pensate for  the  additional  outlay. 
Belts. — After  separation  by  the  screen,  the  various  sizes  of 
large  coal  are  received  upon  belts,  by  the  side  of  which  attendants 
are  stationed  to  pick  out  dirt  and  stones  with  which  the  coal  is 
associated.  The  length  of  these  belts  is  dependent  to  a  great 
extent  on  the  nature  of  the  coal  and  trade  of  the  district,  but  in 
all  cases  is  greater,  the  dirtier  the  coal.  In  the  Midlands,  where 
several  qualities  of  large  coal  are  made,  all  of  which  are  loaded 
together  down  the  mine,  it  was  at  one  time  the  common  practice 
to  wheel  each  tub  from  railway  waggon  to  waggon,  picking  out  the 
various  qualities.  This  practice  has  been  superseded  by  the 
employment  of  travelling  belts.  All  the  coal  from  the  mine  is 
tipped  on  to  one  end  and  gradually  passes  in  front  of  a  row  of 
attendants,  who  pick  out  the  qualities  required  for  the  trucks 
they  are  loading,  and  let  the  remainder  pass  by  to  be  taken  off 
further  on  by  other  attendants  loading  different  qualities.  To 
enable  many  waggons  to  be  loaded  at  one  time,  the  belts  are  made 
proportionately  long,  frequently  from  200  to  300  ft.  .  , 
These  belts,  however,  are  more  for  sorting  the  coal  than  for 
cleaning  it.  For  the  latter  purpose,  even  with  the  dirtiest  seams, 
they  rarely  exceed  60  or  70  ft.  The  width  of  the  belt  is  governed 
by  the  length  the  attendants  can  easily  reach.  If  they  are 
stationed  on  both  sides,  4  ft.  6  in.  is  a  common  width,  but  better 
results  are  perhaps  obtained  with  only  4  ft. 
Belts  may  be  constructed  in  several  different  ways.  The  form 
most  generally  in  use  consists  of  steel  plates  attached  to  an 
endless  chain.  These  chains  are  usually  made  of  alternate  single 
and  double  links,  which  are  preferably  connected  to  the  plates 
forming  the  belt  by  being  bolted  to  angle-irons  which  are  riveted 
to  the  plates.  This  construction  allows  a  plate  to  be  taken  out  and 
replaced  without  cutting  any  rivets,  as  would  have  to  be  done  if 
the  links  of  the  chain  were  riveted  direct  to  the  plates. 
A  construction  largely  employed  in  Lancashire  is  to  rivet  pieces 
of  angle-iron  (a,  Figs.  461  and  462)  to  each  plate  and  to  bolt  the 
link,  b,  to  them.  The  links  of  one  plate  overlap  those  of  the  other, 
and  a  bolt,  c,  is  passed  from  the  links  on  one  side  of  the  plate  to 
those  on  the  other,  thereby  forming  the  hinge  around  which  the 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL  FOE   MARKET.       40  r 
plates  turn,  when  they  arrive  at  the  driving  tumbler  or  sprocket- 
wheel.  Sometimes  the  plates  are  secured  to  the  driving  chain  by  a 
hooked  bolt,  which  passes  through  a  hole  in  the  links  and  is  secured 
on  the  top  of  the  plate  by  a  nut. 
These  belts  are  driven  by  tumblers  which  have  their  arms 
shaped  to  engage  with  the  links.  This  system  of  driving,  with  any 
average  load,  has  been  found  to  give  better  results  than  an 
octagonal  drum,  which  is  sometimes  employed.  Belts  may  either 
FIGS.  461  AND  462. FIG.  463. 
be  driven  from  the  "  leading,"  or  "  following"  end,  both  of  which are  equally  efficient,  unless  the  load  carried  is  a  very  heavy  one ; 
as  the  "  following  "  end  is  more  conveniently  situated  to  the  motive power  they  are  usually  driven  from  it.  They  are  supported  at 
intervals  by  rollers  (a,  Fig.  463),  which  serve  the  double  purpose 
of  lessening  the  power  required  to  move  them 
and  of  preventing  any  sag,  and,  as  an  additional  FIG.  464. 
support,  the  edges  travel  in  an  angle-iron  slide,  yta&s, 
b.     To  reduce  friction,  rollers  are  sometimes   jB provided  at  the  sides  of  the  plates  (Fig.  464), 
these  running  in  the  angle-iron  guide  already  referred  to. 
To  readily  remove  the  dirt  picked  out  of  the  coal,  many  belts 
are  provided  with  a  partition  in  the  middle,  consisting  of  two 
angle-irons  riveted  to  the  plate.  The  attendants  pick  out  the  dirt 
and  deposit  it  in  this  trough.  The  dirt  is  then  carried  along  with 
the  coal,  but  separate  from  it,  and  discharged  down  a  shoot  at  the 
end.  Where  this  is  employed, 
the   shoot   leading  from  the  FIG.  465. 
screen  is  provided  with  a  V- 
guard,  which  prevents  the 
coal  passing  into  the  central 
trough,  and  directs  it  to  the 
two  sides  of  the  belt. 
For  delivering  coal  from 
belts  at  points  along  their  length  the  arrangement  shown  in  Fig. 465  is  applied  at  Aldwarke  Main  Colliery.  A  roller,  a,  is  placed 
diagonally  across  the  belt  at  any  point  where  delivery  is  required 20 

--- Page Break ---
402 
TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
FIG.  466. 
and  sweeps  off  the  coal  into  the  shoot.  This  roller  travels  in 
guides,  and  can  be  raised  and  lowered  to  give  intermittent  delivery. 
Many  materials,  such  as  hemp,  wire  ropes,  &c.,  have  been  used 
in  the  construction  of  picking  belts,  but  have  not  received  much 
favour.  In  Lancashire,  belts  constructed  of  woven  wire  netting 
are  largely  employed  and  possess  one  marked  advantage,  as  they 
rid  the  coal  from  any  fine  which  has  not  been  removed  during 
the  passage  over  the  screen.  Some  coals  have 
small  pieces  of  dirt  adhering  to  them,  and  these 
have  to  be  chipped  off  by  the  attendants.  A 
quantity  of  small  is  produced  which,  if  solid 
belts  are  employed,  is  carried  away  with  the 
large  coal,  but  if  wire  gauze  ones  are  in  use, 
the  small  pieces  fall  through  and  a  more  efficient 
separation  results.  These  belts  are  built  up  in 
several  ways  \  a  common  form  is  shown  in  Fig. 
466.  They  are  obviously  unsuitable  for  carrying  the  smaller 
qualities,  for  which  plate-belts  can  only  be  used. 
Revolving  Tables. — To  economise  the  large  amount  of  space 
occupied  by  cleaning  belts,  circular  picking-tables  are  often 
employed.  They  generally  consist  of  a  horizontal  circular  plate 
revolving  about  a  vertical  axis.  The  centre  part  of  the  plate  is 
made  higher  than  the  circumference  where  the  coal  is  delivered. 
All  the  dirt  picked  out  is  thrown  on  to  this  shelf  near  the  centre 
and  removed  from  time  to  time,  while  the  coal  is  discharged  at 
any  convenient  point  by  a  scraper. 
An  improved  arrangement,  designed  by  Mr.  Wm.  Haydock,  is  in 
use  at  Abram  Colliery,  where  a  mixture  of  coal  and  cannel  has  to 
be  very  carefully  sorted.  A  circular 
table  (A,  Figs.  467  and  468),  is  keyed  on 
a  vertical  shaft  driven  by  bevelled  gear- 
ing, and  in  the  centre  is  a  raised  plat- 
form, or  boss,  C,  upon  which  the  picked 
material  is  placed  by  hand.  Curved 
scrapers  (E  and  F,  Fig.  468),  working 
on  hinges  at  the  circumference,  are  pro- 
vided, and  these  direct  the  qualities  made 
into  their  respective  shoots ;  D  is  a 
scraper  (which  can  be  moved  up  and 
down  by  an  overhead  lever,  H)  on 
the  raised  portion,  and  is  used  to 
turn  the  material  off  this  part  on to  the  table.  The  mixed  coal  and  cannel  is  delivered  on  to 
the  edge  of  the  table  by  the  screen,  B,  and  the  material  which 
occurs  in  the  smallest  quantity  is  picked  out  and  deposited  on  the 
raised  platform,  C,  that  is  to  say,  if  coal  and  cannel  are  being 
sorted  and  coal  predominates,  then  the  cannel  will  be  picked  out. 
The  table  revolves  and  brings  the  material  up  against  the  scraper, 
FIGS.  467  AND  468. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET.       403 
E,  which  sweeps  it  off  into  the  shoot,  as  shown  by  the  arrow. 
The  cannel  on  the  raised  platform  is  swept  off  by  the  scraper,  D, and  directed  into  its  proper  shoot  by  the  hinge,  F.  The  tables  are 
12  ft.  to  15  ft.  in  diameter,  and  make  about  i^  revolutions  per 
minute.  If  a  cannel  truck  is  not  in  position  under  the  shoot,  this 
mineral  can  be  allowed  to  accumulate  on  the  platform,  C,  by raising  the  scraper,  D. 
Loading  Shoots. — When  the  coal  reaches  the  end  of  the  belt, 
it  is  directed  down  a  shoot  into  a  waggon.  These  shoots,  if  fixed, 
have  to  be  placed  at  such  an  inclination  that  the  coal  readily 
slides  down  them,  and  towards  the  end  it  attains  considerable 
velocity,  dashing  violently  into  the  bottom  of  the  truck  and 
causing  considerable  breakage.  With  a  tender  coal  this  becomes 
FIG.  469. FIG.  470. 
a  serious  matter,  and  numerous 
attempts  have  been  made  to  mini- mise the  damage. 
A  common  procedure  on  the  Con- tinent is  to  make  the  shoot  a  series 
of  plates,  which  travel  along  as  a 
belt;  indeed,  it  may  be  considered 
a  belt,  but  instead  of  the  plates  being 
flat,  each  one  is  of  angle  form.  The 
vertical  ridges  effectually  prevent 
the  coal  slipping  (Fig.  469).  Each 
lump  is  gradually  taken  down  the  slope  and  deposited  in  the  truck. 
The  leading  end  is  carried  by  a  movable  jib,  and  can  be  raised  or 
lowered  to  suit  the  height  of  coal  in  the  waggon. 
An  ingenious  coal-lowering  apparatus  has  been  introduced  by 
Mr.  C.  Soar.*  It  consists  of  a  series  of  hinged  shelves  (a, 
Fig.  470),  bolted  to  pitch  chains,  which  are  driven  in  the  direction 
shown  by  the  arrows  by  an  endless  driving  chain,  shown  by  the 
dotted  line,  c,  actuated  from  the  drum-shaft  of  the  picking  band. 
*  Fed.  Inst.  i.  183. 

--- Page Break ---
404  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
at  such  a  speed  that,  as  the  belt  delivers  the  coal  from  its  end,  a 
shelf  is  always  in  a  proper  position  to  receive  it.  The  top  shaft,  e, 
works  in  two  travel  blocks,  g,  which  travel  up  and  down  between  the 
fixed  guide  bars,  b.  The  whole  apparatus  can  be  raised  or  lowered, 
and  held  in  any  position,  by  a  rope  attached  to  a  winch.  The 
coal  has  no  greater  distance  to  fall  when  the  truck  is  empty  than 
when  full,  and  is  put  down  as  if  by  hand. 
An  excellent  loading  shoot  is  employed  at  Bascoup,  It  can  be 
turned  about  its  point  of  support  and  lengthened  or  shortened  at 
will  by  means  of  a  suitable  arrangement.  The  part  a  (Fig.  471)* 
can  slide  in  the  part  b.  A  counterpoise,  c,  whose  chain  is  fixed  to 
the  part  a,  balances  the  entire  shoot  when  at  its  minimum  length. 
The  variation  of  the  length  is  made  by  a  small  windlass,  d> 
FIG.  471. 
mounted  at  the  extremity  of  the  part  a,  and  whose  chain  is 
fastened  to  the  end  of  the  part  b.  A  second  windlass  fixed  to  it 
allows  the  hopper  to  be  raised  or  lowered  at  will ;  the  chain  of  the 
windlass,  which  causes  the  part  a  to  enter  the  part  b,  stretches 
the  chain  of  the  windlass,  d,  thus  making  the  whole  perfectly 
rigid.  A  movable  nose,/,  also  allows  a  discharge  at  two  points 
of  the  axis  of  the  hopper  without  displacing  it ;  this  nose  has 
another  role,  playing  the  part  of  a  stopper  and  regulating  the 
discharge. 
With  the  aid  of  this  telescopic  shoot,  the  coal  can  be  directed  on 
to  any  part  of  a  waggon's  surface,  practically  without  any  drop. Not  only  does  this  save  expense,  one  man  doing  the  work,  but  the 
most  tender  coal  can  be  loaded  without  breakage.  It  is  necessary 
that  the  shoot  should  be  kept  full  of  material. 
TYPICAL  ILLUSTRATIONS.  — Having  described  the 
different  parts  of  a  screening  establishment,  a  description  of  several 
arrangements  as  applied  at  collieries  is  given  to  illustrate  the  way 
they  are  combined  amongst  themselves.  To  a  certain  extent,  any 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL  FOR   MARKET.       405 
desired  arrangement  can  be  made,  the  one  adopted  depending,  as 
has  been  before  remarked,  upon  the  conditions  locally  existing  at 
the  colliery,  the  amount  to  be  treated,  and  the  quantity  and  nature of  the  refuse. 
Pemberton  Colliery. — The  screens  here  have  fixed  bars.  All 
the  tubs  are  tipped  on  to  the  first  one,  which  removes  the  slack, 
this  falling  into  a  hopper.  All  that  passes  over  this  screen  is  con- 
veyed by  a  shoot  on  to  a  travelling  wire  picking  belt.  During 
the  passage  of  the  coal  along  the  belt,  any  dirt  is  removed  by  hand- 
picking,  and  any  fine  particles  which  have  escaped  falling  through 
the  first  screen  pass  through  the  opening  in  this  wire  belt,  and 
fall  into  a  trough  with  sloping  sides,  in  the  bottom  of  which  is  an 
endless  screw,  which  by  its  revolutions  carries  the  slack  into  its 
proper  hopper 
(Fig.    472).     The  FIG.  472. 
round  coal,  on 
reaching  the  end 
of  the  picking  belt, 
falls  on  to  a  se- 
cond screen,  which 
separates  it  into 
two  qualities  ;  the 
larger  size  passing over  the  screen 
drops  at  once  into 
a  railway  waggon,  while  the  cobbles  which  pass  through  this 
screen  fall  on  to  a  travelling  belt  made  of  iron  plates,  and  are 
conveyed  to  another  truck.  The  arrows  indicate  the  direction which  the  coal  takes. 
Brinsop  Hall  Colliery. — At  the  Arley  Mine  Pit,  the  coal, 
after  passing  over  a  screen,  is  carried  along  by  a  steel-wire  picking 
belt,  1 6  ft.  long  by  4  ft.  wide,  and  having  a  mesh  ij  in.  by  ^  in. 
To  do  away  with  the  disadvantage  of  fixed  screens,  the  lower  por- 
tion of  the  bars  are  made  movable  by  the  arrangement  already 
described.  The  screen  is  divided  into  two  portions  by  a  movable 
plate,  about  14  inches  broad,  working  on  a  hinge  at  its  upper 
end.  By  means  of  the  hinged  plate,  the  coal  can  be  steadied 
on  to  the  bars,  and,  in  addition,  a  vertical  rake-stop  is  provided 
for  the  same  purpose.  The  bars  above  this  plate  have  an  inclina- 
tion of  14 J  in.  to  the  yard,  while  that  of  the  lower  ones  is  19 J  in. 
to  the  yard. 
Running  the  entire  length  of  the  picking  belt  and  on  both  sides, 
are  fixed  two  planks  on  which  the  chipping  is  done;  all  the  slack 
produced  by  this  operation  falls  through  the  wire  meshes  and 
passes  down  a  shoot  into  the  slack  waggon.  At  the  end  of  the  belt 
a  second  screen  is  fixed  with  bars  about  4  in.  apart,  which  takes 
out  the  cobbles,  the  remainder  passing  into  the  coal  trucks. 
All  the  dirt  and  inferior  coal  is  picked  off  the  wire  belt  and 

--- Page Break ---
406 
TEXT-BOOK   OF   COAL-MINING. 
thrown  on  to  another  travelling  belt  running  by  the  side  of  the 
first  one,  about  20  ft.  away,  but  placed  at  a  slightly  higher  inclina- 
tion. Fig.  473  shows  an  elevation  of  the  entire  installation,  while- 
Fig.  474  gives  a  cross-section  of  the  arrangement  of  the  belts. 
These  dirt  belts  are  formed  of  old  flat  steel -wire  ropes  lying  side 
by  side,  and  are  about  15  in.  broad  and  37  ft.  long.  Any  good 
FIG.  473. 
coal  is  chipped  off  and  thrown  down  a  shoot  on  to  the  second  main 
screen,  while  the  dirt  and  inferior  coal  pass  on  to  the  end  where 
they  are  divided,  the  former  being  directed  down  a  side  shoot  into 
tubs,  while  the  latter  passes  over  the  end  into  land  sale  carts. 
FIG.  474. FIG.  475. 
Hilda  Colliery. — This  colliery  is  situated  in  the  centre  of  a 
town,  and  the  arrangement  of  the  heapstead  affords  a  fine  illustra- 
tion of  what  can  be  done  in  a  confined  space  if  required.  On  leav- 
ing the  cage  the  tubs  gravitate  to  a  turntable  (a,  Fig.  475),  and 
can  either  be  passed  to  two  tipplers  used  for  land  sale  ;  to  a  third 
road,  if  dirt  or  refuse ;  or  to  a  fourth  road,  if  for  the  screens,  where 
they  are  caught  by  a  creeper  and  lifted  up  to  such  a  height  that 
when  released  they  run  by  gravity  on  to  the  weighing  machine, 
where  they  are  automatically  arrested  by  an  arrangement  shown 
in  Fig.  476.  A  rod,  a  b  c,  is  slung  from  a  convenient  place,  a, 
the  end,  c,  being  kept  in  position  by  its  own  weight  and  prevented 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET.       407 
-ra.il S 
FIG.  477. 
falling  to  the  ground  by  the  collar,  d,  on  the  vertical  rod.     A  tub 
is  shown  held  in  position  on  the  weighing  machine.     The  next  tub 
coming  in  the  direction 
indicated  by  the  arrow,  JTIG strikes  the  rod  near  the 
point,  b,  and  as  it  pro- ceeds   down     the    rails 
lifts  up  the  end,  c,  and releases    the   first    tub. 
As  soon,  however,  as  the back    end    of    the   tub 
passes  the  point,  6,  the 
link    drops    down    and 
locks   the   tub,  keeping it  on  the  machine  until 
the   succeeding  tub  re- leases it. 
After  the  tubs  are 
weighed  they  run  on  to 
a  machine- driven  side 
tippler  and  are  dis- 
charged, thence  pro- 
ceeding to  a  second  turn- 
table (b,  Fig.  475),  and  being  turned  through  a  right  angle ;  thence 
to  the  shaft.  The  whole  area  of  the  flat  sheets  is  about  60  ft.  by 
45  ft.,  a  being  about  18  ft.  away  from  the  pit,  and  b  about  15  ft. 
After  being  tipped,  the  coal  is  received  into  a  regulating  hopper, 
and  thence  passes  on  to  a  wire-gauze  jigging-screen,  in  which  three 
gauzes  are  superimposed  one  above  the  other  (Fig.  477).  The  first 
takes  out  large  coal  and  delivers  it  on  to  a  picking  belt ;  the  second, 
which  has  a  mesh  §  inch  square,  separates  nuts,  which  are  delivered 
on  to  a  small  cross-belt,  and  from  thence  to  a  picking-belt  running 
parallel  with  the  main  belt ;  while  the  third  gauze  separates  the 
remainder  into  peas  and  duff,  or  fine.  By  an  arrangement  of  traps, 
the  nuts  and  peas  can  be  remixed  and  loaded  as  one  class  of  coal, 
and  the  peas  and  duff  as  another,  or,  if  required,  all  three  can  be 
combined ;  in  addition,  the  top  screen  can  be  plated  and  unscreened 
coal  made  and  loaded  at  the  far  end  of  the  main  belt,  a  reversible 
trap  being  provided  there  for  such  purpose. 
Placing  the  screens  one  below  the  other,  without  any  shoots  to 
conduct  the  material  passing  through  one  screen  on  to  the  head  of 
the  screen  immediately  below,  saves  an  amount  of  vertical  space ; 
but  the  sorting  cannot  be  so  accurate  as  is  desirable,  as  the  coal 
which  falls  through  near  the  base  of  the  top  screen  scarcely  passes 
over  the  next  screen  at  all,  but  at  once  goes  to  its  shoot.  If  all 
the  coal  has  to  be  delivered  to  the  top  of  each  screen,  the  banking 
level  must  be  a  considerable  height  above  the  ground,  but  to  over- 
come this  disadvantage  a  common  practice  in  the  Yorkshire  coal- 

--- Page Break ---
4o8 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
field  is  to  convey  the  coal  from  the  base  of  one  screen  to  the  top 
of  the  next  one  by  means  of  conveyors  similar  to  those  already described. 
Hewlett  Pit. — At  the  No.  2  shaft  two  separate  shaking  screens 
are  fixed.  The  general  arrangement  will  be  seen  from  Fig.  478. 
The  coal  is  tipped  on  to  the  first  screen,  to  which  a  rocking  motion 
is  imparted  by  means  of  an  eccentric  and  rod,  e,  the  screen  being 
suspended  by  four  arms,  two  of  which  are  shown  at  a  b  and  a'  b'. This  first  screen  is  fixed  at  an  inclination  of  14  in.  to  the  yard, 
and  the  meshes  are  i  in.  square.  The  round  coal  passing  over  it 
falls  on  to  a  wire  picking  belt  fixed  in  the  same  line  as  the  screen 
FIG.  478. 
if  A  CG  off  eon SLACK 
'  FOa    NUTS 
where  the  best  (merchants')  coal  is  picked  off,  the  cobbles  passing over  the  end  into  a  truck.  All  the  material  passing  through  the 
first  screen  is  conveyed  by  a  shoot  to  the  head  of  a  second  screen, 
suspended  by  the  arms,  c  d,  c'  d',  which  also  receive  a  reciprocating motion  by  an  arm,  /,  and  eccentric  keyed  on  the  same  shaft  as 
the  first  one.  The  meshes  here  are  J  in.  square,  and  the  mineral is  divided  into  nuts  and  slack. 
Aniche  Colliery,  Prance. — Only  one  tippler  is  used,  this 
being  a  machine- driven  side-tip  one,  and  all  the  coal  is  turned on  to  a  Briart  screen,  placed  on  a  small  inclination.  The  large 
coal  passing  over  this  screen  is  conveyed  down  a  shoot  on  to  a 
travelling  hempen  picking  belt,  No.  i,  which  carries  it  to  a  rail- 
way truck.  During  its  passage  there  the  coal  is  sorted  by  hand 
into  two  sizes,  part  being  placed  on  the  No.  2  belt  (Figs.  479 
and  480). 
All  the  coal  passing  through  the  screen  with  oscillating  bars 
falls  on  to  a  jigging-screen  (No.  i),  worked  from  an  eccentric  in the  ordinary  manner ;  this  screen  is  fixed  at  right  angles  to  the 
first  one,  and  the  motion  is  sideways.  All  the  coal  passing  over 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR  MARKET.       409 
is  carried  on  to  belt  No.  3 ;  all  that  falls  through  drops  on  to  a 
second  jigger  fixed  immediately  below  the  first,  and  exactly 
similar  to  it,  except  that  the  holes  are  smaller.  The  small  coal 
passes  through,  falls  on  to  a  belt,  and  is  at  once  conveyed  to  the 
trucks  ;  the  larger  coal  passes  over  the  screen  and  drops  on  to  a 
travelling  belt.  No.  4,  which  runs  parallel  to  No.  3,  and  at  right 
angles  to  the  screen. 
The  coal  from  the  first  shaker-screen  is  taken  by  the  belt 
directly  to  a  waggon,  but  that  from  the  second  screen  after  being 
carried  along  on  its  picking  belt,  falls  on  to  another  belt  at  right 
angles,  and  is  conveyed  to  its  proper  waggon. 
A  noticeable  feature  about  all  the  jigging-screens  which  the author  has  seen  on  the  Continent,  is  the  fact  that  they  are  made 
of  perforated  sheet  iron  with  circular  holes,  no  wire  netting, 
FIGS.  479  AND  480. 
either  with  square  or  circular  holes,  having  been  met  with.  The 
advantage  of  circular  holes  seems  to  be  that  only  the  proper 
sized  particles  can  pass  through ;  with  square  holes,  the  diagonal 
line  is  longer  than  the  sides,  and  larger  pieces  than  the  square 
of  the  mesh  can  fall  through. 
No.  5  Pit,  Bascoup. — The  collieries  of  Mariemont  and 
Bascoup  possess  very  complete  screening-plants,  which  allow  the 
different  kinds  of  coal  to  be  easily  separated  and  classified.  That 
at  No.  5  Pit,  Bascoup,  is  the  most  recent  and  complete  one.  It  is 
shown  in  plan  and  sectional  elevation  in  Figs.  481  and  482.  The 
former  is  to  scale,  while  the  latter,  for  the  sake  of  clearness,  is  a 
diagrammatic  representation.  The  screens,  picking  belts,  &c., 
are  situated  in  a  building,  142  feet  in  length,  and  92  feet  in 
width,  placed  in  the  axis  of  the  pit  frame.  The  building  comprises 
three  levels  or  stages,  (ist)  The  upper  floor  is  used  entirely  for 
the  haulage  of  full  and  empty  tubs,  and  inclines  towards  the 

--- Page Break ---
410 
TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
winding  shaft,  so  as  to  allow  the  waggons  to  return  there  by 
gravity.  (2nd)  The  intermediate  stage  is  horizontal;  it  is  at 
this  level  that  the  handling  (sorting  of  the  coal,  &c.)  is  done  and 
where  the  principal  supervision  is  required,  (srd)  The  railway 
level  or  charging  floor.  The  freight  roads  are  not  horizontal, 
being  inclined  in  various  ways  in  order  to  facilitate  the  handling 
of  the  waggons. 
Circulation  of  Tubs  on  the  Upper  Floor. — As  soon  as  the  tubs 
come  off  the  cage,  they  are  pushed  on  to  one  of  the  four  ways- 
(a,  Fig.  481),  and  conducted  by  a  creeper  chain  to  the  top  of  an 
inclined  plane  whose  summit  is  at  the  commencement  of  the 
curve  leading  to  the  tippler.  At  this  point  the  tubs  disengage 
themselves  from  the  chain  and  continue  running,  partly  by  the 
acquired  velocity,  which  is  very  feeble,  however,  and  partly  by  the 
FIG.  481. 
action  of  their  own  weight.  The  height  of  the  incline  is  deter- 
mined experimentally,  so  that  the  waggon  stops  on  arriving  at  the 
tippler,  b.  Each  succeeding  tub  pushes  away  the  one  that  has 
just  been  emptied.  The  empty  tubs  gravitate  down  the  roads,  c, to  the  rear  of  the  shaft  at  d.  The  direction  of  motion  is  shown 
by  the  arrows. 
Screens  making  Two  Sizes. — The  two  groups  of  apparatus,  Nos.  3 
and  4,  make  two  sizes,  large  and  "  tout-venant."  From  the 
tippler,  b,  the  coal  falls  upon  the  Briart  screens,  e,  inclined  at  10°; the  large  coal  remaining  upon  the  sieve  passes  into  the  hopper,  f9 
inclined  at  22°,  from  which  it  is  conducted  to  the  loading  place. The  coal  passing  through  the  screen  is  received  upon  a  shaking 
shoot,  <7,  which  throws  it  upon  two  revolving  picking  tables,  ^, 
where  the  dirt  is  removed ;  the  coal  falls  into  a  loading  hopper. 
Screens  making  Five  Classifications. — The  two  groups  of 
apparatus,  Nos.  i  and  2,  are  much  more  complete  than  those  just 
described.  They  make  five  sizes :  large,  "  gailleteries,  gailletins, 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION    OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET.      411 
tetes  de  moineaux"  *  and  fine.  From  the  tippler,  b,  the  coal  is 
emptied  on  to  the  first  Briar t  screen,  i,  inclined  at  10°;  this retains  the  large  coal,  which  passes  into  the  hopper,  /,  where  it 
unites  with  that  furnished  by  Nos.  3  and  4.  That  which  passes 
through  the  screens  is  received  upon  a  shaking  shoot,  k,  inclined 
at  15°,  which  leads  the  coal  to  the  commencement  of  a  second 
Briart  horizontal  screen,  I.  The  " gailleteries"  which  pass  over the  screen  are  pushed  on  to  the  cleaning  belt,  j,  and  carried  into 
the  loading  hoppers,  from  which  they  are  put  into  trucks.  All 
the  coal  passing  through  the  second  sieve,  I,  falls  down  a  shoot 
and  is  lifted  by  a  bucket  elevator,  m,  and  delivered  on  to  the 
third  screen,  n.  This  is  horizontal,  and  retains  the  " gailletins,' which  then  go  to  the  belt,  o,  by  means  of  which  they  are 
conducted  into  a  loading  hopper  in  the  same  way  as  "  gailleteries.'" The  same  hopper  also  receives  the  gailletins  furnished  by  the 
other  screen  of  this  group.  Finally,  a  fourth  screen,  p,  re- 
ceives that  which  falls  through  the  third,  by  the  aid  of  a  shaking 
table,  q.  The  " tetes  de  moineaux"  which  pass  over  screen  p,  are received  on  a  cleaning  belt,  r,  and  conducted  to  the  centre  of  the 
work-shed,  where  they  can  either  be  loaded  in  a  truck  or  sent 
back  again  by  a  second  belt  towards  the  screen,  and  mixed  with 
the  fine  after  it  has  been  washed,  the  course  adopted  depending  on the  demands  of  trade. 
The  fine,  which  passes  the  four  screens,  falls  into  the  hopper,  s, 
from  which  it  can  either  be  loaded  directly  into  trucks  by  a  shoot, 
or  sent  to  the  washer  by  means  of  the  conveyor  and  bucket 
elevators,  u  and  v,  which  deliver  it  on  to  a  reciprocating  table, 
where  a  further  sizing  takes  place,  to  be  described  later  on.  The 
fine,  instead  of  being  transported  by  belts,  and  loaded  at  a  central 
spot,  like  the  gailleteries,  gailletins,  and  tetes  de  moineaiKC,  is 
either  loaded  into  a  waggon  at  the  place  where  it  is  separated,  or  if 
destined  for  the  washers,  is  sent  there  direct  by  belts,  &c.,  from 
group  No.  i.  No.  2  group  can  also  send  its  fine  to  the  washers, 
but  as  it  is  rather  removed  from  them,  the  small  coal  is  taken  by 
a  belt  to  the  bucket-elevator  of  the  first  group. 
*  As  it  is  imposible  to  give  these  sizes  in  their  English  equivalents,  the technical  names  applied  to  them  at  the  colliery  are  retained. 

--- Page Break ---
412  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
Washery. — All  the  coal  destined  for  the  washery,  after  being 
lifted  by  the  bucket-elevator,  is  delivered  upon  a  reciprocating 
table,  formed  of  a  series  of  perforated  iron  plates,  arranged  one 
below  the  other,  which  subdivide  it  into  the  following  sizes :  dust, 
from  o  to  5  mm.,  and  grains,  from  5  to  n,  from  n  to  16,  and 
from  1 6  to  25  mm.  Each  of  these  four  sizes  is  washed  separately 
in  a  manner  similar  to  that  described  subsequently.  The  two 
former  in  felspar  washers  of  the  Coppee  system,  and  the  two 
latter  in  the  nut-washers  of  the  same  firm.  The  three  sizes, 
5  to  n,  ii  to  1 6,  and  16  to  25  mm.,  are  mixed  together  again 
after  washing,  and  sold.  About  40  tons  per  hour  can  be  treated. 
Cross  Creek  Collieries,  Pennsylvania. — Anthracite  coal cannot  be  sold  in  the  state  that  it  comes  from  the  mine. 
Owing  to  its  compact  nature,  and  the  practical  absence  of 
volatile  matters  in  its  composition,  it  will  not  burn  well  unless 
the  lumps  are  nearly  of  a  uniform  size,  and  are  free  from  dust. 
The  method  of  preparing  anthracite  coal  for  the  market  is  there- 
fore entirely  different  from  that  adopted  with  bituminous  varieties. 
Uniform  and  varied  sizing  is  essential,  in  order  that  when  the 
lumps  are  burnt  the  air  may  have  a  free  passage  between  them. 
In  addition,  large  amounts  of  slaty  or  argillaceous  coal  and  car- 
bonaceous shale  are  intimately  mixed  with  the  pure  coal,  and 
cannot  be  separated  by  hand-picking ;  it  is  also  generally  impossible to  sell  all  the  large  coal  as  it  comes  from  the  mine.  For  these 
reasons,  machinery  has  to  be  employed  to  break  up  the  larger 
pieces. The  more  recent  and  elaborate  machinery  employed  in  Penn- 
sylvania, has  been  admirably  described  by  Mr.  E.  B.  Coxe,*  but  as his  memoir  covers  77  pages  of  printed  matter  and  is  illustrated  by 
43  plates,  it  is  impossible  to  give  anything  but  the  briefest  sum- mary here. 
The  coal  is  first  tipped  on  to  a  fixed  bar  screen,  which  allows 
most  of  the  small  coal  to  pass  through.  The  large  coal  passes  by 
shoots  on  to  a  movable  bar  screen,  and  all  the  small  that  falls 
through  is  joined  to  that  obtained  from  the  fixed  bar  screen.  Up 
to  this  stage,  practically  only  two  sorts  are  made,  each  of  which 
is  treated  separately.  The  lump  coal  is  then  divided  into  three 
sorts,  the  first  being  the  shale  and  slate,  which  goes  to  the  dirt 
heap  ;  the  second  is  pure  coal,  which  is  sold  as  lump-coal,  if  there is  any  market  for  it ;  the  third  product  consists  of  pieces  of  coal 
and  shale  adhering  to  each  other,  and  is  too  impure  to  go  to 
market  in  its  existing  condition.  Sometimes  the  shale  can  be 
chipped  off  with  a  pick,  but  more  generally  the  mixture  cannot 
be  cleaned  in  this  way,  and  has  to  be  put  through  a  set  of  crush- 
ing rolls,  and  then  treated  in  gyrating  screens,  and  the  dirt  picked 
out.  The  pure  coal  also  passes  through  rolls,  and  is  afterwards 
*  Amer.  Inst.  M.  E.  xix.  398. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION    OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET.       413 
separated  on   gyrating  screens,    into    several  sizes   or  qualities, similar  to  those  mentioned  below. 
All  the  coal  that  has  passed  through  the  fixed  and  movable 
bar  screens  is  conveyed  to  two  screens,  each  of  which  make  three 
sizes,  called  "  steamboat,"  "  broken,"  and  "  egg."  The  smaller coal  passes  to  another  pair  of  screens,  known  as  the  stove  or  wet 
screens  (A),  which  are  situated  a  little  lower  down.  The  steam- 
boat coal  from  both  screens  passes  into  a  picking-shoot,  and  from 
thence  to  a  loading-shoot,  provided  all  the  steamboat  coal  can  be 
sold.  If  it  cannot,  a  portion  is  passed  through  a  set  of  rolls,  and 
separated  by  screens  into  "  broken,"  "  egg,"  "  stove,"  "  chestnut," 
"pea,"  buckwheat  No.  i,  No.  2,  and  No.  3,  and  dust. All  the  coal  which  goes  to  the  stove  or  wet  screens  (A),  is 
divided  there  into  stove,  chestnut,  pea,  and  No.  1,2,  and  3  buck- 
wheat, and  slime.  These  screens  are  worked  wet — i.e.,  a  large 
amount  of  w^ater  is  put  on  them,  as  the  coal  they  treat  contains 
mud  and  other  impurities,  and  in  order  to  make  a  good  separa- 
tion it  is  necessary  to  wash  it.  In  addition,  all  the  wet  coal 
from  this  screen  is  cleaned  in  jigging  coal-washers. The  movable  bar  screens  are  a  modification  of  the  Briart 
screen,  arranged  so  that  the  bars  only  move  up  and  down  half 
as  much  as  they  move  forward.  With  this  construction  the 
coal,  although  fed  forward  with  rapidity,  is  not  thrown  up  and 
down  so  much.  The  gyrating  screens  were  designed  by  Mr.  Coxe, 
and  have  been  previously  described. 
The  rolls  employed  for  breaking  the  coal  differ  in  one  point 
from  those  generally  adopted.  The  difference  is  in  the  form  of 
the  teeth.  The  rolls  used  are  known  as  corrugated  rolls,  and  the 
teeth  are  continuous  from  one  end  to  the  other.  There  are  no 
points.  The  end  of  the  tooth  is  slightly  rounded,  and  the  part 
doing  the  work  is  cast  in  chills,  so  as  to  give  greater  endurance. 
It  is  claimed  that  this  type  of  roll  breaks  a  lump  of  coal  into  two 
pieces  of  nearly  the  same  size,  while  with  rolls  of  ordinary  con- 
struction the  pointed  teeth  break  the  coal  in  much  the  same  way 
as  the  stroke  of  a  pick  would  do ;  that  is,  the  lines  of  fracture 
radiate  approximately  from  the  point  where  the  tooth  strikes  the 
lump  of  coal.  Experience  has  also  shown  that  separate  rolls 
should  be  employed  to  break  the  coal  into  different  sizes,  as 
although  all  sizes  below  the  size  which  is  being  broken  are  always 
made,  yet  the  most  economical  method  is  to  break  any  size  as 
nearly  as  possible  into  the  size  immediately  below  it.  In  other 
words,  it  is  more  economical  to  break  "  lump  "  into  "  steamer," 
then  break  "  steamer "  as  far  as  possible  into  "  broken,"  the 
"  broken  "  into  "  egg,"  and  so  on  ;  of  course,  at  each  time  elimi- nating all  the  coal  below  the  size  that  you  wish  to  break,  before 
passing  that  size  through  the  rolls. 
Automatic  shale-pickers  are  used  in  some  parts  of  the  estab- 
lishment.    They  depend  for  their  action  on  the  fact  that  while 

--- Page Break ---
4i4  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
the  coal  generally  breaks  into  cubical  masses,  the  piece?  of  shale 
of  the  same  length  and  width  are  of  much  less  thickness.  Hence, 
if  a  quantity  of  shale  and  coal  which  has  been  passed  through  a 
screen  and  properly  sized,  the  shale,  if  placed  edgewise,  would 
drop  through  a  slit  over  which  the  coal  would  pass. 
COAL  WASHING. — Below  a  certain  size  it  is  impossible  to 
pick  out  the  dirt  mixed  with  coal,  and  recourse  has  to  be  made  to 
washing,  for  which  a  large  variety  of  machines  have  been  designed. 
Their  principle  and  action  are  similar  in  every  respect  to  those 
employed  for  ore  dressing,  but  here  it  is  the  lighter  material  that 
is  valuable.  The  theory  of  the  subject  is  that  bodies  of  different 
specific  gravities  fall  through  water  at  different  velocities,  the 
heavier  more  quickly  than  the  lighter,  that  is  to  say,  if  both  pieces 
are  of  approximately  the  same  size;  because  it  is  obvious  that  a  larger 
piece  of  a  lighter  material  meets  with  as  much  resistance  in  pass- ing through  water  as  a  small  piece  of  a  heavier  material.  For 
such  reason  a  preliminary  sizing  should  always  take  place  before 
washing. 
Sizing  Apparatus. — The  small  coal  which  passes  through  the last  screen  is  generally  further  subdivided,  either  by  means  of 
revolving  sieves  or  trommels  or  reciprocating  tables.  The  latter, 
perhaps,  do  the  work  better,  but  are  not  so  convenient,  as  water 
cannot  be  employed ;  with  trommels  a  stream  of  water  is  intro- duced and  materially  assists  the  operation.  The  disadvantage  of 
a  trommel  having  a  mesh  of  varying  size  is  that  all  the  material 
has  to  pass  over  that  part  of  the  screen  which  has  the  finest  mesh, 
and  consequently  the  wear  is  considerable,  but  with  such  a  soft 
substance  as  coal  this  objection  is  not  very  serious.  It  has  been 
found  that  revolving  screens  require  patching  in  the  small  (fine) 
portions  about  every  year ;  their  general  life  is  somewhere  from 
five  to  seven  years,  except  when  there  is  much  sulphur  present. 
Revolving  screens  are  unsuited  for  separating  sizes  below  J  inch  ; 
and  an  apparatus  which  retains  its  German  name,  "Spitzkasten" is  employed.  It  consists  of  a  series  of  pyramidal  boxes,  upon  whose 
sloping  sides  no  material  can  settle.  Each  box  is  larger  than  the 
previous  one.  On  entering  the  first  trough,  the  speed  of  the 
water  containing  the  material  in  suspension  is  checked,  the  par- 
ticles of  larger  size  settle  down  a  little,  and  escape  the  velocity 
of  the  current,  so  that  they  soon  reach  the  bottom  of  the  trough. The  number  of  boxes  determines  the  number  of  sizes  made.  A 
stop-cock  is  provided  at  the  bottom  of  each  box,  through  which 
the  deposit  can  be  swept  out  at  any  time  by  opening  the  tap ;  this 
device  avoids  any  necessity  for  interrupting  the  main  flow. 
Trough  Washers. — The  first  type  of  washer  consisted  of  a 
trough,  provided  with  a  series  of  vertical  stops,  which  prevent  the 
coal  and  dirt  passing  on  (Figs.  483  and  484).  At  the  point  where 
the  coal  is  washed  the  supplying  channel  is  divided  into  two ; into  each  of  these  divisions  the  stream  of  unwashed  coal  can  be 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL  FOR,  MARKET.       415 
directed  at  pleasure.     As  soon  as  one  trough  is  full,  the  dirty  coal 
and  water  is  directed  into  the  other,  and  a  current  of  clean  water 
turned  into  the  first  trough,  while  at  the  same  time  the  deposits 
of  coal  which  have  accumu- 
lated against  the  stops,  a  a, 
are  agitated  by  the  attend- ants with   rakes,  with   the 
result  that  the  lighter  coal 
is  carried  over  the  obstruc- 
tion, while  the  dirt  (pyrites 
principally),  being  of  higher 
FIGS.  483  AND  484. 
specific  gravity,  remains  be- 
hind.  The  washed  coal  passes  ~^      '     f      '       *      JX~ on  to  an  inclined  sieve,  where 
all  the  water  is  drained  away,  and  thence  by  a  shoot  into  trucks. 
As  soon  as  all  the  coal  is  removed  from  the  washing  troughs,  a 
hole  in  the  bottom  (shown  at  b  b,  in  Fig.  484)  is  opened  at  the 
lower  end,  the  vertical  stops  are  lifted  out  of  position,  and  the 
accumulations  of  dirt  are  swept  down  and  pass  away  through  the 
hole,  which  is  then  closed  up  again.  The  vertical  stops  are 
returned,  and  as  by  this  time  the  second  trough  contains  a  full 
charge  of  unwashed  coal,  the  stream  of  dirty  coal  and  water  is 
diverted  into  the  first  trough,  and  a  similar  series  of  operations 
to  those  just  described  carried  on  in  the  second  channel. 
It  is  obvious  that  a  large  amount  of  labour  is  required.  To 
reduce  this  charge,  mechanically  moved  rakes  are  employed, 
the  best  form  of  which  are  those  raking  backwards,  not  forwards, 
or  the  unwashed  material  is  likely  to  be  pushed  over  the  dam. 
The  amount  of  water  required  is  also  very  great,  and  the  quantity 
of  coal  that  can  be  treated  is  limited. 
Although  the  cost  of  working  is  large, 
yet  up-keep  and  first  cost  are  very 
low,  and  it  appears  that,  under  certain 
conditions,  a  trough  washer  gives  as 
good  results  as  any  other  form. 
Robinson's  Washer.  —  This  well- known  machine  consists  of  an  inverted 
truncated  cone,  with  a  diameter  at  the 
top  about  four  times  that  of  its  diam- eter at  the  bottom  (Fig.  485).  At  the 
base  of  the  cone  is  fitted  a  water-jacket, 
a  b,  into  which  water  under  pressure 
can  be  brought,  and  which  passes  into 
the  machine  through  a  series  of  per- 
forations placed  all  round  the  cone, 
the  diameter  of  these  holes  being 
generally  about  J  in.  Still  lower  is 
a  cylindrical  chamber,  c,  controlled  by  two  slides,  d  and  e,  movable 
FIG.  485. 

--- Page Break ---
4i6  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
by  the  levers  as  shown.  A  strong  shaft,  y,  is  fixed  vertically, 
exactly  in  the  centre  of  the  cone,  and  to  it,  through  the  medium 
of  a  cast-iron  crosshead,  are  bolted  four  arms,  two  of  which  are 
shown  at  g  and  h.  Each  of  these  arms  carries  three  iron  bars,  i  i, 
projecting  downwards  and  curved  round  at  their  lower  extremity, 
in  order  to  work  close  against  the  sides  of  the  cone.  The  central 
vertical  shaft  terminates  in  four  arms,  k.  Rotation  is  effected  by 
bevel  gearing. 
The  principle  of  this  machine  is  the  one  common  to  all  current 
classifiers — viz.,  that  if  two  equal-sized  particles  of  different  specific 
gravities  are  allowed  to  drop  through  a  stream  of  water,  by 
regulating  the  velocity  of  the  water  it  can  be  arranged  that  the 
particles  of  highest  specific  gravity  shall  continue  to  fall,  while 
the  lighter  ones  are  driven  upwards.  Within  certain  limits,  it  is- 
not  necessary  that  the  particles  treated  should  be  all  of  the  same 
size,  but  it  is  perfectly  clear  that,  unless  some  preliminary  sizing 
takes  place,  there  is  a  danger  of  either  coal  passing  away  with 
the  water,  or  dirt  being  carried  up  with  the  coal,  both  of  which 
results  are  unprofitable  and  undesirable. 
The  actual  operation  of  washing  is  conducted  in  the  following 
manner  :  Coal  is  introduced  at  the  top  of  the  cone  and  falls  into 
the  water,  and  is  kept  in  a  state  of  agitation  by  the  revolving 
arms.  Situated  some  distance  above  the  machine  is  a  cistern, 
from  which  water  under  pressure  is  brought  and  introduced  into 
the  base  of  the  cone  through  the  pipes,  a  and  6,  the  regular 
distribution  being  effected  by  the  holes  in  the  plates  already 
alluded  to.  The  water-pressure  is  so  regulated  that  it  is  sufficient 
to  lift  up  all  the  particles  of  coal  and  carry  them  over  the  top  of 
the  cone,  while  it  is  not  strong  enough  to  force  up  the  dirt,  which falls  downwards  and  accumulates  in  the  base  of  the  cone.  Its 
removal  is  effected  by  the  two  sliding  doors.  As  a  rule,  e  is  closed. 
When  the  space  between  e  and  d  is  full,  d  is  closed  and  e  opened, 
and  the  dirt  discharged.  The  washed  coal,  after  passing  away  at 
the  top,  is  received  on  a  perforated  plate,  and  the  greater  part  of 
the  water  drains  away. 
The  success  of  this  machine  depends  to  a  very  great  measure on  the  carefulness  and  attention  of  the  attendants.  The  chief 
points  are  the  time  given  to  flushing,  and  the  regulation  of  the 
discharge  of  the  dirt.  The  machine  is  compact  and  occupies  little 
space ;  it  is  also  strongly  constructed  and  is  not  liable  to  break down. 
Copp6e  Machine. — A  great  many  of  the  very  largest  washing establishments  are  fitted  either  with  the  Coppee  or  Liihrig 
machines,  both  of  which  are  identical  except  in  small  details. 
Two  different  machines  are  used,  one  for  washing  the  coal  from 
f-inch  upwards,  called  the  "  nuts  washer,"  and  the  other  called 
the  "felspar  machine"  for  washing  coal  of  sizes  from  f-inch  down to  powder. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL   FOR   MARKET.       417 
The  nuts  machine  (Fig.  486)  is  of  the  ordinary  continuous 
jig  type,  and  consists  of  two  compartments,  a  and  6,  in  one  of 
which  the  piston  works,  while  the  other  is  provided  with  a 
perforated  strainer,  slightly  inclined  from  front  to  back.  The 
piston,  p,  receives  an 
up-and-down  motion  by  FIG.  486. 
being  connected  to cranks  on  a  horizontal 
shaft,  and  the  amount 
of  this  throw  can  be 
varied  from  ij  to  4  in. 
An  opening,  w,  runs 
along  the  front  of  the 
washing  compartment, 
and  through  this  clean 
coal  continuously  passes 
away.  The  shale  is  dis- 
charged through  a  small 
cylindrical  compartment, 
d,  connected  to  the  side  of  the  casing,  but  which  starts  above  the 
level  of  the  strainer,  leaving  a  free  space  between  the  strainer 
and  the  lowest  end  of  the  compartment  of  about  3  in.  It  is  open at  both  ends  and  communicates  with  the  outside  of  the  machine 
through  the  opening,  r.  It  is  provided  with  a  sliding  door  which 
regulates  the  discharge  of  the  shale. When  the  unwashed  coal  is  introduced  into  the  machine  and 
the  piston  descends,  it  drives  water  into  the  compartment,  6,  and 
lifts  the  bed  of  the  material  resting  on  the  strainer.  On  the 
return  stroke,  the  heavier  dirt  falls  faster  than  the  lighter  coal, 
while  in  the  upstroke  the  lighter  coal  is  lifted  farther  than  the 
FIGS.  487  AND  488. 
heavier  dirt ;  the  result  is,  that  the  two  substances  separate  into 
layers,  the  coal  being,  of  course,  the  highest. 
The  felspar  washer  is  of  similar  construction,  but  differs  materi- 
ally in  its  method  of  working.  It  consists  of  a  box,  divided  into 
two  compartments  by  a  longitudinal  partition,  in  one  of  which  the 2D 

--- Page Break ---
4i  8  TEXT-BOOK   OF  COAL-MINING. 
piston  works  as  before  (Figs.  487  and  488).  It  is  also  generally 
divided  into  two  or  sometimes  three  compartments  in  the  direction 
of  its  length,  each  communicating  with  the  other  by  openings,  o, 
along  the  side,  and  through  these  the  washed  coal  passes  away. 
In  the  nuts  washer,  the  holes  through  the  sieve  are  smaller  than 
the  size  of  the  material  being  treated,  and  consequently  no  dis- 
charge takes  place  through  them.  In  the  felspar  machine,  they 
are  larger  than  the  material,  and  the  dirt  passes  through  the 
sieve  into  the  lower  part  of  the  apparatus.  Three  sieves  are 
generally  employed.  The  dirty  coal  is  introduced  at  one  end  and 
gradually  passes  down  over  the  remaining  gratings,  the  clean 
material  being  finally  discharged  at  the  opposite  end. 
The  chief  peculiarity  is  the  introduction  of  a  layer  of  felspar, 
from  two  to  three  inches  thick,  on  each  sieve,  whose  specific  gravity 
is  greater  than  that  of  the  material  to  be  concentrated,  and  yet 
less  than  that  of  the  gangue.  The  sizes  of  the  particles  of  this  bed 
are  larger  than  the  holes  in  the  sieve.  The  whole  framework  of 
the  machine  is  filled  with  water  up  to  the  level  of  each  sieve,  and 
as  the  pistons  work  up  and  down,  a  volume  of  water  is  forced 
through  the  holes  in  the  bottom  of  each  sieve,  lifting  the  bed  and 
the  layer  of  material  on  it,  and  then  allowing  the  whole  to  fall 
again  on  the  return  stroke.  The  lighter  coal  rises  to  the  surface, 
and  the  heavier  dirt  gradually  finds  its  way  through  the  bed  of 
felspar,  when  it  falls  into  the  bottom  of  the  compartment  to  be 
removed  from  time  to  time.  It  is  essential  for  thorough  cleaning 
that  the  size  of  the  felspar  should  be  as  small  as  allowable,  and 
that  the  particles  of  mineral  forming  the  bed  should  be  of  con- 
venient density,  have  well  defined  rectilinear  angles,  and  be  of 
great  durability  to  resist  wear  and  tear.  A  point  of  considerable 
importance  is  the  proper  regulation  of  the  delivery  of  water,  which 
is  controlled  by  a  tap;  upon  this  depends  the  progress  of  the 
material  and  the  time  it  is  operated  upon. 
For  very  dirty  coal,  perhaps  no  machine  does  its  work  so  effici- 
ently as  this  ;  indeed,  every  one  gives  it  the  character  of  removing 
dirt.  It  is,  however,  ex- 
pensive  in  first  cost,  but 
requires  little  attention. 
Much  depends  upon  the e     •>•    F 
percentage  or  dirt  origin- 
If  it  is  small,  and,  say,  one- half  of  it  is  removed,  the 
coke  from  the  resulting 
product  is  a  fair  one  ;  on 
the  other  hand,  where  the 
dirt  amounts  to  from  15 
to  30  per  cent,  and  only  3  to  10  per  cent,  is  taken  away,  the  coke 
is  very  bad.  With  a  dirty  coal,  probably  it  is  best  to  use  machines 
of  this  type. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL  FOR  MARKET.      419 
Fig.  489  gives  a  diagrammatic  representation  of  a  washery  in 
South  Wales  treating  about  200  tons  per  day.  The  fine  coal 
from  the  screens  (bars  i  in.  apart)  is  raised  by  a  bucket-elevator and  delivered  into  a  revolving  screen,  and  separated  into  three 
portions  :  (i)  the  large,  which  passes  over  and  goes  to  a  "  nuts  " 
washer  ;  (2)  a  size  between  f  and  f  in.,  also  treated  in  a  "  nuts  " washer ;  (3)  the  size  below  f  in.,  which  is  carried  off  by  a  stream 
of  water  and  delivered  into  a  second  revolving  screen,  having  per- 
forations J  in.  diameter.  Two  sizes  are  made  here — (i)  f  in.  to 
J  in. ;  and  (2)  J  in.  to  nothing.  These  are  washed  separately  and 
then  re-united. 
The  nuts  washers  are  situated  a  floor  above  the  felspar  machines, 
and  all  the  coal  from  them  after  washing  is  delivered  on  to  a  pair 
of  rolls  and  crushed,  and  is  afterwards  mixed  with  the  washed  coal 
from  the  felspar  machines,  the  whole  being  raised  by  a  bucket- elevator,  and  then  carried  by  a  revolving  screw  and  stored  in  four 
bunkers,  each  holding  about  40  tons.  Each  one  is  filled  consecu- 
tively, and  the  discharge  is  so  arranged  that  the  coal  stands 
in  each  as  long, as  possible  in  order  that  the  water  may  drain 
away. 
One  small  engine,  about  15  in.  cylinder  by  3  ft.  stroke,  does  all 
the  work,  and  there  are  only  two  men  employed  in  the  building — - 
viz.,  an  engineman  who  looks  after  the  machinery  on  the  first 
floor  (engine,  felspar  washers,  and  pump),  and  an  attendant  who 
looks  after  the  "  nuts  "  machines  and  regulates  the  discharge  into the  bunkers.  In  addition,  one  man  is  employed  outside  to  see 
that  the  slack  is  being  delivered  all  right  from  the  screens.  The 
cost  of  an  entire  installation  for  washing  200  tons  per  day  would 
be  from  ^£2000  to  ^2500.  About  1000  gallons  of  water  are  lost 
per  hour,  this  being,  say,  10  per  cent,  of  the  total  quantity  used, 
and  the  life  of  a  plant  is  variable,  depending  in  a  great  measure  in 
the  way  it  is  looked  after.  In  bad  cases  it  may  be  five  years,  in 
.good  fifteen  years. 
Conclusions. — The  relative  advantages  of  coal  washing  have 
been  fully  considered  in  a  paper  by  Mr.  R.  de  Soldenhoff  *  and in  the  discussion  which  followed.  The  interesting  point  is  the 
.absolute  cost  of  washed  coal,  after  charging  the  cost  of  the  un- 
washed .  coal  delivered  to  the  machine.  For  example,  a  certain 
number  of  tons  of  coal  are  delivered  to  a  washing  machine,  which 
if  not  washed  would  in  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs  be  sold  for 
a  certain  sum  per  ton,  the  impurities  contained  in  them  being 
weighed  with  the  coal.  During  the  process  of  washing  the  greater 
part  of  these  impurities  is  removed,  and  the  resulting  product 
weighs  considerably  less  (at  Dowlais  4697  tons  of  unwashed  pro- 
duced 3433  tons  of  clean  coal,  the  remainder  was  dirt  and  loss  in 
washing;  the  latter  amounting  to  2.72  percent,  on  the  46  9  7  tons, 
•or  3.59  per  cent,  on  the  3433  tons).  So  many  tons  are  actually 
*  So.  Wales  Inst.  xiv.  88. 

--- Page Break ---
420  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
lost  which  could  have  been  sold  at  a  certain  rate,  and  these 
represent  a  certain  sum  of  money  which,  being  divided  by  the 
number  of  tons  of  washed  coal  recovered,  gives  a  certain  amount 
which  must  be  added  to  the  cost  of  washing. 
As  the  value  of  the  unwashed  coal  increases,  so  does  this 
charge,  and  a  point  may  easily  be  reached  where  it  neutralises 
the  increased  value  of  the  washed  product,  especially  if  the  coal 
is  sold,  not  coked.  In  the  latter  case  (coking)  the  advantages  of 
producing  coke  with  little  ash  are  great,  less  flux  is  required  for 
the  furnace,  and  less  slag  is  produced,  and  also  less  coal  has  to  be 
handled.  Washing  might  easily  make  an  uncokable  coal  into  a 
cokable  one  ;  as  a  very  impure  coal,  although  a  caking  one,  may, 
owing  to  the  large  amount  of  ash  in  the  coke,  be  unsaleable. 
There  is  another  point  which  must  be  specially  noted :  the 
same  water  must  not  be  used  over  and  over  again  for  washing, 
without  some  efficient  filtering  arrangement,  or  the  lustre  of  the 
coke  will  be  completely  lost.  At  Earnock  Colliery,  Lanarkshire, 
the  water  is  pumped  on  to  the  top  of  the  dirt-heap,  and  allowed 
to  percolate  through  it  before  being  used  again.  Settling  tanks 
do  not  entirely  remove  the  difficulty. 
Dry  Coal  Cleaning. — Messrs  Basiaux  and  Leonard*  describe 
an  apparatus  for  cleaning  coal  by  means  of  an  air  blast  at  Rhein- 
Preussen  Colliery,  Germany.  The  coal  is  first  separated  by  a 
trommel  into  five  sizes,  the  largest  of  which,  i  to  2  inches  in  dia- 
meter, goes  direct  to  the  coke  ovens ;  the  others  pass  each  to  a 
separate  cleaner,  where  the  coal  is  spread  out  in  a  trough  about 
6  feet  9  inches  long  by  2  feet  broad,  divided  by  a  horizontal  perfo- 
rated plate  into  an  upper  and  lower  chamber.  One  end  of  the 
trough  is  in  communication  with  the  air  blast,  the  other  with  the 
cleaned  coal  dust-chamber,  from  which,  however,  it  is  separated 
by  a  sloping  screen,  the  bottom  end  communicating  with  a  hopper 
placed  below  the  trough.  In  the  lower  compartment  of  the 
trough  is  an  endless  belt,  which  carries  the  coal  to  be  cleaned  in 
an  opposite  direction  to  the  air  blast. 
The  air  blast  blows  the  pure  coal-dust  through  the  screen,  and 
the  larger  coal  against  the  screen,  down  which  it  slides  into  a 
hopper,  while  the  stones,  too  heavy  to  be  affected  by  the  blast,  are 
carried  forward  by  the  endless  band  into  another  hopper. 
The  clean  coal  gave  7  per  cent,  of  ash,  and  the  stones  (high) 
45  per  cent,  of  coal.  The  cost  of  cleaning  (exclusive  of  interest 
and  depreciation  of  capital)  was  given  at  o.jyd.  per  ton. 
Briquettes. — On  the  Continent,  the  manufacture  of  briquettes as  a  means  of  utilising  small  coal  is  in  great  favour.  English  mining 
practice  is  probably  further  behind  here  than  in  any  other  opera- tion. The  great  reason  for  this  seems  to  have  been  the  absence  of 
a  market,  which  was  probably  due  to  the  uncompromising  form  of 
*  Eev.  Univ.  (2e  Serie)  ix.  135. 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION   OF   COAL   FOR   MARKET.       421 
the  article  manufactured,  although  recently  English  firms  have 
taken  out  patents  for  an  improved  mode  of  traversing  and  locking 
step  by  step  a  revolving  mould-plate,  which  may  be  subdivided for  interchanging  moulds. 
Briquettes  of  the  shape  generally  manufactured  in  England  are 
unsuitable  for  domestic  use.  On  the  Continent  every  shape  is 
made,  varying  from  an  ordinary  brick  to  ovoidal  perforated  bullets 
about  the  size  of  a  goose's  egg ;  the  former  may  be  used  for locomotive,  and  the  latter  for  domestic  purposes.  Large  quantities 
are  made  every  year,  and  the  demand  is  increasing.  The  only 
objection  against  them  is  the  rather  dense  and  nasty  smoke  pro- duced on  burning. 
So  much  attention  has  been  given  to  the  subject,  that  the 
machines  employed  on  the  Continent  seem  to  be  a  decided  improve- ment on  those  used  in  this  country.  The  one  most  in  favour  is  that 
of  Messrs.  Bietrix  &  Co.,*  who,  after  an  experience  of  many  years, have  avoided  the  use  of  steam  as  a  heating  medium,  finding  that 
the  presence  of  moisture  should  be  avoided  in  the  manufacture  of 
homogeneous  briquettes.  In  preparing  the  paste,  the  first  pro- cedure is  to  dry  the  coal  in  a  small  furnace,  having  a  rotating 
plate  for  its  bottom.  The  fire  is  placed  on  one  side  and  passes 
over  the  coal  and  returns  underneath  the  plate.  During  its 
passage  through  the  furnace,  the  coal  is  turned  over  by  means  of 
rakes  and  vanes,  and  on  its  discharge  is  mixed  with  as  small  a 
quantity  of  pitch  as  possible,  which  has  been  brought  there  by an  elevator. 
The  two  substances  are  intimately  mixed  by  a  screw  and  conveyed 
on  to  the  feeding  plate  of  the  machine,  the  chief  feature  of  which 
is  a  horizontal  mould-plate  and  double  system  of  levers,  by  the 
aid  of  which  the  briquette  is  compressed  on  both  sides.  The  rotating 
plate  which  contains  the  dies  is  provided  with  a  series  of  short 
roller  pegs  projecting  downwards,  which  engage  at  intervals  with 
a  screw-thread  cut  in  a  revolving  shaft.  In  this  way  the  plate  is 
turned,  and  at  each  turn  locked  in  position  while  the  presses  enter 
the  die,  motion  only  taking  place  when  the  plungers  are  out  of  the dies.  The  dies  are  attached  to  a  beam  connected  at  one  end  to 
geared  cranks,  while  the  other  is  attached  to  an  hydraulic  piston. 
The  paste  receives  double  compression,  first  by  the  top  plunger 
and  then  by  the  bottom  one.  If  any  hard  body  gets  into  the 
press  by  accident,  the  hydraulic  piston  rises  and  prevents 
damage. 
As  the  coal  is  first  dried  in  a  furnace,  the  briquettes  contain  a 
very  small  amount  of  moisture,  and,  in  addition,  less  pitch  is 
required,  as  the  coal,  to  a  certain  extent,  is  softened.  The  machine 
is  very  simple  and  compact,  one  of  the  main  features  also  being 
the  certainty  with  which  the  coal  and  tar  are  mixed,  this  being  a 
*  Soc.  Ind.  Min.  (2°  Serie),  xii.  461. 

--- Page Break ---
422  TEXT-BOOK  OF  COAL-MINING. 
failing  with  many  machines,  pitch  being  very  expensive.  As  the 
mould-plate  is  horizontal  and  has  three  of  its  holes  exposed  to  the 
feed  scrapers  at  one  time,  it  is  always  properly  charged.  Double 
compression  is  admittedly  such  an  advantage  that  every  one  at  the 
present  time  uses  it. 
In  the  machines  making  ovoidal  shapes,  two  plates  are  employed, 
the  lower  one  fixed  horizontally  and  the  upper  one  inclined  at  an 
angle.  The  horizontal  revolving  plate  on 
which  the  paste  is  fed  is  provided  with  two 
rows  of  egg-shaped  cups  (a  a,  Fig.  490), 
from  the  bottom  of  which  project  vertical 
spindles.  The  upper  plate  is  provided  with 
two  rows  of  oval  recesses  which  correspond 
with  the  cups  in  the  lower  plate.  The  two 
plates  turn  on  shafts,  b  and  c,  and  during  the  revolution  approach 
each  other,  and  at  this  moment  the  lower  cups  are  raised  up 
by  a  cam,  which  pushes  up  the  spindles  to  which  they  are  attached, 
and  by  these  means  the  briquettes  are  compressed.  A  little 
further  on  in  the  revolution  the  two  plates  separate  again,  and 
the  cups  being  still  further  raised,  the  briquettes  are  discharged. 
Bibliography. — The  following  is  a  list  of  the  more  important 
memoirs  dealing  with  the  subject-matter  of  this  chapter : 
EEV.  UNIV.  :  Du  chargement  et  du  dechargement  des  charbons  sur  les 
chemins  defer  et  sur  les  voies  navigables,  G.  Dugnet  (2®  Serie),  iv.  221 
et  549;  Note  sur  le  nettoyage  du  charbon  par  vent  souffle,  MM. 
Basiaux  et  Leonard  (2e  Serie),  ix.  135  ;  La  preparation  des  charbons 
dans  le  bassin  de  la  JRuhr,  F.  Peters  (2e  Serie),  xv.  201  ;  Note  sur  le 
triage  mecanigue  du  puits  No.  5  de  la  societe  charbonniere  de  Bascoup, 
A.  Godeaux  (2°  Serie),  xviii.  531  ;  Notice  sur  les  installations  de 
chargement  du  port  de  Cardiff  (Angleterre),  J.  Alardin  (3°  Serie),  xi. 
233 ;  Fabrication  des  agglomeres  ovoides,  proc6d6  %'ourquembergt 0.  Holzer  (3e  Serie),  xvi.  161. 
N.  STAFF.  INST. :  The  Tipping  and  Screening  of  Coal,  J.  Rigg,  iv.  103. 
INST.  C.  E. :  Coal  Washing,  T.  F.  Harvey,  Ixx,  106. 
Spiral  ^Revolving  Screen,  D.  P.  Morison,  xxviii.  183  ;  Luhrig's  Method of  Coal  Washing t  E.  P.  Rathbone,  xxix.  159  ;  On  the  Dry,  or  Wind, 
Method  of  Cleaning  Coal,  E.  P.  Rathbone,  xxxi.  245. 
MIN.  INST.  SCOT.  :  Description  of  a  Self-tipping  Cage  and  "Gunboat," R.  T.  Moore,  iv.  250 ;  On  the  General  Principles  of  Coal  Washing, 
F.  J.  Rowan,  ix.  185  ;  Notes  on  Coal- Cleaning  Machines,  D.  Cowan, 
x.  229  ;  Eeport  of  Committee  on  Coal  Cleaning,  xi.  145  ;  Manufacture 
of  Patent  Fuel,  J.  Clark,  xiii.  236. 
SO.  WALES  INST.  :  Coal  Washing,  J.  Brogden,  x.  119  ;  An  improved  Coal- 
Washing  Machine,  A.  Riviere,  x.  294  ;  Improvements  in  Coal  Washing, 
R.  de  Soldenhof,  xiv.  88. 
BRIT.  SOC.  MIN.  STUD. :  Various  Methods  of  Banking  and  Screening,  E.  F. 
Melly  and  J.  Stevens,  iv.  67  ;  Coal  Cleaning,  R.  T.  Cronshaw,  v.  61  ; 
Coal-  Washing  Plant,  H.  Palmer  and  J.  H.  Ward,  viii.  I ;  Visits  to 
some  Lancashire  Collieries,  H.  W.  Hughes,  xii.  83;  The  New  Coal 

--- Page Break ---
PREPARATION  OF  COAL   FOR  MARKET.       423 
Separator  and  Washer  at  the  Zollern  Pit,  near  Dortmund,  W.  Bell, 
xiv.  170. 
AMEE.  INST.  M.  E.  :  Improvements  in  Coal  Washing,  Elevating,  and  Con- 
veying Machinery,  S.  Stutz,  xii.  497  ;  An  Experiment  in  Coal  Washing, 
T.  M.  Drown,  xiii.  341  ;  The  Iron  Breaker  at  Drifton  and  the 
Machinery  used  for  Handling  and  Preparing  Coal  at  the  Cross  Creek 
Collieries,  E.  B.  Coxe,  xix.  398. 
CHES.  INST.  :  Past  and  Present  Methods  of  Banking  Coal  at  Annesley 
Colliery,  J.  Timms,  xvi.  157. 
MAN.  GEO.  SOC. :  Screening  Arrangements  at  Brinsop  Hall  Collieries,  A.  H. 
Leech,  xviii.  373 ;  Description  of  a  Patent  Screen,  G.  C.  Greenwell, 
Jun.,  xx.  440. 
FED.  INST.  :  Screening  Plant  at  East  Hetton  Colliery,  S.  Tate,  i.  3 ;  1m- 
proved  Coal  Screening  and  Cleaning,  T.  E.  Foster  and  H.  Ayton,  i. 
83 ;  Soar1  a  Coal- Lowering  Apparatus,  C.  Soar,  i,  183. 
SOC.  IND.  MIN.  :  Lavage  des  charlons,  Max.  Evrard  (2e  Serie),  ii.  281  ;  Etude sur  la  lavage  de  la  houille  aux  mines  de  Besseges,  J.  B.  Marsaut 
(2°  Serie),  viii.  387  ;  Lavoirs  aufeldspath:  Atelier  de  lavage  du  Mar- 
tinet, M.  Landrivon  (2e  Serie),  xii.  393  ;  Etude  sur  V agglomeration  des combustibks  et  particulierement  sur  tesproctdts  employes  par  Bietrix  et 
die,  L.  Batault  (2°  Serie),  xii.  461  ;  Machines  d  agglomtrer  Roux,  M. 
Veillon  (2°  Serie),  xiii.  575  ;  Preparation  vnecanique  des  charbons  aux 
mines  de  Decize,  M.  Busquet  (2°  Serie),  xiv.  363 ;  Preparation 
me"canique  des  houilles  dans  le  Nord  de  la  France,  L.  Parent  (2°  Serie), 
xv.  33  ;  Note  sur  un  lavoir  A  charbon,  dit  "  Lavoir  Apakttes"  Max. Evrard  (3°  Serie),  iii.  317. 
Coal-Handling  Machinery  at  theBondont  Yard  of  the  Delaware  and  Hudson 
Canal  Company,  Scientific  American,  June  1890,  p.  360. 
Mallisard-Taza  Tipping  Cage  used  in  French  Cottieries,  Engineering  and Mining  Journal,  1.  129. 
Press-Kohlenindustrie,  E.  Preissig,  Freiberg,  1887. 
Kohlenaufbereitung,  E.  Lamprecht,  Leipzig,  1888. 
Notes  on  Compressing  Brown  Coal  into  Briquettes,  <&c.t  B.  Staubel,  Colliery 
Guardian,  August  1892,  Ixiv.  280. 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 
ABEL,  Sir  F.  A.,  on  coal  dust,  316,  321 
Abram  Colliery,  Lancashire,  377,  402 
Accidents  from  blasting,  90 
in  boring,  31 
Acid  water,  effect  of,  305 
Adams  and  Forster-Brown  on  cost  of sinking,  125 
Adelaide  rock  drill,  62 
After-damp,  315 
Age  of  coal,  7 
Air  compressors,  49 conduits,  55 
crossings,  343 
current,  distribution  of,  341 
measurement  of,  345 
production  of,  327 
friction  of,  313,  324 
quantity  required,  313 
vessels,  302 
Aix-la-Chapelle,  121 
Aldwarke   Main  Colliery,  Yorkshire, 
401 Alternating  currents,  56 
American  system  of  boring,  26,  35 
Ammonite,  79 
Ampere,  57 
Anemometers,  345 
Angling  of  winding  ropes,  251 
Aniche  Colliery,  France,  408 
Anthracite,  12 
mining,  168 
preparation  of,  412 Anticlinal,  3 
Anzin  Colliery,  France,  246,  260,  279 
Aqueous  rocks,  i 
Archer  &  Robson's  watering-cart,  323 Ardeer  powder,  79 
Arley  Mine,  Brinsop  Hall  Colliery,  405 
Arnold  boiler,  376 
Ash  in  coal,  14 
conveyors,  for  boilers,  379 
Ashworth's  lamps,  365,  372 Mueseler  lamp,  359 
wick  tube,  365 
Atkinson,  J.  J.,  on  air  friction,  324 on  fans  and  furnaces,  340 
and  W.  Coulson  on  tubbing,  116 
and  Daglish  on  anemometers,  346 on  water-gauges,  348 
Atkinson,  L.    B.    &  C.   W.,  on  coal cutting,  72 
Atkinson's  conductors,  59 electro  motors,  58 
Atkinson,  Messrs.,  on  coal  dust,  318 
Aubin  Colliery,  France,  82 
Austrian  Fire-damp  Commission,  320 Axles  and  wheels,  184 
BAGNALL'S  sleeper,  180 
Bailey  &  Co.'s  pumps,  301 Bainbridge,  E.,  on  cage  bearers,  145 
on  lubrication,  186 
Baird's  coal-cutting  machine,  69 Balance  bobs,  291 
Balance  platforms  for  cages,  278,  279 Barometer,  347 
Barraclough's  pulley  205 Barriers,  154 
Barrow,  J.,  on  boring,  30,  33 
Bascoup  Colliery,  Belgium,  148,  272, 
278,  388,  390,  394,  404,  409 
Basiaux  and  Leonard  on  coal  clean- 
ing, 420 Baskets,  39 
Batteries  for  blasting,  83 
Baure  on  boring,  30 
on  steam  condensation,  196 
Bedson,  Dr.  P.  P.,  on  gases  in  coal dust,  319 
Beihilfe  Mine,  near  Freiberg,  63 
Bell    End  Pit,    South   Staffordshire, 
183,  209,  210,  242,  277,  282 Belling  out  shafts,  145 
Belts  for  cleaning  coal,  400 Benzoline  for  lamps,  365 
Bestwood  Colliery,  Nottinghamshire, 
264,  268 Bessemer  steel  ropes,  237 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 
425 
Bever  &  Dorling's  clutch,  213 Bewick,  J.  T.,  on  boring,  34 
Bezenet  Colliery,  France,  196 
Bibliography,  8,  37,  90,  127,  148,  173, 
227,  284,  312,  349,  374,422 
Bickershaw  Colliery,  Lancashire,  253, 261 
Bickford's  fuse,  80,  85 fuse  igniter,  81 
volley  fuse,  85 
Bietrix  &  Co.'s  briquette  machinery, 
421 Biram's  anemometer,  345 Bird,  W.  J.,  on  coating  steam-pipes, 
380 Bits,  boring,  19 
rock  drill,  66 
Bituminous  coal,  10 
Black  damp,  314 
Blackwell  Colliery,  Derbyshire,  190 
Blanchet  pneumatic  system  of  wind- 
ing, 262 
Blasting,  80 
by  electricity,  82 
fuse,  80,  85 
gelatine,  77 
in  dry  and  dusty  mines,  77 
position  of  holes  for,  85 
prohibited,  89 
substitutes  for,  87 
Blocks  or  stops,  193,  205 
Blowers,  14,  315 
Blown-out  shots,  86 Boilers,  195,  375 
Boilers,  underground,  195 
Bonneted  Mueseler  lamp,  359 
Bonus  for  work,  38 
Bord  and  pillar,  152 
Borehole  at  Sperenberg,  34 Middlesbrough,  34,  35 
Boreholes,  casing,  33 surveying,  35 
triangular,  43  <• uses  of,  36 
Boring,  methods  of,  18 
accidents  in,  31 
cost  of,  34,  67 
cross  cuts,  75 
frame  for  sinking,  99 
holes  wet,  66 
record  of,  34 
sinking  by,  118 
Borings  in  coal,  gas  from,  16 
Bornet's  drill,  46 
Bornhardt's  exploder,  83 Bosseyeuse,  89 
Bowks,  101 
Brain,  on  electric  pumping,  309 
Brakes  for  branches,  214 
haulage,  194,  214 
Koepe  winding,  264 tubs,  385 
winding,  252,  264 
Brancepeth  Colliery,  Durham,  318 
Branches,  haulage  on,  201,  204,  212, 216 
Brandt's  drill,  63 Brattices,  132 
Breakage  of  chains,  minimising,  205 
Breaking  down  appliances,  87 
Breaking  ground,  38 
Briart,  A.,  on  rail-guides,  244 
Briart's  pulleys,  203 screens,  392,  398 
Bricks,  104 
Bridle  chains,  240,  241 
Brinsop    Hall    Colliery,    Lancashire, 
39i,  405 Briquettes,  420 
Broomhill  Colliery,  Northumberland, 
196 
Brough,  B.  H.,  on  surveying,  35 
Brown  coal,  10 
Brown,  M.  W.,  on  explosives,  79 on  fans,  332 
Bucket  pumps,  286 
Buddie,  introducer  of  panel  working, 
154 
Bull  engine,  296 Bulling  iron,  44 
Bulman,  H.  F.,  on  cost  of  horse haulage,  191 
on  method  of  working,  155 
Burns'  brake,  252 
Burnet's  roller  wedge,  88 
CAGE,  attaching  rope  to,  239 
Cage  chains,  240,  241 
Cages,  234,  274 
safety,  268 
Gallon  on  subsidence,  150 
Calorific  power,  12 
Camphausen  Colliery,  Prussia,  271 Candles,  352 
Canklow  sinking,  Yorkshire,  295 Cannel,  n 
separating  from  coal,  402 
Capell-Davis'  anemometer,  346 Capell  fans,  333,  339 
Cappings,  rope,  239 Carbonic  acid,  314 oxide,  314 
Carboniferous  system,  7 Carbonite,  79 
Carburetted  hydrogen,  314 
Carll,  J.  F.,  on  boring,  26 
Casartelli's  anemometer,  345 

--- Page Break ---
426 
INDEX. 
Casing  boreholes,  33 
Casting  lead  rivets,  367 
Catches  at  pit  top,  270,  273 
Celynen  Colliery,  S.  Wales,  336 
Chance,  H.  M.,  on  boring,  35 
on  working  Mammoth  bed,  168 
Changing  tubs,  272 
Chaudron  method  of  sinking,  118 
Chocks  or  cogs,  135 
Choke  damp,  314 
Circulation  of  tubs,  145,  272,  276,  282, 
Clacks,  2,  292 
Clanny  lamp,  352,  353 
Clark,  K.  W.,  on  coal  cutting,  74 
Clay  Cross  Colliery,  Derbyshire,  190 
Claying  iron,  44 
Cleaning  anthracite,  412 coal,  395 
safety  lamps,  369 
Clear  Spring  Colliery,  37 
Clearing  borehole,  21 
Cleat,  6,  152,  158 
Cleavage,  6 
Clifton  Colliery,  Nottingham,  274,  276, 
385,  389 
Clips  for  haulage,  217 
detaching,  220 
Clowes,  Prof.,  on  testing  for  gas,  373 
Clutches,  200,  212 
Coal,  classification  of,  10 cleaning,  395 
commercial  value  of,  12 
composition  of,  10,  n,  13 
definition  of,  9 
dust,  316 
dust,  action  of  moisture  on,  322 
conveyors  for  boilers,  379 
cutting  machines,  67 
compressed  air,  68 electric,  71 
Gillot  and  Copley,  68 
Kigg  and  Meiklejohn,  68 Baird,  69 
Harrison,  69 
Ingersoll-Sergeant,  70 Legg,  70 
Goolden,  72 
Jeffrey,  72 
Van-Depoele,  72 Stanley,  74 
formation  of,  9 
lowering  apparatus,  403 
Mines  [Regulation  Act,  234,  355 
preparing  for  market,  382 sizing,  414 
washing,  414 
Coating  steam-pipes,  380 
Cochrane,  W.,  on  ventilators,  330 
Cocker  sprags,  134 
Cockson,  C.,  on  fans  and  furnaces, 
34i 
Cockson  fan,  333 
Coffering,  in 
Cogs  or  chocks,  135 
Collieries  referred  to  : 
Abram,  Lancashire,  377,  402 
Aix-la-Chapelle,  121 
Aid  war  ke  Main,  Yorkshire,  401 
Aniche,  France,  408 
Anzin,  France,  246,  260,  279 
Aubin,  France,  82 
Bascoup,  148,  272,  278,  388,  390, 
394,  404,  409 Bell  End,  183,  209,  210,  242,  277, 
282 
Bestwood,  Nottinghamshire,  264, 
265 
Bezenet,  France,  196 
Bickershaw,  Lancashire,  253,  261 Blackwell,  190 
Brancepeth,  Durham,  318 Brinsop  Hall,  391,  405 
Broomhill,  Northumberland,  196 
Camphausen,  271 
Canklow  sinking,  Yorkshire,  295 
Celynen,  South  Wales,  336 
Clay  Cross,  190 Clear  Spring,  37 
Clifton,  274,  276,  385,  389 
Cowpen,  386 
Dairy  pit,  Wigan,  341 
DenabyMain,  Yorkshire,  276,  294, 
301 
Dowlais,  323,  419 
Earnock,  Lanarkshire,  420 East  Franklin,  37 
East  Howie,  Durham,  376 
Elemore,  Durham,  196,  200 
Emilia,  Germany.  122 
Epinac,  France,  262 
Eppleton,  154,  IQO,  328 
Hanover,  Westphalia,  264 
Harris  Navigation,  16,  100,  104, 126,  248,  276,  324 Harton,  387 
Has  well,  316 
Hetton,  Durham,  307,  342 
Hewlett,  408 
Hilda,  South  Shields,  233,  273, 406 
Hohenzollern,  Prussia,  227 
Homer  Hill,  280 Horloz,  Liege,  243 
Hottinguer  shaft,  Epinac,  262 Lens,  54,  139,  390 Lincoln,  37 
Llanbradach,  107,  261 
Llwynypia,  323 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 427 
Collieries  referred  to  (continued) — 
Lye  Cross,  182,  190,  208,  214,  241, 281,  344 
Mariemont,   Belgium,    241,    242, 
244,  380,  409 
Marihaye.  89 
Merthyi-  Vale,  16 Neunkirchen,  Prussia,  316,  320 
Newbattle,  Edinburghshire,  216 
Nunnery,  145,  186,  220 
Pemberton,  280,  405 
Plymouth,  59 
Pochin,  South  Wales,  323 
Podmore  Hall,  89 
Kamrod  Hall,  Staffordshire,  125 
Khein-Preussen,  Germany,  420 Roche  la  Moliere,  108 
St.    Adolphe,   Haine   St.    Pierre, 
Belgium,  123 
Sandwell  Park,  126,  232,  233 
Seaham,  115 
Shamrock,  Westphalia,  63 
Shenandoah  City,  36 
Shipley,  88 
Shireoaks,  118 
Skelton  Park,  222 
Sneyd,  N.  Staffordshire,  265 
Trafalgar,  Gloucestershire,  309 
Tyldesley,  Lancashire,  253,  259 
"Wharncliffe  Silkstone,  36,  227 Ynishir,  323 
Zauckerode,  Saxony,  226 
Colliery  Owners'  Association  on  subsi- dence, 150 
Colquhoun's  sleeper,  179 Combs  for  screens,  397 
Composition  of  coal,  10,  n,  13 
Compressed  air,  48,  197 motors,  55 
transmission,  197 
Compound  engines,  261 
Commercial  value  of  coal,  12 
Condensers,  steam,  260 
Condensation  of  steam  in  steam  pumps, 
3°3 
Conductors  between  cages,  246 electric,  58,  59 
Conduits,  air,  55 
Conformable  strata,  5 
Conical  drums,  251,  256 
Continuous  electric  currents,  56 
Contracts,  38 
Conveyors,  coal  and  ash,  for  boilers, 
379 
Cooling  compressed  air,  49 
Coppee  washers,  416 
Cores,  extracting,  24,  28,  30 
Cornish  pumping  engine,  295, 299,  300 
valve,  292 
Corrosion  of  tubbing,  117,  329 
Cost  of  blasting  v.  hand  getting,  89 boring,  34,  36,  75 coal  cutting,  73,  74 
drilling,  48,  63,  67 electric  light,  371 
electric  pumping,  309 
feeding  horses,  189 haulage,  224 
horses,  189 
horse  haulage,  191 
lubrication  of  tubs,  187 
metal  supports,  138 
pulleys,  207 rail  guides,  243 ropes,  237 
sinking,  122,  125 
timbering,  138,  140 
tubbing,  117 
ventilation,  341 
washing  coal,  419,  420 
Covering  pit  top,  102 
Coulson,  W. ,  and  J.   J.  Atkinson  on tubbing,  116 
Counterbalancing    in    winding,   251, 
254,  256,  257,  263 
pump  rods,  291 Cowpen    Colliery,    Northumberland, 
386 
Coxe,  E.  B.,  on  anthracite  cleaning, 
412 
Coxe's  gyratory  screens,  394 Cradock  on  strains  during  winding, 
241 
Cradock's  ropes,  238 
Craig,  W.  Y.,  on  blasting,  89 Creeper  chain,  383 
Cribs,  see  Curbs Cross  cuts,  131 boring,  75 
Crossings,  air,  343 
Crow's  foot,  31 
Crucible  steel  ropes,  237 
Curbs,  garland,  106 iron,  113 
putting  in,  for  tubbing,  113 
setting  out,  101 
supporting  in  loose  ground,  109 
wood,  93,  106 
DAGLISH,  J.,  on  boring,  27 
Daglish   and  Atkinson   on  anemo- meters, 346 
water  gauges,  348 
Dairy  Pit,  Wigan,  341 
Dams,  311 
'•  Dancing  "  of  valves,  54 
Davey,  H.,  on  pumping-engine  gear, 
297 

--- Page Break ---
428 
INDEX. 
Davey  differential  engine,  296 
Davis  and  Stokes'  commutators,  58 
Davis'  self-timing  anemometer,  345 Davy,  Sir  H.,  on  lamps,  354 
Davy  lamp,  352,  363 
Deep  workings,  draining,  305 
Deflector  lamp,  361 
Delicate  indicators,  371 
Demanet,  C.,  on  rail  guides,  243 
Denaby  Main,  Yorkshire,  276,  294,  301 
Detachers,  automatic,  for  clips,  220 
Detonators,  80 
Diamond  boring,  27 
Diamond  boring  reamer,  33 
Diamond  Boring  Co.,  33,  34 
Differential  engine,  296 
pulley,  209 Dip,  3 
Direct-acting  steam  pumps,  298 
Disposable  hydrogen,  14 
Doors,  342 
Double-beat  valve,  292 
Double-stall  method  of  work,  161 
Douglas,  M.  H.,  on  laying  out  kips, 
146 Dowlais  Colliery,  South  Wales,   323, 
419 
Draining  deep  workings,  305 
shaft  during  sinking,    no,    300, 
310 
Drawbars,  185 
Dressers,  41 
Drills,  hand,  42 
machine,  60 
supports  for,  99 
Driving  fans,  336 
pulleys,  203 
roads,  48,  129,  136 
Drums  and  pulleys,  193,  203,  205,  207. 209 
Drums,  throwing  in  and  out  of  gear, 
200 
winding,  250 
winding,  diameter  of,  238 
for  lining  shafts,  97 
Dry  coal  cleaning,  420 
Dudley,  P.  H.,  on  rails,  177 
Dumont  on  subsidence,  150 
Dynamite,  76 
EARNOCK  Colliery,  Lanarkshire,  420 
East  Franklin  Colliery,  Pennsylvania, 
37 East  Howie  Colliery,  Durham,  376 
Edmeston's  clutch,  213 Efficiency  of  electric  transmission,  59 fans,  337 
Eilers,   K.,   on  electric  locomotives, 
227 
Electric  batteries,  370 
blasting,  80,  82 
coal-cutting  machinery,  71 conductors,  58,  59 drills,  65 
haulage,  226 horse-power,  57 
lighting,  370 
locomotives,  226 
percussive  drills,  65 
pumping,  309 
signals,  283 transmission,  56,  198,  309 Electricity,  56 
Electro  motive  force,  57 
Electro  motors,  58,  71 
Elemore  Colliery,  Durham,  196,  200 
Elliott's  multiple  wedge,  87 drill,  46 
Elsom,  H.,  re-lighting  lamps,  369 
Emilia  Colliery,  Germany,  122 
Endless  chain'haulage,  198,  202,  383 rope  haulage,  198,  205,  214 
Engine-house,  250 Engines  for  fans,  336 
for  haulage,  198 
for  winding,  248 
English  Fan  Commission,  349 
Epinac  Colliery,  France,  262 
Eppleton  Colliery,  Durham,  154,  190, 
328 
Equivalent  orifice,  338 
Evans  &  Son's  pumps,  299,  300 valves,  292 
Expansion  joints,  196 
Expansion  of  steam,  257 Explosives,  75 
firing  of,  80 
Eyre's  steel  wheels,  184 
FAIRLEY,  W.,  on  air  friction,  324 
Fan  brake  for  haulage,  194 Capell,  333,  339 Cockson,  333 
compared  with  furnaces,  340 efficiency  of,  337 
engines,  336 forms  of,  330,  335 Guibal,  330,  339 
Schiele,  333,  389 Waddle,  331,  339 Walker,  334,  339 
Faraday  lines  of  force,  56 
Faraday  and  Lyell  on  explosion,  316 Faults,  4 
proving,  36 
Favier's  explosive,  79 
Fayol  on  subsidence,  150 Feed-water,  heating,  376 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 429 
Feeding  horses,  187 
Felspar  washer,  416 
Fencing  pit  tops,  279 
Ferguson,  D.,  on  pulleys,  206 
Finger  chain,  383 
Fire-damp,  314 indicators.  371.  (See  also  Safety lamps.) 
stink.  170 
Fires  in  mines,  37,  170 
Firing  explosives,  80 
Firth's  props,  137 Fish  plating,  178,  243 
Fisher's  caging  apparatus,  274 clip,  218 
clutch,  212 
tippler,  389 
Flat  ropes,  256 
sheets,  383 
Forster- Brown  and  Adams  on  cost  of 
sinking,  125 
Fossils,  3,  7 
Fowler's  cage  loading  apparatus,  275 Frankfort,  electric  transmission  at,  60 
Frantz's  catches,  271 Free-falling  cutters,  23 
Friction  of  air,  324 
Frictional  electric  machines  for  blast- 
ing, 83 
Furnace  ventilation,  327 
Furnaces  compared  with  fans,  340 
Fuses,  80 
GALLOWAY  boiler,  376 
Galloway,  W.,  on  coal  dust,  316,  318 
compound  engines,  261 
draining  shafts,  no 
guides  for  sinking,  103 
shaft  top  doors,  102 
sinking  at  Llanbradach,  107 
Garland  curbs,  106 
Gas  indicators,  371 
pressure  of,  in  borings,  16 
releasing,  36 
Gases  occluded  in  coal,  15 
in  mines,  314 
Gauge  of  rails,  177 
Gauges,  water,  348 
Gelatine  dynamite,  77 
Gelignite,  77 
Geology,  i 
Germans,  80 
Gillott  &  Copley's  coal-cutting  ma- chine, 68 
Glasses  for  lamps,  365,  372 
Goolden's  coal-cutting  machine,  72 Gournay,  de,  on  Koepe  winding,  264 
Gradient  of  roads,  keeping,  130 
Gradins  renvrrste,  163 
Grange  expansion  gear,  259 Gray  lamp,  356 
Greasing  ropes,  237 
Grenwell,  G.  C.,  on  tubbing,  117 on  working,  155 
Greenwell's  screen,  396 
Grimmitt's    overwinding    apparatus, 
269 
Grisoutite,  79 
Guibal  fan,  330,  339 
Guide  troughs,  247 shoes,  246 
cage,  234,  243 
boring,  20 
for  sinking,  102 for  winding,  234,  243 
pulley  for  winding,  257 
Guiding  pump  rods,  291 
Guinotte  &  Briart's  screen,  398 Gunpowder,  75 
Gurney,  Sir  G.,  on  ventilation,  329 
HADE  of  faults,  4,  36 
Hall,  H.,  on  coal  dust,  321 Hammers,  41 
Hand-machine  drills,  45 Hand-tools,  39 
Hanover  Colliery,  Westphalia,  264 
Hardy  Pick  Co.'s  appliances,  40,  45, 
186 
Harris    Navigation    Colliery,    South 
Wales,   16,  100,  104,  126,  248, 276,  324 
Harrison's  coal-cutting  machine,  69 Harton  Colliery,  Durham,  387 
Haswell  Colliery,  Durham,  316 
Haswell  coal-getter,  88 Haulage,  175 
brakes,  194,  214 
clips,  217 
clip  detachers,  220 clutches,  212 
comparison  of  systems,  224 
direct-acting,  198 
drums  and  pulleys,  193,  200,  203, 
205 
electric  locomotives,  226 
endless  chain,  202 
endless  rope,  205,  214,  224 
engines  for,  198 horse,  187 
locomotives,  226 
main  and  tail  rope,  200,  225 
on  branches,  201,  204,  212 
permanent  way,  175 
primitive  methods,  175 
self-acting  inclines,  192 
tail  rope,  200 
transmission  of  power,  195 

--- Page Break ---
430 
INDEX. 
Haydock,  W.,  on  picking  coal,  402 
Hay  ward,  Tyler    &  Co.'s  condenser, 303 
Headways,  152 
Health  of  miners,  effect  of  explosives on,  78 
Helves,  39 
Hetton  Colliery,  Durham,  307,  342 
Hepplewhite-Gray  lamp,  356 Hewlett  Colliery,  Lancashire,  408 
Hilda  Colliery,  South  Shields,  233, 
273,  406 Hilt  on  coal  dust,  317 
Hipkin's  sleeper,  180 Hohenzollern  Colliery,  Prussia,  227 
Hoists,  275.  277,  384 
Holing  in  roads,  131 
Holman's  condenser,  303 
Homer  Hill  Colliery,  South  Stafford- shire, 280 
Hood,  A.,  on  watering  dusty  mines, 
323 
Hoppits,  101 
Horloz  Colliery,  Liege,  243 
Horse  haulage,  187 
Horse  power  for  fans,  337 
Horses  feeding,  187 
for  haulage,  198 
for  pumps,  304 
life  of,  181,  191 
Hottinguer  Shaft,  Epinac,  262 
Howat's  lamp-cleaning  machine,  369 rivet  machine,  367 
Howell  drill,  46 
Hudson's  turntable,  181 Hunting,  C.,  on  horses,  188 
Hussmann,  coal-boring  machine,  75 
Hydraulic  mortar,  105 
power  for  pumping,  307 
rock-drill,  63 
transmission  of  power,  63,  307 
wedges,  88 
IGNEOUS  rocks,  i 
Inclines,  self-acting,  192 
Indicators,  fire-damp,  371 Induration  of  rock,  2 
Ingersoll's  rock  drill,  61 
Ingersoll-Sergeant's  coal-cutting  ma- chine, 70 valve,  54 
Injectors,  377 
Inset,  arrangement  of,  145 
Intrusive  rocks,  2 
Iron  and  steel  supports,  137 Iron  tubbing,  112 
JARS,  27 
Jeffrey  coal-cutting  machine,  72 
Jenkins,  154 
Jig-brows,  192 
Joints,  expansion,  196 for  timber  sets,  135 
for  pipes,  196,  288 for  spear  rods,  290 in  rock,  5 
Jones,  J.,  on  cost  of  tubbing,  118 Jumpers,  42 
Junctions,  180,  195,  216 
KEPS,  270 
Kieselguhr,  76 
Kibbles,  101 
Kind-Chaudron   method  of    sinking 118 
Kind's  free-falling  cutter,  23 Plu£»  33 
King's  hook,  267 Kips,  146 
Koepe  system  of  winding,  263 
LABOUR,  arrangement  of,  151 Lamination,  2 Lamps,  352 
Lancashire  boiler,  376 
method  of  working,  156 
Lang's  wire  ropes,  238 
Lay  of  ropes,  238 
Laying  dust  in  mines,  322 rails.  177 
Lead  rivets,  366 
Le  Chatelier    and  Mallard  on  coal dust,  317,  319 
Lee,  J.  F.,  automatic  detacher,  221 
Legg's  coal-cutting  machine,  70 Lens  Colliery,  France,  54,  139.  390 
Leonard  and  Basiaux  on  coal  clean- ing, 420 Levels,  129 Lids,  133 
Lifts.  275,  277,  384 
Lighting,  109,  352 
Lignite,  10 Lime  cartridges,  88 
Lincoln  Colliery,  Pennsylvania,  37 Lining  boreholes,  32 shafts,  93 
Lippmann's  method  of  sinking,  120 Liveing's  indicator,  372 
Llanbradach   Colliery,  South  Wales, 
107,  261 Llwynypia  Colliery,  South  Wales,  323 Loading  shoots,  403 
Locked  coil  ropes,  238 
Locking  safety  lamps,  366 
Locomotives,  226 
Longden,  J.  A.,  on  shoeing.  189 shaft  pillars,  149,  151 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 
Longwall  method,  156 
Losses  in  air  circulation,  344 
Lubrication,  186 
Liihrig  washers,  416 
Lye  Cross  Pit,  South  Staffordshire, 
182,    190,   208,   214,   241,   281, 
344 
Lyell  and  Faraday  on  explosions,  316 
MACGEORGE,  E.  F.,  35 
Machine  drills,  hand,  45 
power,  60 
Macquet,  A.,  on  grisoutite,  79 
Magnetic  locks,  366 
Magneto  machines  for  blasting,  84 
Mahlet  on  Koepe  winding,  264 
Main  and  tail  rope  haulage,  198,  200, 225 
Mallard   and  Le    Chatelier  on  coal 
dust,  317,  319 
Mammoth  bed,  Pennsylvania,  168 
Mariemont  Collier}?,  Belgium,  241,  242, 
244,  380,  409 
Marihaye  Colliery,  Belgium,  89 
Market,  preparing  coal  for,  382 
Marsaut  lamp,  361 
Marsaut,  J.  B.,  on  lamps,  355 
Martin,   W.  HM   on  watering  dusty mines,  323 
Marvin  electric  rock  drill,  65 
Masonry,  104,  140 
Mather  and  Platt's  system  of  boring, 24,  34 
Mechanical  stoking,  377 
ventilation,  330 
Meinicke's  system  of  counterbalanc- ing, 257 
Melly,   E.    F.,  on  the  Warwickshire 
coalfield,  170 
Merthyr  Vale  Colliery,  South  Wales, 
*i6 
Metamorphic  rocks,  i 
Middlesbrough,  boring  at,  27,  34 
Mine  fires,  37,  171 
Moore,  J.,  on  pumping,  308 
Moore's  hydraulic  pumping  plant,  308 Morgan  lamp,  360,  366 
Mortar,  105 
Moss  box,  118 
Motors,  air,  55 
electric,  58 
Mueseler  lamp,  354,  359 
Multitubular  boilers,  376 
Munscheid  coal-boring  machine,  75 
Murgue,  D.,  on  ventilation,  338,  347 
Musgrave  expansion  gear,  258 
NAKED  lights,  352 
Natural  ventilation,  327 
Needles,  45 
Neunkirchen,  Prussia.  316,  320 
Newbattle   Colliery,  Edinburghshire, 216 
Nitro-glycerine,  76 
Nunnery  Colliery,  Sheffield,  145,  186, 220 
"Normal,"  theory  of,  150 Nuts  washer,  416 
(EYNHAUSEN'S  free-falling  cutter,  24 
Ohm,  57 
Oil  for  lamps,  364 
Oil  vessels  of  safety  lamps,  365 Oiling  ropes,  237 
tub  axles.  186 Orifice  of  passage,  338 
Ormerod's  hook,  267 Outbursts  of  gas,  315 Outcrop,  3 
Over-rope  haulage,  214 
Overwinding,  preventing,  266 
PALMER,  H.,  on  loss  in  ventilation,  344 Panels,  154 
Pasfield's  brake,  253 Pedestals  for  tub  axles,  185 
Pemberton  Colliery,  Lancashire,  280, 405 
Pennsylvania  anthracite  cleaning,  412 
method  of  working,  168 
Percussive  drills,  42,  60,  65 Picks,  39 
Picking  belts,  400 tables,  402 
Pieler  lamp,  371 Pile  driving,  95 
Pillar  and  stall,  152 
Pipes,  arrangement  of  pump,  301 
supporting  in  shafts,  289,  294 Pit  frames,  229 
Pit-top  covering,  102 Plating  for  screens,  397 
Plates  and  turntables,  181 
Platt,  F.,  on  working  Mammoth  bed, 
168 
Plough  steel  ropes,  237 
Plunger  pumps,  287 
Plymouth  Colliery,  South  Wales,  59 
Pneumatic  hoisting,  262 
Pochin  Colliery,  South  Wales,  323 
Podmore  Hall  Colliery.North  Stafford- shire, 89 
Poetsch's  method  of  sinking,  121 Post  and  stall,  152 
Pottsville,  sinking  shaft  at,  100 
Power  machine  drills,  60 
Power,  transmission  of,  36,  48,  56.  63, 195.  307 

--- Page Break ---
432 
INDEX. 
Preparation  of  coal  for  market,  382 Pricker,  45 
Primary  batteries,  371 
Props,  timber,  133 
or  keps,  270 
Prospecting,  18 
Protector  lamp,  368 
Proving  faults,  36 
Prussian  Fire-damp  Commission,  316 
Pulleys  and  drums,  193,  203,  205,  207, 209 
Pulleys,  tension,  211 winding,  233 
diameter  of,  238 
Pulsometer,  295,  310 
Pumping,  286 
Pumps,  Bailey  &  Co.,  301 Bull,  296 
connecting  to  rods,  291 Cornish,  295 
direct-acting,  298 
Evans  &  Sons,  299,  300 
sinking,  293,  300 
Tangyes,  303 
Worthington,  300 
QUADKANTS,  293 
Quartering,  96 
Quicksand,  sinking  through,  94,  121 
Quincy  Quarries,  U.S.A.,  66 
RACKAKOCK,  77 
Kails,  arrangement  of,  192 
as  guides,  243 
at  junctions,  216 form  of,  175 
gauge  of,  177 laying,  177 
length  of,  177 
sections  for,  176 
specifications  for,  177 
Eammelsberg  Mine,  drills  at,  67 
Hamming,  44 
Kamrod  Hall  Pit,  South  Staffordshire, 
125 
Rand  Drill  Co.,  65 Reamer,  33 
Redmayne,  K.A.S.,  on  boring,  35 on  working,  155 
Regulating  doors,  343 
Relighting  safety  lamps,  368 
Repairs,  381 Reservoirs,  air,  55 
Reversed  faults,  4 
Revolving  screens,  395 
tables,  402 
Rhein-Preussen   Colliery,    Germany, 
420 
Richter  on  spontaneous  combustion, 
170 
Riding  column,  296 
Rigg  and  Meiklejohn's  coal-cutting machine,  68 
Ripping,  158 
Rising  main,  288 Bivelaine,  40 
Roads,  129 
Robinson's  washer,  414 Roburite,  78 
Roche  la  Moliere,  France,  108 
Rock  drills,  Adelaide,  62 Brandt,  63 
electric,  65 
Ingersoll,  6 1 Marvin,  65 
supports  for,  64,  99 tripod,  65 
Rods,  boring,  19,  22 
Rollers  for  haulage,  194 
Roof,  ripping,  158 
supporting,  132 
Rope,  236 attaching  to  cage,  239 boring,  24 
cappings,  239 
greasing  apparatus,  238 over  and  under  tubs,  214 threading,  224 
winding,  counterbalancing,  256 
Rope- ways,  boreholes  as,  36 
Rosenberg,  L.,  on  blasting,  86 on  tunnels,  67 
Rotary  drills,  42 
Royal  Commission  on  Accidents  in Mines,  318,  319,  355,  356 
on  coal-dust,  321 
Rutherford  and  Thompson's  clip,  219, 222 
Ryder's  lock,  366 
SAFETY  cages,  268 cartridges,  77 
hooks,  267 valves,  376 
Safety  lamps,  352 
Ashworth's,  365,  372 
Ashworth's  Mueseler,  359 bonneted  Mueseler,  359 Clanny,  352,  353 
cleaning,  369 
Davy,  352,  363 
deflector,  361 design  of,  354 
gauze,  353 
glasses,  365,  372 Gray,  356 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 
433 
Safety  lamps  (continued)  — 
Hepplewhite-Gray,  356 locking,  366 
Marsaut,  361 
modern  forms,  356 
Morgan,  360,  366 Mueseler,  354,  359 oil,  364 
oil  vessels,  365 
protector,  368 
relighting,  368 
Sight,  364 
Stephenson,  353 testing,  355 
Thorneburry,  363 
Tin-can  Davy,  368 wick,  365 
wick  tubes,  365 
Wolff,  368 
St.    Adolphe  Pit,   Haine   St.    Pierre, 
Belgium,  123 
Salt  used  in  dusty  mines,  322 
Sandwell  Park  Colliery,  South  Staf- 
fordshire, 126,  232,  233 
Sawing  timber,  381 
Sawyer,  A.  K.,  block,  193 
on  strength  of  roof,  132 
Scaffolding  in  shaft,  107 
Schiele  fan,  333,  339 
Schanschieff's  battery,  371 Scrapers,  44 
Screens,  390 
Briart,  392,  398 
combs,  397 
Coxe's  gyratory,  394 fixed  bar,  390 
Greenwell's,  396 Guinotte,  398 
gyratory,  394 
jigging,  394 movable  bar,  391 
plating,  397 
revolving,  395 
spiral,  395 
trommels,  595 
varying  size,  397 
Seaham  Colliery,  Durham,  115 
Search  for  coal,  18 
Secondary  batteries,  370 
Segregation,  3 
Self-acting  inclines,  192 
Self-emptying  cages,  274 
Setting  timber,  methods  of,  132 
Shaft  pillars,  149 
Shafts- 
deepening,  122 form,  92 
lining,  93,  104 
position,  92 
Shafts  (continued) — sinking  by  boring,  118 
size,  93 
timbering,  93 
tubbing,  in widening,  125 
Shamrock  Colliery,  Westphalia,  63 Sharpening  tools,  40,  43,  47 
Shenandoah  City  Colliery,   Pennsyl- vania, 36 
Shipley  Colliery,  Derbyshire,  88 
Shireoaks  Colliery,  Nottinghamshire, 118 
Shoeing  horses,  189 Shoots,  loading,  403 Shovels,  39 
Shutters  for  fans,  331 
Side-laning,  165 
Side  of  work,  165 
Sight  lamp,  364 
Signalling,  283 Sinking,  92 
after  reaching  stone  head,  98 
by  boring,  118 
freezing  ground,  121 
Potts ville  shaft,  100 
pumps,  293,  300 
through  quicksand,  94,  121 to  stone  head,  93 
upwards,  125 
Site  for  boring,  choice  of,  19 Sizing  coal,  414 
Skelton  Park  Colliery,  Yorkshire,  222 
Skips  and  cages,  234 Skirtings,  154 
Slack  rope,  taking  up,  211 
Sledges  and  hammers,  41 
Sleepers,  178 Slickensides,  4 
Sludgers,  21,  26 
Smallman's  clip,  217 
Smith  &  Moore's  lime  cartridge,  88 Smithing  tools,  66 
Smokeless  powder,  76 
Sneyd  Colliery,  North  Staffordshire, 
265 
Snore  piece,  286,  295 
Soar,  C.,  coal-lowering  apparatus,  403 
Soldenhoff,  R.  de,  on  coal- washing, 41 9 Solenoids,  65,  66 
Sommeiller's  air  compressor,  49 
Sopwith,  A.,  photographs  by,  158 
Southall,  A.  B.,  on  guides,  247 
South  Staffordshire,  method  of  work- ing, 164 
South  Wales,  method  of  working,  161 Sparking,  58 
Spaulding,  H.  C.,  on  coal-cutting,  72 on  electric  locomotives,  227 
2  E 

--- Page Break ---
434 INDEX. 
Spear  rods,  289 
Sp'erenberg,  boring  at,  34. Spilling,  136 
Spiral  drums,  251,  256 
ftpitzkasten,  414 
Splits,  341 
Spontaneous  combustion,  170 
Sprags,  134 
Spray  producers,  523 
Spring  pole,  21 
Spudding.  27 
Spurns,  1 66 
Square  work,  165 
Squibs,  80 Stables,  190 
Stages  for  walling,  107 
Stall  and  pillar,  152 
Stall  roads,  156 
Stanley's  heading  maehino,  74 
Stauss" props,  271,  277,  278 Steam  coal,  11 
condensing,  260,  303 
engines,  198,  248,  336 
expansion,  257 
jet  ventilation,  329 lifts,  384 
loop,  196 
pipes,  37,  196,  380 
pumps,  298 traps,  196 
Steam-ways,  boreholes  as,  36 
Steavenson,  A.  L.,  on  fans,  338 
on  fire-damp  indicators,  372 
Steel  pit  frames,  233 
ropes,  237 
sleepers,  179 
supports,  137 
Stephenson  lamp,  353 
Stemming,  44 
Stocks  or  trees,  288 
Stokes,  A.  H.,  on  coal-dust,  321 wick  tube,  365 
Stoking,  mechanical,  377 Stone  head,  93 
Stoop  and  room.  152 
Stoppings,  342 
Stops  or  blocks,  193,  205 
Strata,  order  of,  6 
Stratification,  2 
Stretcher  bars,  64,  65 
Strike,  3 
Struts,  134 
Sturgeon's  valves,  53 Sty  the,  314 
Subsidence,  149 
Suisse  on  Koepe  winding,  264 
Sulphuretted  hydrogen,  314 
Sullivan  Prospecting  Co.'s  hydraulic feed  29 
Sulzer  expansion  gear,  260 
Supporting  pipes  in  shafts,  289,  294 rock  drills,  64 
roof,  132 Surveying,  35 
Suspended  lifts,  293 
Swages,  66 
Switches,  180 
Syphons,  306 Synclinal,  3 
TABLES,  revolving,  402 
Tallies  chassantes,  164 
montantes,  164 
Tail-rope,  for  winding,  256 
haulage,  198,  200,  225 Tamping,  44,  87 
plugs,  87 
Tangyes'  steam  pumps,  303 
Taper  ropes,  256 
Tapping  water,  36 Taza-Malissard  fan  brake,  194 
Tempering  tools,  43 
Temper  screw  for  boring,  26 
Ten-yard  seam,  S.  Staffordshire,  168 Tenders  for  boring,  34 
Tension  pulleys,  211 Testing  safety  lamps,  355 
Thick  coal  working,  1 68 Thermometer,  347 
Thomas,   J.  W.,  on  gas  in  coal,   15, 
3!9 Thompson's  calorimeter,  12 Thorneburry  lamp,  363 
Threading  the  rope  for  haulage,  224 
Throw  of  faults,  36 
Thurling,  131,  166 
Tiller,  boring,  20 
Timber,  kinds  of,  133 
preparation  of,  381 Timbering,  93,  132 
Tin-can  Davy  lamp,  363 
Tipping  kibble,  101 waggon,  103 Tipplers,  385 Tonite,  79 
Tonkin's  valve,  299,  300 Tools,  hand,  39 
for  rock  drills,  66 sharpening,  40,  43,  47 
tempering,  43 
Trafalgar    Colliery,    Gloucestershire, 
309 Transformers,  57 
Transmission  of  power,  36,  48,  56,  63, 
195,  307 
Trasenster,  L.,  on  Koepe  winding,  264 
Trees  or  stocks,  288 

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 
435 
Trench's  compound,  79 
Triger's  method  of  sinking,  121 Trip  expansion  gear,  258 
Tripod  for  drill,"^ Trommels,  395 
Trough  faults,  5 
washers,  414 
Trows,  132 
Tubbing,  in 
corrosion  of,  117,  329 
cost  of,  117 
strength  of,  116 
Tub  controllers,  28  ( 
Tubs,  182 
arrangement  of,  for  haulage,  215 
attaching  to  rope,  202,  203 
changing,  272,  274 
circulation  of,  145,  272,  276,  282, 
383.  4io keeping  on  cage,  236 
Turntables,  181 
Tyldesley  Colliery,   Lancashire,    253, 259 
UNCONFOKMARLE  strata,  5 
Undercutting,    see   coal-cutting    ma- chines. 
in  roads,  131 
Under  and  over  rope  haulage,  214 
Useful  effect  of  fans,  337 
VACUUM  Brake  Co.'s  appliances,  no Valves,  dancing  of,  54 
for  air  compressors,  52 
Ingersoll-Sergeant's,  54 
pump,  292 safety,  376 
Sturgeon's,  53 
Walker's,  52 
Van-Depoele's   coal-cutting  machine, 
72 
Ventilation,  313 
distribution  of,  341 
during  sinking,  109 
driving,  131 
fans,  330 
furnace,  327 
measurement  of,  345 
natural,  327 
regulating,  341 
steam  jet,  329 
Visor,  269 Volt,  57 
Vosberg  tunnel,  drills  at,  67 
WADDLE  fan,  331,  339 
Wadhook,  31 
Waggon,  tipping,  103 
Walker,  G.  B.,  on  cost  of  coal-cutting, 
73,  74 
on  electric  locomotives,  227 
Walker's  brake,  214 differential  pulley,  209 fan,  334,  339 
hook,  268 shutter,  331,  335 valves,  52,  54 
Walling  stages,  107 
Walls  or  bords,  152 
Ward  &  Lloyd's  clip,  219 Warwickshire    method    of    working, 
170 Washing  coal,  414 
Water  cartridges,  77 
gauges,  348 supply,  37 
keeping  back  by  tubbing,  1 1 1 
rings,  1 06 tapping,  36 
Watering  dusty  mines,  323 Watt,  57 
Wedges,  41 
for  getting  coal — Burnett's,  88 Elliot's,  87 
Haswell,  88 
hydraulic,  88 
Wharncliffe  Silkstone  Colliery,  York- shire, 36,  227 
Wheeler,  Prof.,  on  coal-cutting,  69 Wheels  and  axles,  184 Wick,  365 
Widening  bore  holes,  33 shafts,  125 
Williams'  joint  for  pipes,  289 
Wills,  W.  E.,  tub-releasing  gear,  277 
Wilson,  E.,  on  size  of  engines,  249 Wind  bore,  286,  295 
Winding,  229 
engines,  248 in  downcast  shaft,  280,  281 
in  sinking,  101 Wire  belts,  402 
ropes,  237,  238 
rope  guides,  245 Wolff  lamp,  368 
Wood  worth,  B.,  tub  controller,  282 
Working  branches  and  curves,    201, 
204,  212,  216 
coal bord  and  pillar,  152 
double  stall,  161 
homewards,  161 in  the  broken,  154 
in  the  whole,  154 
Lancashire,  156 

--- Page Break ---
436 
INDEX. 
Working  coal  (continued)— longwall,  156,  1 66 methods  of,  149 
Pennsylvania,  168 
seams  near  together,  169 
South  Staffordshire,  164 
South  Wales,  161 
square  work,  165 
steep  seams,  162,  169 
thick  seams,  164 
Working  coal  (continued)— two  main  systems,  149 
Warwickshire,  170 
Workshops,  381 
Worthington's  pumps,  300 
YNISHIE  Colliery,  South  Wales,  323 
ZAUCKERODE  Colliery,  Saxony,  226 
PRINTED  BY  BALLANTYNE,  HANSOM  AND  CO. LONDON  AND  EDINBURGH 

--- Page Break ---
CATALOGUE 
OF 
STANDARD    WORKS PUBLISHED  BY 
CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  COMPANY, LIMITED. 
PAGE 
I. — Religious  Works,   4 
II.— Works  on  Medicine  and  the  Allied  Sciences,     9 
III.— General  Scientific  and  Technical  Works,       .     23 
IV. — Educational  Works,         .        .        .        .         .     54 
V. — Works  in  General  Literature,  62 
LONDON: 
12     EXETER     STREET,     STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
OT 
CHARLES  GRIFF1  &  COMPANY'S LIST  OF  PUBLICATIONS 
RELIGIOUS    WORKS. 
ANECDOTES   (CYCLOPAEDIA    OF    RELIGIOUS   AND MORAL).     With  an  Introductory  Essay  by  the  Rev.  GEORGE  CHEEVER, 
D.D.      Thirty-sixth  Thousand.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  3/6. 
%*  These  Anecdotes  relate  to  no  trifling  subjects  ;  and  they  have  been  selected,  not for  amusement,  but  for  instruction.     By  those  engaged  in  the  tuition  of  the  young,  they 
will  be  found  highly  useful. 
THE  LARGE-TYPE  BUNYAN. 
BUNYAN'S    PILGRIM'S    PROGRESS.     With Life  and  Notes,  Experimental  and  Practical,  by  WILLIAM  MASON. 
Printed  in  large  type,  and  Illustrated  with  full-page  Woodcuts.  Twelfth 
Thousand.  Crown  8vo.  Bevelled  boards,  gilt,  and  gilt  edges,  3/6. 
CHRISTIAN  YEAR  (The):  With  Memoir  of  the Rev.  JOHN  KEBLE,  by  W.  TEMPLE,  Portrait,  and  Eight  Engravings  on 
Steel,  after  eminent  Masters.  New  Edition.  Small  8vo,  toned  paper. 
Cloth  gilt,  5/. 
***  The  above  is  the  only  issue  of  the  "  Christian  Year  "  with  Memoir  and  Portrait 
of  the  Author.     In  ordering,  Griffin's  Edition  should  be  specified. 
CRUTTWELL    (REV.   CHARLES    T.,    M.A.) A    HISTORY    OF     EARLY    CHRISTIAN    LITERATURE.      In 
large  8vo,  handsome  cloth.  [In  preparation. 
%*  This  work  is   intended  not  only  for  Theological   Students,   but   for   General 
Readers,  and  will  be  welcomed  by  all  acquainted  with  the  Author's  admirable  "  History 
of  Roman  Literature,"  a  work  which  has  now  reached  its  Fifth  Edition. 
DICK      (Thos.,      LL.D;):      CELESTIAL SCENERY  ;  or,  The  Wonders  of  the  Planetary  System  Displayed.  This 
Work  is  intended  for  general  readers,  presenting  to  their  view,  in  an 
attractive  manner,  sublime  objects  of  contemplation.  Illustrated.  New 
Edition.  Crown  8vo,  toned  paper.  Handsomely  bound,  gilt  edges,  5/. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
RELIGIOUS  WORKS.  U5 
Now  Ready.     FIFTH  AND  GREATLY  IMPROVED  EDITION.     In  LARGE  8vo. 
Cloth  Elegant,  6/.     Gilt  and  Gilt  Edges,  7/6. 
THE    STORY    OF    THE    BIBLE, 
From  GENESIS  to  RE  DELATION. 
Including  the  Historical  Connection  between  the  Old  and  New  Testaments. 
Told  in  Simple  Language. 
BY    CHARLES     FOSTER. 
TKHitb  dDaps  anfc  ox>er  250  Engravings (Many  of  them  Full-page,  after  the  Drawings  of  Professor  CARL  SCHONHERR  and  others), 
Illustrative  of  the  Bible  Narrative,  and  of  Eastern Manners  and  Customs. 
OPINIONS  OF  THE  PRESS. 
"A  book  which,  once  taken  up,  is  not  easily  laid  down.  When  the  volume  is  opened, we  are  fairly  caught.  Not  to  speak  of  the  well-executed  wood  engravings,  which  will each  tell  its  story,  we  find  a  simple  version  of  the  main  portions  of  the  Bible,  all  that  may 
most  profitably  be  included  in  a  work  intended  at  once  to  instruct  and  charm  the  young 
— a  version  couched  in  the  simplest,  purest,  most  idiomatic  English,  and  executed 
throughout  with  good  taste,  and  in  the  most  reverential  spirit.  The  -work  needs  only  to 
be  known  to  make  its  -way  into  families,  and  it  will  (at  any  rate,  it  ought  to)  become  a 
favourite  Manual  in  Sunday  Schools." — Scotsman. 
"A  HOUSEHOLD  TREASURE." — Western  Morning  News. 
"  This  attractive  and  handsome  volume  .  .  .  written  in  a  simple  and  transparent 
style.  .  .  .  Mr.  Foster's  explanations  and  comments  are  MODELS  OF  TEACHING." — Freeman. 
"This  large  and  handsome  volume,  abounding  in  Illustrations,  is  just  what  is  wanted. 
The  STORY  is  very  beautifully  and  reverently  told." — Glasgow  News. 
"  There  could  be  few  better  Presentation  Books  than  this  handsome  volume." — Daily Review. 
"  WILL  ACCOMPLISH  A  GOOD  WORK."— Sunday  School  Chronicle. 
"  In  this  beautiful  volume  no  more  of  comment  is  indulged  in  than  is  necessary  to  the elucidation  of  the  text.  Everything  approaching  Sectarian  narrowness  is  carefully 
eschewed." — Methodist  Magazine. 
"  This  simple  and  impressive  Narrative  .  .  .  succeeds  thoroughly  in  riveting  the 
attention  of  children  ;  .  .  .  admirably  adapted  for  reading  in  the  Home  Circle." — Daily  Chronicle. 
"The  HISTORICAL  SKETCH  connecting  the  Old  and  New  Testaments  is  a  very  good idea  ;  it  is  a  common  fault  to  look  on  these  as  distinct  histories,  instead  of  as  parts  of 
one  grand  whole." — Christian. 
"  Sunday  School  Teachers  and  Heads  of  Families  will  best  know  how  to  value  this 
handsome  volume." — Northern  Whig. 
%*  The  above  is  the  original  English  Edition.     In  ordering,. 
Griffin's  Edition,  by  Charles  Foster,  should  be  distinctly  specified* 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
8  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
MIND     IN     MATTER: 
.A.  S:H:O:R,T 
BY   THE 
REV.   JAMES    TAIT. 
[Third  Edition.     Demy  8vo.     Handsome  Cloth,  6/. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS.  —  Evolution  in  Nature  and  Mind  —  Mr.  Darwin  and 
Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  —  Inspiration,  Natural  and  Supernatural  —  Deductions. 
%*  Special  attention  has  in  this,  the  Third  Edition,  been  directed  to Embryology  and  later  Darwinism. 
"  An  able  and  original  contribution  to  Theistic  literature.  .  .  .  The  style  is  pointed, 
concise,  and  telling  to  a  degree."  —  Glasgow  Herald. "Mr.  TAIT  advances  many  new  and  striking  arguments  .  .  .  highly  suggestive  and 
fresh."  —  Brit.  Quarterly  Review. 
THE     MASSES: 
HOW    SHALL   WE    REACH    THEM? 
Some  Hindrances  in  the  way,  set  forth  from  the  standpoint  of  the  People,  with 
Comments  and  Suggestions. 
BY 
AN    OLD    LAY    HELPER. 
Cloth,  2s.  6d.     Second  Edition. 
%*  An  attempt  to  set  forth  some  deficiencies  in  our  present  methods  of reaching  the  poor,  in  the  language  of  the  People  themselves. 
"  So  full  of  suggestiveness  that  we  should  reprint  a  tithe  of  the  book  if  we  were  to transcribe  all  the  extracts  we  should  like  to  make." — Church  Bells. 
"  '  Hindrances  in  the  way  '  exactly  describes  the  subject-matter  of  the  Book.  Any  one 
contemplating  Missionary  work  in  a  large  town  would  be  helped  by  studying  it." — Guardian. 
"  '  The  Masses  '  is  a  book  to  be  well  pondered  over  and  acted  upon." — Church  Work. 
"A  very  useful  book,  well  worth  reading."— -Church  Times. 
"  A  most  interesting  book.  .  .  .  Contains  a  graphic  description  of  work  among  the 
masses." — English  Churchman. 
WORDS  AND   WORKS  OF  OUR   BLESSED   LORD: 
AND  THEIR  LESSONS   FOR  DAILY   LIFE. 
Two  Vols.  in  One.      Foolscap  8vo.      Cloth,  gilt  edges,  6/. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  9 
forks  in  Medicine,  Surgery,  and  the  Allied  Sciences. 
***  Special  Illustrated  Catalogue  sent  Post-free  on  application. 
  •    
"W  O  E,  K  S 
By  SIR  WILLIAM  AITKEN,  M.D.,  Edin.,  F.R.S., LATE  PROFESSOR  OF  PATHOLOGY    IN   THE    ARMY    MEDICAL    SCHOOL  ;    EXAMINER  IN  MEDICINB 
F0«   THE   MILITARY  MEDICAL  SERVICES  OF  THE  QUEEN  ;    FELLOW  OF  THE  SANITARY 
INSTITUTE  OF  GREAT   BRITAIN  ;    CORRESPONDING   MEMBER   OF    THE   ROYAL 
IMPERIAL    SOCIETY    OF    PHYSICIANS    OF    VIENNA  ;    AND    OF  THB 
SOCIETY  OF  MEDICINE  AND  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  DRESDEN. 
SEVENTH  EDITION. 
THE  SCIENCE  AND   PRACTICE   OF  MEDICINE. 
In  Two  Volumes,  Royal  8vo.,  cloth.  Illustrated  by  numerous  Engravings 
on  Wood,  and  a  Map  of  the  Geographical  Distribution  of  Diseases.  To  a 
great  extent  Rewritten  j  Enlarged,  Remodelled,  and  Carefully  Revised 
throughout,  42/. 
Opinions  of  the  Press. 
"The  work  is  an  admirable  one,  and  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  the  Student,  Pro- fessor, and  Practitioner  of  Medicine.  .  .  .  The  reader  will  find  a  large  amount  of 
information  not  to  be  met  with  in  other  books,  epitomised  for  him  in  this.  We  know  of 
no  work  that  contains  so  much,  or  such  full  and  varied  information  on  all  subjects  connected 
with  the  Science  and  Practice  of  Medicine."—  Lancet. 
"The  SEVENTH  EDITION  of  this  important  Text-Book  fully  maintains  its  reputation. .  .  .  Dr.  Aitken  is  indefatigable  in  his  efforts.  .  .  .  The  section  on  DISEASES  of 
the  BRAIN  and  NERVOUS  SYSTEM  is  completely  remodelled,  so  as  to  include  all  the  most 
recent  researches,  which  in  this  department  have  been  not  less  important  than  they  are 
numerous." — British  Medical  Journal. 
OUTLINES 
OF  THE 
SCIENCE   AND   PRACTICE   OF   MEDICINE. 
A    TEXT-BOOK    FOR    STUDENTS. 
Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo,  12/6. 
"  Students  preparing  for  examinations  will  hail  it  as  a  perfect  godsend  for  its  conciseness." — A  thenaum. 
"Well-digested,  clear,  and  well-written,  the  work  of  a  man  conversant  with  every 
detail  of  his  subject,  and  a  thorough  master  of  the  art  of  teaching." — British  Medical Journal. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 
. 

--- Page Break ---
io  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
WORKS     by     A.     WYNTER     BLYTH,     M.R.C.S.,     F.C.S., 
Barrister-at-Law,  Public  Analyst  for  the  County  of  Devon,  and  Medical  Officer 
of  Health  for  St.  Marylebone. 
I.  FOODS:   THEIR    COMPOSITION    AND ANALYSIS.     Price  i6/.     In  Crown  8vo,  cloth,  with  Elaborate  Tables 
and  Litho-Plates.      Third  Edition.     Revised  and  partly  rewritten. 
General  Contents. 
History  of  Adulteration— Legislation,  Past  and  Present — Apparatus  useful  to  the 
Food  Analyst — "Ash" — Sugar — Confectionery—  Honey — Treacle— Jams  and  Preserved Fruits  —Starches— -Wheaten-Flour—  Bread — Oats  —  Barley — Rye — Rice — Maize — Millet 
— Potato — Peas — Chinese  Peas — Lentils — Beans — MILK — Cream— Butter— Cheese — Tea 
—Coffee  —  Cocoa  and  Chocolate  —  Alcohol  —  Brandy— Rum— Whisky— Gin— Arrack- 
Liqueurs — Beer — Wine — Vinegar — Lemon  and  Lime  Juice — Mustard — Pepper — Sweet 
and  Bitter  Almond— Annatto— Olive  Oil— Water.  Appendix:  Text  of  English  and American  Adulteration  Acts. 
"  Will  be  used  by  every  Analyst."—  Lancet. 
"  STANDS  UNRIVALLED  for  completeness  of  information.  .  .  .  A  really  '  practical ' 
work  for  the  guidance  of  practical  men." — Sanitary  Record. 
"  An  admirable  digest  of  the  most  recent  state  of  knowledge.  .  .  .  Interesting 
even  to  lay-readers." — Chemical  News. 
"V  The  THIRD  EDITION  contains  many  Notable  Additions,  especially  on  the  subject 
of  MILK  and  its  relation  to  FEVER-EPIDEMICS,  the  PURITY  of  WATER-SUPPLY,  the MARGARINE  ACT,  &c.,  &c. 
II.  POISONS:  THEIR  EFFECTS  AND  DE- TECTION.   Price  i6/. General  Contents. 
Historical  Introduction — Statistics — General  Methods  of  Procedure — Life  Tests — 
Special  Apparatus—  Classification  :  I.— ORGANIC  POISONS  :  (a.)  Sulphuric,  Hydrochloric, 
and  Nitric  Acids,  Potash,  Soda,  Ammonia,  &c.  ;  (b.)  Petroleum,  Benzene.  Camphor, 
Alcohols,  Chloroform,  Carbolic  Acid,  Prussic  Acid,  Phosphorus,  &c.  ;  (c.)  Hemlock, 
Nicotine,  Opium,  Strychnine,  Aconite,  Atropine,  Digitalis,  &c.  ;  (</.)  Poisons 
derived  from  Animal  Substances  ;  (f.)  The  Oxalic  Acid  Group.  II. — INORGANIC 
POISONS  :  Arsenic,  Antimony,  Lead,  Copper,  Bismuth,  Silver,  Mercury,  Zinc,  Nickel, 
Iron,  Chromium,  Alkaline  Earths,  &c.  Appendix:  A.  Examination  of  Blood  and 
Blood-Spots.  B.  Hints  for  Emergencies:  Treatment — Antidotes. 
"Should  be  in  the  hands  of  every  medical  practitioner." — Lancet. 
"  A  sound  and  practical  Manual  of  Toxicology,  which  cannot  be  too  warmly  re- commended. One  of  its  chief  merits  is  that  it  discusses  substances  which  have  been 
overlooked." — Chemical  Aeivs. 
"  One  of  the  best,  most  thorough,  and  comprehensive  works  on  the  subject."— Saturday  Review. 
HYGIENE  AND  PUBLIC  HEALTH   (a  Die- tionary  of)  :  embracing  the  following  subjects  : — 
I. — SANITARY  CHEMISTRY  :  the  Composition  and  Dietetic  Value  of Foods,  with  the  Detection  of  Adulterations. 
II.— SANITARY  ENGINEERING  :  Sewage,  Drainage,  Storage  of  Water, Ventilation,  Warming,  &c. 
III. — SANITARY  LEGISLATION  :  the  whole  of  the  PUBLIC  HEALTH 
ACT,  together  with  portions  of  other  Sanitary  Statutes,  in  a 
form  admitting  of  easy  and  rapid  Reference. 
IV.— EPIDEMIC  AND  EPIZOOTIC  DISEASES  :    their  History  and  Pro- pagation, with  the  Measures  for  Disinfection. 
V. — HYGIENE— MILITARY,  NAVAL,  PRIVATE,  PUBLIC,  SCHOOL. 
Royal  8vo,  672  pp.,  cloth,  with  Map  and  140  Illustrations,  28/. 
"  A  work  that  must  have  entailed  a  vast  amount  of  labour  and  research.     .     .     .     Will 
become  a  STANDARD  WORK  IN  PUBLIC  HEALTH." — Medical  Times  and  Gazette. 
"  Contains  a  great  mass  of  information  of  easy  reference." — Sanitary  Record. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  11 
SECOND  and  CHEAPER  EDITION.     Handsome  Cloth,  4s. 
FOODS     AND     DIETARIES: 
H  Manual  of  Clinical  Bietetics. 
BT 
R.    W.    BURNET,    M.D., 
Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Physicians  of  London;  Physician  to  the  Great  Northern Central  Hospital,  Ac. 
In  Dr.  Burnet's  "  Foods  and  Dietaries,"  the  rationale  of  the special  dietary  recommended  is  briefly  stated  at  the  beginning 
of  each  section.  To  give  definiteness  to  the  directions,  the 
HOURS  of  taking  food  and  the  QUANTITIES  to  be  given  at  each 
time  are  stated,  as  well  as  the  KINDS  of  food  most  suitable.  In 
many  instances  there  is  also  added  a  list  of  foods  and  dishes 
that  are  UNSUITABLE  to  the  special  case. 
%*  To  the  SECOND  EDITION  a  chapter  on  Diet  in  INFLUENZA,  and  numerous  Fresh Recipes  for  Invalid  Cookery,  have  been  added. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
DIET  in  Diseases  of  the  Stomach,  Intestinal  Tract,  Liver,  Lungs  and 
Pleura?,  Heart,  Kidneys,  &c. ;  in  Diabetes,  Scurvy,  Anaemia,  Scrofula,  Gout 
(Chronic  and  Acute),  Obesity,  Acute  and  Chronic  Rheumatism,  Alcoholism, 
Nervous  Disorders,  Diathetic  Diseases,  Diseases  of  Children,  with  a  Section 
on  Prepared  and  Predigested  Foods,  and  Appendix  on  Invalid  Cookery. 
"  The  directions  given  are   UNIFORMLY  JUDICIOUS  and   characterised  by  good-sense. 
May  be  confidently  taken  as  a  RELIABLE  GUIDE  in  the  art  of  feeding  the  sick."— Brit.  Med.  Journal. 
"  To  all  who  hare  much  to  do  with  Invalids,  Dr.  Burnet's  book  will  be  of  great  use. .  .  .  It  will  be  found  all  the  more  valuable  in  that  it  deals  with  BROAD  and  ACCEPTED 
VIEWS.  There  are  large  classes  of  disease  which,  if  not  caused  solely  by  errors  of  diet,  have 
a  principal  cause  in  such  errors,  and  can  only  be  removed  by  an  intelligent  apprehension  of their  relation  to  such.  Gout,  Scurvy,  Rickets,  and  Alcoholism  are  instances  in  point,  and 
they  are  all  TREATED  with  ADMIRABLE  SENSE  and  JUDGMENT  by  Dr.  Burnet.  He  shows  a 
desire  to  allow  as  much  range  and  VARIETY  as  possible.  The  careful  study  of  such  books  as 
this  will  very  much  help  the  Practitioner  in  the  Treatment  of  cases,  and  powerfully  aid  the 
action  of  remedies." — Lancet. 
"  Dr.  Burnet's  work  is  intended  to  meet  a  want  which  is  evident  to  all  those  who  have to  do  with  nursing  the  sick.  .  .  .  The  plan  is  METHODICAL,  SIMPLE,  and  PRACTICAL.  .  .  . 
Dr.  Burnet  takes  the  important  diseases  seriatim  .  .  .  and  gives  a  Time-table  of  Diet, with  Bill  of  Fare  for  each  meal,  quantities,  and  beverages.  .  .  .  An  appendix  of  Cookery 
for  invalids  is  given,  which  will  help  the  nurse  when  at  her  wits'  end  for  a  change  of  diet, 
to  meet  the  urgency  of  the  moment  or  tempt  the  capricious  appetite  of  the  patient." — Glasgow  Herald. 
LONDON:  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
12  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 
FOURTH  EDITION,  Pocket-Size,  Leather,  8s.  6d.     With  very  Numerous  Illustrations. 
A    SURGICAL    HANDBOOK, 
3for  ipractitioners,  Students,  1bouse*Surgeonst  an&  Dreseers. 
BY  F.  M.  CAIRD,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.  (ED.), 
AND 
C.  W.  CATHCART,  M.B.,  F.R.C.S.  (ENG.  &  ED.), 
Assistant-Surgeons,  Royal  Infirmary,  Edinburgh. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
Case-Taking—Treatment  of  Patients  before  and  after  Operation — Anaesthetics: 
General  and  Local — Antiseptics  and  Wound-Treatment — Arrest  of  Haemorrhage 
— Shock  and  Wound  Fever — Emergency  Cases — Tracheotomy :  Minor  Surgical 
Operations — Bandaging — Fractures — Dislocations,  Sprains,  and  Bruises — 
Extemporaiy  Appliances  and  Civil  Ambulance  Work — Massage — Surgical 
Applications  of  Electricity — Joint-Fixation  and  Fixed  Apparatus — The  Syphon 
and  its  Uses— Trusses  and  Artificial  Limbs — Plaster-Casting — Post-Mortem 
Examination — Sickroom  Cookery  Receipts,  &c.,  &c.,  &c.   
'•  THOROUGHLY  PRACTICAL  AND  TRUSTWORTHY.    Clear,  accurate,  succinct."—  The  Lancet. 
"ADMIRABLY  ARRANGED.  The  best  practical  little  work  we  have  seen.  The  matter  is  as 
good  as  the  manner." — Edinburgh  Medical  Journal. 
"THIS  EXCELLENT  LITTLE  WORK.  Clear,  concise,  and  very  readable.  Gives  attention  to 
important  details,  often  omitted,  but  ABSOLUTELY  NECESSARY  TO  SUCCESS." — Atheneeum. "A  dainty  volume."— Manchester  Medical  Chronicle. 
In  Extra  Crown  Zvo,  with  Litho-plates  and  Numerous  Illustrations.     Cloth,  8s.  6d. 
PHARMACY    AND    MATERIA    MEDIOA 
(A    Laboratory   Course    of): 
Including  the  Principles  and  Practice  of  Dispensing. 
Bbapteb  to  tbc  Stubs  of  tbe  JBritfsb  pbarmacopceia  anb  tbc  "Requirements of  tbe  private  Stubent. 
BY  W.  ELBORNE,  F.L.S.,  F.C.S., 
Late  Assistant-Lecturer  in  Materia  Medica  and  Pharmacy  in  the 
O-wens  College,  Manchester. 
"A  work  which  we  can  very  highly  recommend  to  the  perusal  of  all  Studerts  of  Medicine. 
•  .  .  ADMIRABLY  ADAPTED  to  their  requirements." — Edinburgh  Medical  Journal. 
"  Mr.  Elborne  evidently  appreciates  the  Requirements  of  Medical  Students,  and  there  can be  no  doubt  that  any  one  who  works  through  this  Course  will  obtain  an  excellent  insight  into 
Chemical  Pharmacy." — British  Medical  Journal. 
"The  system  .  .  which  Mr.  Elborne  here  sketches  is  thoroughly  sound." — Chemist and  Druggist. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  13 
GRIFFIN'S    MEDICAL    SERIES. 
Standard  Works  of  Reference  for  Practitioners  and  Students, 
ISSUED    UNIFORMLY    IN    LIBRARY    STYLE. 
Large  8vo,  Handsome  Cloth,  very  fully  Illustrated. 
^-~~~^~>~^^~~^^~^ 
Full  Catalogue,  with  Specimens  of  the  Illustrations,  sent  Post-free  on  application. 
VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED. 
HUMAN     ANATOMY. 
BY  ALEXANDER  MACALISTER,  M.A.,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  F.S.A., 
Professor  of  Anatomy  in  the  University  oj Cambridge,  and 
Fellow  of  St.  John's  College.    36s. 
"  BY  FAR  THE  MOST  IMPORTANT  WORK  on  this  subject  which  has  appeared  in  recent  years." —  The  Lancet. 
"  Destined  to  be  a  main  factor  in  the  advancement  of  Scientific  Anatomy.  .  .  .  The fine  collection  of  Illustrations  must  be  mentioned." — Dublin  Medical  Journal. 
"  This  SPLENDID  WORK."— Saturday  Review. 
HUMAN     PHYSIOLOGY. 
BY  PROFESSOR  LANDOIS  OF  GREIFSWALD 
AND 
WM.  STIRLING,  M.D.,  Sc.D., 
Brackenbury  Professor  of  Phvsiology  in  Owens  College  and  Victoria  University,  Manchester; 
Examiner  in  the  University  of  Oxford.  FOURTH  EDITION.  With  some  of  the 
Illustrations  in  Colours.  2  Vols.,  423. 
"The  BOOK  is  the  MOST  COMPLETE  resumt  of  all  the  facts  in  Physiology  in  the  language. Admirably  adapted  for  the  PRACTITIONER.  .  .  .  With  this  Text-book  at  command,  NO 
STUDENT  COULD  FAIL  IN  HIS  EXAMINATION." — The  Lancet. 
"  One  of  the  MOST  PRACTICAL  WORKS  on  Physiology  ever  written.  EXCELLENTLY  CLEAR, 
ATTRACTIVE,  and  SUCCINCT."— British  Medical  Journal. 
EMBRYOLOGY  (An  Introduction  to). 
BY  ALFRED  C.  HADDON,  M.A.,  M.R.I.A., 
Professor  of  Zoology  in  the  Royal  College  of  Science,  Dublin.        x8s- 
"  An  EXCELLENT  RESUME'  OF  RECENT  RESEARCH,  well  adapted  for  self-study.  .  .  .  Gives remarkably  good  accounts  (including  all  recent  work)  of  the  development  of  the  heart  and 
other  organs.  .  .  .  The  book  is  handsomely  got  up."—  The  Lancet. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
16  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 
GRIFFIN'S  MEDICAL  SERIES— Continued. 
RAILWAY    INJURIES: 
With  Special  Reference  to  those  of  the  Bach  and  Nervous  System,  in  their 
Medico-Legal  and  Clinical  Aspects. 
BY  HERBERT  W.  PAGE,  M.A.,  M.C.  (CANTAB),  F.R.C.S.  (£NG.), 
Surgeon  to  St.  Mary's  Hospital ;  Dean,  St.  Mary's  Hospital  Medical  School,  &c.,  &c.    6s. 
"A  work  INVALUABLE  to  those  who  have  many  railway  cases  under  their  care  pending 
litigation.     ...     A  book  which  every  lawyer  as  well  as  doctor  should  have  on  his  shelves." —British  Medical  Journal 
THE  SURGERY   OF  THE    KIDNEYS. 
Being  the  Harveian  Lectures,  1889. 
BY  J.  KNOWSLEY  THORNTON,  M.B.,  M.C, Surgeon  to  the  Samaritan  Free  Hospital,  &c. 
In  Demy  8ve,  with  Illustrations,  Cloth,  $s. 
"The  name  and  experience  of  the  Author  confer  on  the  Lectures  the  stamp  of  authority." — British  Medical  Journal* 
GYN/ECOLOGY  (A  Practical  Treatise  on): 
BY 
JOHN  HALLIDAY  GROOM,  M.D.,  F.R.C.P.E.,  F.R.C.S.E., 
Physician  to  the  Royal  Infirmary  and  Royal  Maternity  Hospital,  Edinburgh ;  Examiner  in 
Midwifery,  R.C.P.,  Edinburgh;  Lecturer,  Edinburgh  School  of  Medicine,  &c.,  &c. 
WITH    THE   COLLABORATION   OF 
MM.  JOHNSON  SYMINGTON,  M.D.,  F.R.C.S.E.,  AND 
MILNE  MURRAY,  M.A.,  M.B.,  F.R.C.P.E. 
[Shortly. 
%*  Volumes  on  other  subjects  in  active  preparation. 
a  COMPLETE  RECORD  of  the  PAPERS  read  before 
the  MEDICAL  SOCIETIES  throughout  the  United  Kingdom 
during  each  year,  vide"  THE  OFFICIAL  YEAR-BOOK  OF  THE SCIENTIFIC  AND  LEARNED  SOCIETIES  OF  GREAT 
BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND"  (page  53). 
"The  value  of  these  Lists  of  Papers  can  hardly  be  over-rated." — Lancet. 
"INDISPENSABLE  to  any  one  who  may  wish  to  keep  himself  abreast  of 
the  Scientific  work  of  the  day. " — Edinburgh  Med.  Journal. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET.   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES. 
X-7 
Griffin's  Medical  Students'  Text-Books. 
Anatomy,    .       .    ^ Biology, 
Botany  (Elementary), 
Brain  and  Spinal  Cord, 
Central  Nervous 
Organs, 
Mental  Diseases,    . 
Chemistry,  Inorganic, 
Qualitative  Analysis, 
Quantitative     „ 
Electricity,  . 
Embryology, 
Eye,  Diseases  of  the, 
Foods,  Analysis  of,   . 
Foods  and  Dietaries, 
Gynaecology, 
Histology,    . 
Medicine,     . 
Nursing, 
Obstetrics,  . 
Pharmacy,  . 
Physiology,  Human, 
Practical, . 
Poisons,  Detection  of, 
Sanitation,  Practical, 
Skin,  Diseases  of  the, 
Surgery- Civil, 
Military,  .       .       • Zoology, 
PAG* 
PROP.  MACALISTER,     .         .  13 
AINSWORTH  DAVIS,     .         .  29 
AINSWORTH  DAVIS,     .         .  29 
VICTOR  HORSLEY,       .         .  15 
OBERSTEINER  AND  HILL,      .  15 
BEVAN  LEWIS,    ...  15 
DUPRE  AND  HAKE,     .         .  30 
PROF.  SEXTON,    ...  49 
PROF.  SEXTON,  49* PROF.  JAMIESON,         .         .  38 
PROF.  HADDON,           .         .  1$ 
MEYER  AND  FERGUS,          .  14 
WYNTER  BLYTIT,         .         .  10 
B.  W.  BURNET,           .         .  11 
HALLIDAY  GROOM,       .        .  16- 
PROF.  STIRLING,          .         .  21 
SIR  WM.  AITKEN,       .         .  9 
L.  HUMPHRY,     ...  18 
H.  G.  LANDIS,   ...  18 
W.  ELBORNE,      ...  12 
LANDOIS  AND  STIRLING,      .  13 
PROF.  STIRLING,          .        .  21 
WYNTER  BLYTH,         .         .  10 
DR.  GEORGE  REID,    .        .  20 
PROF.  ANDERSON,       .        .  14 
CAIRD  AND  CATHCART,        .  12 
PORTER-GODWIN,         .         .  19 
SELENKA  AND  DAVIS,          .  30 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
iS  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 
SEVENTH  EDITION.     In  Extra  Crown  8vo,  with  Numerous 
Illustrations,  Cloth,  3-r.  6d. 
NURSING  (A  Manual  of): 
an&  Surgtcal. 
BY   LAURENCE  HUMPHRY,  M.A.,  M.B.,  M.R.C.S., 
Assistant-Physician  to,  and  Lecturer  to  Probationers  at,  Addenbrooke's Hospital,  Cambridge, 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. 
The  General  Management  of  the  Sick  Room  in  Private  Houses  —  General 
Plan  of  the  Human  Body  —  Diseases  of  the  Nervous  System  —  Respiratory 
System  —  Heart  and  'Blood-Vessels  —  Digestive  System  —  Skin  and  Kidneys  — Fevers  —  Diseases  of  Children  —  Wounds  and  Fractures—  Management  of  Child- 
Bed  —  Sick-Room  Cookery,  &c.,  &c. 
f 
%*  A  Full  Prospectus  Post  Free  on  Application. 
"  In  the  fullest  sense  Mr.  Humphry's  book  is  a  DISTINCT  ADVANCE  on  all  previous Manuals.  .  .  .  Its  value  is  greatly  enhanced  by  copious  Woodcuts  and  diagrams  of  the 
"bones  and  internal  organs,  by  many  Illustrations  of  the  art  of  BANDAGING,  by  Temperature •charts  indicative  of  the  course  of  some  of  the  most  characteristic  diseases,  and  by  a  goodly 
array  of  SICK-ROOM  APPLIANCES  with  which  EVERY  NURSE  should  endeavour  to  become 
acqu  ainted. "— British  Medic  a  I  Journal. 
"  We  should  advise  ALL  NURSES  to  possess  a  copy  of  the  work.  We  can  confidently  re- 
commend it  as  an  EXCELLENT  GUIDE  and  companion." — Hospital, 
LANDIS    (Henry   G.,  A.M.,   M.D.,  Professor  of Obstetrics  in  Starling  Medical  College) : 
THE  MANAGEMENT  OF  LABOUR  AND  OF  THE  LYING-IN 
PERIOD;  In  8vo,  with  Illustrations.  Cloth,  7/6. 
"  Fully  accomplishes  the  object  kept  in  view  by  its  author.  .  .  .  Will  be  found 
of  GREAT  VALUE  by  the  young  practitioner."— Glasgow  Medical  JournaL 
LINN  (S.H.,  M.D.,  D.D.S.,  Dentist  to  the  Imperial Medico-Chirurgical  Academy  of  St.  Petersburg)  : 
THE  TEETH :  How  to  preserve  them  and  prevent  their  Decay.  A 
Popular  Treatise  on  the  Diseases  and  the  Care  of  the  Teeth.  With 
Plates  and  Diagrams.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth,  2/6. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  19 
LONGMORE    (Surgeon-General,   C.B.,    Q.H.S., F.R.C.S.,  &c.,  late  Professor  of  Military  Surgery,  Army  Medical  School): 
THE   SANITARY  CONTRASTS   OF  THE   CRIMEAN   WAR. 
Demy  8vo.     Cloth  limp,  1/6. 
"A  most  valuable  contribution  to  Military  Medicine." — British  Medical  Journal. 
"  A  most  concise  and  interesting  Review." — Lancet. 
PARKER  (Prof.  W.   Kitchen,  F.R.S.,  Hunteriao Professor,  Royal  College  of  Surgeons): 
MAMMALIAN  DESCENT:  being  the  Hunterian  Lectures  for  1884. 
Adapted  for  General  Readers.  With  Illustrations.  In  8vo,  cloth,  10/6. 
"The  smallest  details  of  science  catch  a  LIVING  GLOW  from  the  ardour  of  the  author's- imagination,  ...  we  are  led  to  compare  it  to  some  quickening  spirit  which  makes- 
all  the  dry  bones  of  skulls  and  skeletons  stand  up  around  him  as  an  exceeding  great 
army."  — Prof.  Romanes  in  Nature. 
"  Get  this  book  ;  read  it  straight  ahead,  .  .  you  will  first  be  interested,  then absorbed  ;  before  reaching  the  end  you  will  comprehend  what  a  lofty  ideal  of  creation  is- 
that  of  him,  who,  recognising  the  unity  and  the  continuity  of  Nature,  traces  the  gradual 
development  of  life  from  age  to  age  .  .  .  and  has  thus  learned  to  'look  through 
Nature  up  to  Nature  s  GOD.'  " — Scotsman. 
"A  very  striking  book  ...  as  readable  as  a  book  of  travels.  Prof.  PARKER 
is  no  Materialist."— Leicester  Post. 
I 
PORTER  AND  GODWIN'S  POCKET-BOOK. 
FOURTH  EDITION.     Revised  and  enlarged.     Foolscap  Sv0,  Roan,  with  152  Illustrations 
and  Folding-plate.     8s.  (>d. 
THE  SURGEON'S  POCKET-BOOK. 
Specially  afcaptefc  to  tbe  public  /Ifcefcical  Services* 
BY  SURGEON-MAJOR  J.  H.  PORTER. 
Revised  and  in  great  part  rewritten 
BY   BRIGADE-SURGEON    C.    H.   Y.   GODWIN, 
Professor  of  Military  Surgery  in  the  Army  Medical  School. 
"  The  present  editor — Brigade-Surgeon  Godwin— has  introduced  so  much  that  is  new  and 
practical,  that  we  can  recommend  this  '  Surgeon's  Pocket-Book'  as  an  INVALUABLE  GUIDE  to 
all  engaged,  or  likely  to  be  engaged,  in  Field  Medical  Service."—  Lancet. 
"A  complete  vade  ntecum  to  guide  the  military  surgeon  in  the  field." — British  Medical Journal. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
20  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  VO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
PRACTICAL  SANITATION:  )J A  HAND-BOOK  FOR  SANITARY  INSPECTORS  AND   OTHERS 
INTERESTED   IN  SANITATION. 
BY 
GEORGE    REID,    M.D.,    D.P.H., 
Fellow  of  tJie  Sanitary  Institute  of  Great  Britain,  and  Medical  Officer, 
Staffordshire  County  Council. 
Tlditb  an  appen&fj  on  Sanitary  %aw 
BY 
HERBERT     MANLEY,     M.A.,     M.B.,     D.P.H., 
Medical  Officer  of  Health  for  tJie  County  Borough  of  West  Bromivich. 
In  Large  Crown  Sv0. ,  ivith  Illustrations.     Price  6s. 
Dr.  Reid's  PRACTICAL  SANITATION  is  heartily  recommended  to all  who  take  an  interest  in  the  great  subject  on  which  it  treats,  a 
subject  which  is  attracting  the  serious  attention  of  the  general 
public.  The  necessity  for  no  longer  allowing  grave  sanitary 
defects  to  exist  in  our  houses  and  their  surroundings  is  now 
generally  acknowledged,  and  people  are  beginning  to  enquire  for 
themselves  into  matters  to  which,  hitherto,  they  have  closed 
their  eyes.  While  specially  designed  for  the  use  of  Sanitary 
Inspectors,  the  book  will  be  found  to  be  of  value  to  all,  as  giving 
within  small  compass  a  thorough,  clearly  written,  and  well-illus- 
trated digest  of  Sanitary  Science. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
Introduction — Water  Supply:  Drinking  Water,  Pollution  of  Water- 
Ventilation  and  Warming  —  Principles  of  Sewage  Removal  —  Details  of 
Drainage  ;  Refuse  Removal  and  Disposal — Sanitary  and  Insanitary  Work 
and  Appliances — Details  of  Plumbers'  Work — House  Construction — Infec- 
tion and  Disinfection — Food,  Inspection  of ;  Characteristics  of  Good  Meat ; 
Meat,  Milk,  Fish,  &c.,  unfit  for  Human  Food — Appendix :  Sanitary  Law ; 
Model  Bye-Laws,  &c. 
"A  VERY  USEFUL  HANDBOOK,  with  a  very  useful  Appendix.  We  recommend it  not  only  to  SANITARY  INSPECTORS,  but  to  HOUSEHOLDERS  and  ALL  interested 
in  Sanitary  matters." — Sanitary  Record. 
LONDON :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
MEDICINE  AND  THE  ALLIED  SCIENCES.  21 
WORKS 
BY  WILLIAM  STIRLING,  M.D.,  Sc.D., 
Professor  in  the  Victoria  University,  Brackenbury  Professor  of  Physiology  and  Histology in  the  Owens  College,  Manchester;  and  Examiner  in  the  University  of  Oxford. 
SECOND  EDITION.     In  Extra  Crown  8vo,  with  234  Illustrations,  Cloth,  9s. 
PRACTICAL    PHYSIOLOGY   {Outlines  of): 
Being  a  Manual  for  the  Physiological  Laboratory,  including 
Chemical  and.  Experimental  Physiology,  with 
Reference  to  Practical  Medicine. 
PART   I.—  CHEMICAL    PHYSIOLOGY. 
PART    II.—  EXPERIMENTAL    PHYSIOLOGY. 
%*  In  the  Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged,  the  number  of  Illustra- tions has  been  increased  from  142  to  234. 
"  A  VERT  EXCELLENT  and  COMPLETE  TREATISE."  —  Lancet. 
"The  student  is  enabled  to  perform  for  himself  most  of  the  experiments  usually  shown  in a  systematic  course  of  lectures  on  physiology,  and  the  practice  thus  obtained  must  prove 
May  be  confidently  recommended  as  a  guide  to  the  student  of 
physiology,  and,  we  doubt  not,  will  also  find  its  way  into  the  hands  of  many  of  our  scientific 
and  medical  practitioners."  —  Glasgow  Medical  Journal. 
"This  valuable  little  manual.  .  .  .  The  GENERAL  CONCEPTION  of  the  book  is  EXCELLENT; the  arrangement  of  the  exercises  is  all  that  can  be  desired  ;  the  descriptions  of  experiments 
are  CLEAR,  CONCISE,  and  to  the  point."  —  British  Medical  Journal. 
In  Extra  Crown  8vo,  with  344  Illustrations,  Cloth,  12s.  Qd. 
PRACTICAL  HISTOLOGY  (Outlines  of): 
A  Manual  for  Students. 
%*  Dr.  Stirling's  "  Outlines  of  Practical  Histology"  is  a  compact  Hand- book for  students,  providing  a  COMPLETE  LABORATORY  COURSE,  in  which 
almost  every  exercise  is  accompanied  by  a  drawing.  Very  many  of  the 
illustrations  have  been  prepared  expressly  for  the  work. 
"  The  general  plan  of  the  work  is  ADMIRABLE  .  .  .  It  is  very  evident  that  the  sug- gestions given  are  the  outcome  of  a  PROLONGED  EXPERIENCE  in  teaching  Practical  Histology, combined  with  a  REMARKABLE  JUDGMENT  in  the  selection  of  METHODS.  .  .  .  Merits  the 
highest  praise  for  the  ILLUSTRATIONS,  wnich  are  at  once  clear  and  faithful."— British  Medical Journal. 
41  We  can  confidently  recommend  this  small  but  CONCISELY-WRITTEN  and  ADMIRABLY ILLUSTRATED  work  to  students.  They  will  find  it  to  be  a  VKRY  USEFUL  and  RELIABLE  GUIDK 
in  the  laboratory,  or  in  their  own  room.  All  the  principal  METHODS  of  preparing  tissues  for 
section  are  given,  with  such  precise  directions  that  little  or  no  difficulty  can  be  felt  in  fol- lowing them  in  their  most  minute  details.  .  .  .  The  volume  proceeds  from  a  MASTKB  in 
his  craft."— Lancet. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
22  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  *  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
In  large  Crown  §vo.     Handsome  Cloth.     Price  $s.  Post  free. 
THE  WIFE   AND    MOTHER: 
a  flDebical  (Suibe 
TO  THE  CARE  OF  HER  HEALTH  AND  THE 
MANAGEMENT  OF  HER  CHILDREN. 
BY 
ALBERT   WESTLAND,  M.A.,  M.D.,  C.M. .  ^z 
*^*  This  work  is  addressed  to  women  who  are  desirous  of 
fulfilling  properly  their  duties  as  wives  and  mothers,  and  is 
designed  to  assist  them  in  exercising  an  intelligent  supervision 
over  their  own  and  their  children's  health. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
PART      I.  —  Early  Married  Life. 
PART     II.  —  Early  Motherhood. 
PART  III.—  The  Child,  in  Health  and  Sickness. 
PART   IV.  —  Later  Married  Life. 
to  Mniltu  _  ^JA 
"WELL-ARRANGED,  and  CLEARLY  WRITTEN.  The  chapter  on  the  Nutrition of  the  Child  is  very  carefully  written,  and  the  Hints  as  to  the  ARTIFICIAL  FEEDING 
of  Infants  are  reliable."  —  Lancet. 
"A  REALLY  EXCELLENT  BOOK.  .  .  .  The  author  has  handled  the  subject conscientiously  and  with  perfect  good  taste.  .  .  .  The  work  is  what  it  pro- 
fesses to  be  —  a  guide  and  help,  giving  all  that  is  most  essential  to  know  of  the  life- 
history  of  womanhood  and  motherhood."  —  Aberdeen  Journal. 
"  EXCELLENT  AND  JUDICIOUS  .  .  .  the  work  of  an  experienced  obstetricist, surgeon,  and  physician  .  .  .  deals  with  an  important  subject  in  a  manner  that 
is  at  once  PRACTICAL  AND  POPULAR."—  Western  Daily  Press. 
"The  best  book  I  can  recommend  is  '  THE  WIFE  AND  MOTHER,'  by  Dr.  ALBERT WESTLAND,  published  by  Messrs.  Charles  Griffin  &  Co.  It  is  a  MOST  VALUABLE 
work,  written  with  discretion  and  refinement."  —  Hearth  and  Home. 
"Will  be  WELCOMED  by  every  young  wife  .  .  .  abounds  with  valuable 
advice."  —  Glasgow  Herald. 
LONDON:  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND   TECHNICAL  WORKS.  23 
GENERAL    SCIENTIFIC    WORKS 
RELATING  TO 
CHEMISTRY    (THEORETICAL    AND    APPLIED)  ;     ELECTRICAL 
SCIENCE;  ENGINEERING^CmL  AND  MECHANICAL); 
THE    DESIGN    OF    STRUCTURES: 
A  Practical  Treatise  on  the  Building1  of  Bridges,  Roofs,  &c. 
BY    S.    ANGLIN,    C.E., 
Master  of  Engineering,  Royal  University  of  Ireland,  late  Whitworth  Scholar,  &c. 
With  very  numerous  Diagrams,  Examples,  and  Tables. 
Large  Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  i6s. 
_-   
The  leading  features  in  Mr.  Anglin's  carefully-planned  "  Design  of  Struc- 
tures "  may  be  briefly  summarised  as  follows  : — 1.  It  supplies   the  want,   long   felt   among   Students   of  Engineering  and 
Architecture,  of  a  concise  Text- book  on  Structures,  requiring  on  the  part  of the  reader  a  knowledge  of  ELEMENTARY  MATHEMATICS  only. 
2.  The  subject  of  GRAPHIC  STATICS  has  only  of  recent  years  been  generally 
applied  in  this  country  to  determine  the  Stresses  on  Framed  Structures ;  and 
in  too  many  cases  this  is  done  without  a  knowledge  of  the  principles  upon 
which  the  science  is  founded.     In  Mr.  Anglin's  work  the  system  is  explained from  FIRST  PRINCIPLES,  and  the  Student  will  find  in  it  a  valuable  aid  in 
determining  the  stresses  on  all  irregularly- framed  structures. 
3.  A  large  number  of  PRACTICAL  EXAMPLES,  such  as  occur  in  the  every-day 
experience  of  the  Engineer,  are  given  and  carefully  worked  out,  some  being 
solved  both  analytically  and  graphically,  as  a  guide  to  the  Student. 
4.  The  chapters  devoted  to  the  practical  side  of  the  subject,  the  Strength  of 
Joints,  Punching,  Drilling,  Rivetting,  and  other  processes  connected  with  the 
manufacture  of  Bridges,  Roofs,  and  Structural  work  generally,  are  the  result 
of  MANY  YEARS'  EXPERIENCE  in  the  bridge-yard ;  and  the  information  given on  this  branch  of  the  subject  will  be  found  of  great  value  to  the  practical 
bridge-builder. 
"Students  of  Engineering  will  find  this  Text-Book  INVALUABLE." — Architect. 
"The  author  has  certainly  succeeded  in  producing  a  THOROUGHLY  PRACTICAL  Text- Book.  "—Builder. 
"We  can  unhesitatingly  recommend  this  work  not  only  to  the  Student,  as  the  BEST TEXT-BOOK  on  the  subject,  but  also  to  the  professional  engineer  as  an  EXCEEDINGLY 
VALUABLE  book  of  reference."— Mechanical  World. 
"This  work  can  be  CONFIDENTLY  recommended  to  engineers.  The  author  has  wisely chosen  to  use  as  little  of  the  higher  mathematics  as  possible,  and  has  thus  made  his  book  of 
REAL  USE  TO  THE  PRACTICAL  ENGINEER.  .  .  .  After  careful  perusal,  we  have  nothing  but 
praise  for  the  work." — Nature. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
24  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  COSS  PUBLICATIONS. 
With  numerous  Tables  and  Illustrations.      Crown  8vo.      Cloth,  10/6. 
Second  Edition ;  Revised. 
ASSAYING    (A   Text-Book   of) 
For  the  use  of  Students,  Mine  Managers,  Assayers,  &c. 
BY 
C.  BERINGER,  F.I.C.,  F.C.S., 
Late  Chief  Assayer  to  the  Rio  Tinto  Copper  Company,  London, 
J.    J.    BERINGER,   F.I.C.,    F.C.S., 
Public  Analyst  for,  and  Lecturer  to  the  Mining  Association  of,  Cornwall. 
General  Contents. 
PART  I.— INTRODUCTORY  ;  MANIPULATION  :  Sampling  ;  Drying  ;  Calculation  of  Re- 
sults— Laboratory-books  and  Reports.  METHODS  :  Dry  Gravimetric ;  Wet  Gravimetric- 
Volumetric  Assays :  Titrometric,  Colorimetric,  Gasometric — Weighing  and  Measuring- 
Reagents— Formulae,  Equations,  &c. — Specific  Gravity. 
PART  II. — METALS  :  Detection  and  Assay  of  Silver,  Gold,  Platinum,  Mercury,  Copper, 
Lead,  Thallium,  Bismuth,  Antimony,  Iron,  Nickel,  Cobalt,  Zinc,  Cadmium,  Tin,  Tungsten, 
Titanium,  Manganese,  Chromium,  &c. — Earths,  Alkalies. 
PART  III. — NON-METALS:  Oxygen  and  Oxides;  The  Halogens — Sulphur  and  Sul- 
phates— Arsenic,  Phosphorus,  Nitrogen — Silicon,  Carbon,  Boron. 
Appendix. — Various  Tables  useful  to  the  Analyst. 
"A  REALLY  MERITORIOUS  WORK,  that  may  be  safely  depended  upon  either  for  systematic instruction  or  for  reference." — Nature, 
"  Of  the  fitness  of  the  authors  for  the  task  they  have  undertaken,  there  can  be  no  ques- tion. .  .  .  Their  book  ADMIRABLY  FULFILS  ITS  PURPOSE.  .  .  .  The  results  given  of 
an  exhaustive  series  of  experiments  made  by  the  authors,  showing  the  effects  of  VARYING 
CONDITIONS  on  the  accuracy  of  the  method  employed,  are  of  THE  UTMOST  IMPORTANCE." — Industries. 
"A  very  good  feature  of  the  book  is  that  the  authors  give  reliable  information,  mostly 
based  on  practical  experience." — Engineering. 
"This  work  is  one  of  the  BEST  of  its  kind.  .  .  .  Essentially  of  a  practical  character. .  .  .  Contains  all  the  information  that  the  Assayer  will  find  necessary  in  the  examination 
of  minerals. " — Engineer. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS.  25 
In  8vo.  Handsome  Cloth.     Price  i&r. ' 
PHOTOGRAPHY: 
/7"5  HISTORY,  PROCESSES,  APPARATUS,  AND  MATERIALS. 
COMPRISING 
WORKING  DETAILS  OF  ALL  THE  MORE  IMPORTANT  METHODS. 
BY    A.    BROTHERS,    F.R.A.S. 
WITH  TWENTY-FOUR   FULL  PAGE  PLATES  BY  MANY  OF  THE  PRO- 
CESSES DESCRIBED,  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  IN  THE  TEXT. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
PART.  I.  INTRODUCTORY — Historical  Sketch;  Chemistry  and  Optics 
of  Photography ;  Artificial  Light'(Electric  and  Oxyhydrogen  Light, Compressed  Gas,  Ethexo- Limelight,  Magnesium  Light,  &c.) 
PART  II.  Photographic  Processes,  New  and  Old,  with  special reference  to  their  relative  Practical  Usefulness. 
PART  III.  Apparatus  employed  in  Photography. 
PART  IV.  Materials  employed  in  Photography. 
PART  V.  Applications  of  Photography ;  Practical  Hints. 
"  Mr.  Brothers  has  had  an  experience  in  Photography  so  large  and  varied  that  any  work by  him  cannot  fail  to  be  interesting  and  valuable.  ...  A  MOST  COMPREHENSIVE  volume, 
entering  with  full  details  into  the  various  processes,  and  VERY  FULLY  illustrated.  The 
PRACTICAL  HINTS  are  of  GREAT  VALUE.  .  .  .  Admirably  got  up"— Brit.  Jour,  of  Photography. 
"  For  the  Illustrations  alone,  the  book  is  most  interesting ;  but,  apart  from  these,  the 
volume  is  valuable,  brightly  and  pleasantly  written,  and  MOST  ADMIRABLY  ARRANGED."— Photographic  News. 
"  Certainly  the  FINEST  ILLUSTRATED  HANDBOOK  to  Photography  which  has  ever  been published.  We  have  three  Photogravures,  four  Collotypes,  one  Chromo- Collotype,  numerous 
Blocks,  Photo-Chromo-Typograph,  Chromo-Lithograpn,  Woodbury-Type,  and  Woodbury- Gravure  Prints,  besides  many  others.  ...  A  work  which  should  be  on  the  reference 
shelves  of  every  Photographic  Society." — Amateur  Photographer. 
"This  really  IMPORTANT  handbook  of  Photography  .  .  .  the  result  of  wide experience  ...  a  manual  of  the  best  class.  .  .  .  As  an  album  of  examples  of 
photographic  reproduction  alone,  the  book  is  not  dear  at  the  price.  ...  A  handbook  so 
far  in  advance  of  most  others,  that  the  Photographer  must  not  fail  to  obtain  a  copy  as  a 
reference  work." — Photographic  Work. 
"The  COMPLETEST  HANDBOOK  of  the  art  which  has  yet  been  published.  There  is  no process  or  form  of  apparatus  which  is  not  described  and  explained.  The  beautiful  plates 
given  as  examples  of  the  different  processes  are  a  special  feature." — Scotsman. 
"  Processes  are  described  which  cannot  be  found  elsewhere,  at  all  events  in  so  convenient 
and  complete  a  form." — English  Mechanic. 
" The  chapter  on  PRACTICAL  HINTS  will  prove  INVALUABLE.  Mr.  Brothers  is  certainly 
to  be  congratulated  on  the  THOROUGHNESS  of  his  work." — Daily  Chronicle. 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
26  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  Jt  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
MINE-SURVEYING    (A    Text-Book    of): 
For  the  use  of  Managers  of  Mines  and  Colleries,  Students 
at  the  Royal  School  of  Mines,  &c. 
BY   BENNETT    H.    BROUGH,    F.G.S., 
Instructor  of  Mine-Surveying,  Royal  School  of  Mines. 
With  Diagrams.      THIRD  EDITION.      Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  75.  6d. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. 
General  Explanations — Measurement  of  Distances — Miner's  Dial — Variation  of the  Magnetic-Needle — Surveying  with  the  Magnetic-Needle  in  presence  of  Iron — 
Surveying  \tith  the  Fixed  Needle — German  Dial — Theodolite — Traversing  Under- 
ground— Surface-Surveys  with  Theodolite — Plotting  the  Survey — Calculation  of 
Areas — Levelling — Connection  of  Underground-  and  Surface-Surveys — Measuring 
Distances  by  Telescope — Setting-out — Mine-Surveying  Problems — Mine  Plans — 
Applications  of  Magnetic-Needle  in  Mining — Appendices. 
"  It  is  the  kind  of  book  which  has  long  been  wanted,  and  no  English-speaking  Mine  Agent 
or  Mining  Student  will  consider  his  technical  library  complete  without  it." — Nature, 
"  Supplies  a  long-felt  want." — Iron. 
"A  valuable  accessory  to  Surveyors  in  every  department  of  commercial  enterprise." — Colliery  Guardian. 
WORKS 
BY  WALTER   R.  BROWNE,   M.A.,   M.  INST.  C.E., 
Late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
THE  STUDENT'S  MECHANICS: An  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Force  and  Motion. 
With  Diagrams.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  45.  6d. 
"  Clear  in  style  and  practical  in  method,  'THE  STUDENT'S  MECHANICS'  is  cordially  to recommended  from  all  points  olvievtS' 
FOUNDATIONS  OF  MECHANICS. 
Papers  reprinted  from  the  Engineer.     In  Crown  8vo,  is. 
FUEL    AND    WATER: 
A  Manual  for  Users  of  Steam  and  Water. 
BY  PROF.  SCHWACKIiOFER  AND  W.  R.  BROWNE,  M.A.     (See  p.  49). 
LONDON  :    EXETER   STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL   WORKS. 
27 
PRACTICAL     GEOLOGY 
(AIDS     IN): 
WITH   A    SECTION  ON  PALAEONTOLOGY. 
BY 
GRENVILLE    A.     J.     COLE,     F.  G.S., 
Professor  of  Geology  in  the  Royal  College  of  Science  for  Ireland. 
With  Numerous  Illustrations  and  Tables.      Large  Crown  8vo.      Cloth,  los.  6d. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
PART  I. — SAMPLING  OF  THE  EA-RTH'S  CRUST. Observations  in  the  field.  I    Collection  and  packing  of  specimens. 
PART  II.— EXAMINATION  OF  MINERALS. 
Some  physical  characters  of  minerals. 
Simple  tests  with  wet  reagents. 
Examination  of  minerals  with  the  blowpipe. 
Simple  and  characteristic  reactions. 
Blowpipe-tests. Quantitative  flame  reactions  of  the  felspars 
and  their  allies. 
Examination   of  the    optical    properties    of 
minerals. 
PART  III.— EXAMINATION  OF  ROCKS. 
Introductory. 
Rock-structures  easily  distinguished. 
Some  physical  characters  of  rocks. 
Chemical  examination  of  rocks. 
Isolation  of  the  constituents  of  rocks. 
The  petrological  microscope  and  microscopic 
preparations. 
The  more  prominent  characters  to  be  ob- 
served in  minerals  in  rock-sections. 
Characters  of  the  chief  rock-forming  minerals 
in  the  rock -mass  and  in  thin  sections. 
Sedimentary  rocks. 
Igneous  rocks. Metamorphic  rocks. 
Introductory. 
Fossil  generic  types. — Rhizopoda  ;  Spongiae 
Hydrozoa ;  Actinozoa. 
Polyzoa ;  Brachiopoda. 
Lamellibranchiata. 
PART  IV.— EXAMINATION  OF  FOSSILS. 
Scaphopoda ;       Gastropoda ; 
Pteropoda ; 
Cephalopoda. Echinodermata ;  Vermes. Anthropoda. 
Suggested  list  of  characteristic  invertebrate 
fossils. 
"  Prof.  Cole  treats  of  the  examination  of  minerals  and  rocks  in  a  way  that  has  never 
been  attempted  before  .  .  .  DESERVING  OF  THE  HIGHEST  PRAISE.  Here  indeed  are 
'aids'  INNUMERABLE  and  INVALUABLE.  All  the  directions  are  given  with  the  utmost  clear- 
ness and  precision.  Prof.  Cole  is  not  only  an  accomplished  Petrologist,  he  is  evidently  also 
a  thoroughly  sympathetic  teacher,  and  seems  to  know  intuitively  what  are  stumbling-blocks 
to  learners— a  rare  and  priceless  quality."— Athenasum. 
"To  the  younger  workers  in  Geology,  Prof.  Cole's  book  will  be  as  INDISPENSABLE  as  a 
dictionary  to  the  learners  of  a  language."—  Saturday  Review. 
"That  the  work  deserves  its  title,  that  it  is  full  of  '  AIDS/ and  in  the  highest  degree 
''PRACTICAL,'  will  be  the  verdict  of  all  who  use  it." — Nature. "A  MOST  VALUABLE  and  welcome  book  .  .  .  the  subject  is  treated  on  lines  wholly 
different  from  those  in  any  other  Manual,  and  is  therefore  very  ORIGINAL." — Science  Gossip^. 
"  A  more  useful  work  for  the  practical  geologist  has  not  appeared  in  handy  form. '— Scottish  Geographical  Magazine. 
"  This  EXCELLENT    MANUAL      .     .      .     will  be  A  VERY  GREAT  HELP.      .      .      .      The  Section 
on  the  Examination  of  Fossils  is  probably  the  BEST  of  its  kind  yet  published.  .  .  .  FULL 
of  well-digested  information  from  the  newest  sources  and  from  personal  research."— A nnals of  Nat.  History. 
LONDON :   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
jg  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
SEWAGE    DISPOSAL    WORKS A  GUIDE  TO  THE  CONSTRUCTION  OF  WORKS  FOR 
THE  PREVENTION  OF  THE  POLLUTION  BY 
SEWAGE  OF  RIVERS  AND  ESTUARIES. 
BY 
W.    SANTO   CRIMP,    M.lNST.C.E.,    F.G.S., 
Assistant-Engineer,  London  County  Council 
With  Tables,    Illustrations  in  the  Text,   and  33   Lithographic  Plates. 
Medium  8vo.     Handsome  Cloth,  255. 
PART  I.— INTRODUCTORY. 
Introduction. 
Details  of  River  Pollutions  and  Recommenda- 
tions of  Various  Commissions. 
Hourly  and  Daily  Flow  of  Sewage. 
The  Pail  System  as  Affecting  Sewage. 
The  Separation  of  Rain-water  from  the  Sewage 
Proper. 
Settling  Tanks. 
Chemical  Processes. 
The  Disposal  of  Sewage-sludge. 
The  Preparation  of  Land  for  Sewage  Dis- 
posal. 
Table  of  Sewage  Farm  Management. 
PART  II. — SEWAGE  DISPOSAL  WORKS  IN  OPERATION — THEIR 
CONSTRUCTION,  MAINTENANCE  AND  COST. 
Illustrated  by  Plates  showing  the  General  Plan  and  Arrangement  adopted 
in  each  District. 
1.  Doncaster  Irrigation  Farm. 
2.  Beddington  Irrigation  Farm,  Borough  of 
Croydon. 
3.  Bedford  Sewage  Farm  Irrigation. 
4.  Dewsbury  and  Hitchin  Intermittent  Fil- tration. 
5.  Merton,  Croydon  Rural  Sanitary  Autho- rity. 
6.  Swanwick,  Derbyshire. 
7.  The  Ealing  Sewage  Works. 
8.  Chiswick. 
9.  Kingston-on-Thames,  A.  B.  C.  Process. 10.  Salford  Sewage  Works. 
n.  Bradford,  Precipitation. 
12.  New  Maiden,  Chemical  Treatment  and 
Small  Filters. 
13.  Friern  Barnet. 
14.  Acton,  Ferozone  and  Polarite  Process. 
15.  Ilford,  Chadwell,  and  Dagenham  Sewage 
Disposal  Works. 16.  Coventry. 
17.  Wimbledon. 18.  Birmingham. 
19.  Newhaven. 20.  Portsmouth. 
21.  Sewage  Precipitation  Works,  Dortmund 
(Germany). 
22.  Treatment  of  Sewage  by  Electrolysis. 
"  All  persons  interested  in  Sanitary  Science  owe  a  debt  of  gratitude  to  Mr.  Crimp.  .  . His  work  will  be  especially  useful  to  SANITARY  AUTHORITIES  and  their  advisers  .  .  . 
KMINENTI.Y  i  RACTiCAL  AND  USEFUL  .  .  .  gives  plans  and  descriptions  of  MANY  OF  THE 
MOST  IMPORTANT  SEWAGE  WORKS  of  England  .  .  .  with  very  valuable  information  as  to 
the  COST  of  construction  and  working  of  each.  .  .  .  The  carefully-prepared  drawings  per- 
mit of  an  easy  comparison  between  the  different  systems." — Lancet. 
11  Probably  the  MOST  COMPLETE  AND  BEST  TREATISE  on  the  subject  which  has  appeared in  our  language.  .  .  .  Will  prove  of  the  greatest  use  to  all  who  have  the  problem  of 
Sewage  Disposal  to  face.  .  .  .  The  general  construction,  drawings,  and  type  are  all 
excellent." — Edinburgh  Medical  Journal. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS.  29 
WORK  S 
BY   J.    R.    AINSWORTH    DAVIS,    B.A., 
PROFESSOR  OF  BIOLOGY,  UNIVERSITY  COLLEGE,  ABERYSTWYTH. 
BIOLOGY    (A    Text-Book    of): 
Comprising  Vegetable  and  Animal  Morphology  and  Physiology.      In  Large 
Crown  8vo,  with  158  Illustrations.     Cloth. 
[Second  Edition  in  preparation.'} 
GENERAL,    CONTENTS. 
PART   I.   VEGETABLE   MORPHOLOGY   AND  PHYSIOLOGY. — Fungi — Algas — The 
Moss — The  Fern — Gymnosperms — Angiosperms. 
Comparative  Vegetable  Morphology  and  Physiology — Classification  of  Plants. 
PART  II.  ANIMAL  MORPHOLOGY  AND   PHYSIOLOGY.— Protozoa— Coelenterata — 
Vermes — Arthropoda — Mollusca — Amphibia — Aves — Mammalia. 
Comparative  Animal  Morphology  and  Physiology — Classification  of  Animals. 
With  Bibliography,  Exam.-Questions,  complete  Glossary,  and  158  Illustrations. 
"As  a  general  work  of  reference,  Mr.  Davis's  manual  will  be  HIGHLY  SERVICEABLE  to- 
medical  men. ' — British  Medical  Journal. 
"  Furnishes  a  clear  and  comprehensive  exposition  of  the  subject  in  a  systematic  form." — Saturday  Review. 
"  Literally  PACKED  with  information." — Glasgow  Medical  Journal. 
THE     FLOWERING     PLANT, 
AS    ILLUSTRATING*    THE    FIRST    PRINCIPLES    OF    BOTANY. 
Specially  adapted  for  London  Matriculation,  S.  Kensington,  and  University  Local 
Examinations  in  Botany.  Large  Crown  8vo,  with  numerous  Illustrations.  35.  6d. SECOND  EDITION. 
"  It  would  be  hard  to  find  a  Text-book  which  would  better  guide  the  student  to  an  accurate knowledge  of  modern  discoveries  in  Botany.  .  .  .  The  SCIENTIFIC  ACCURACY  of  statement,, 
and  the  concise  exposition  of  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  make  it  valuable  for  educational  purposes.  In 
the  chapter  on  the  Physiology  of  Flowers,  an  admirable  resume  is  given,  drawn  from  Darwin,. 
Hermann  Miiller,  Kerner,  and  Lubbock,  of  what  is  known  of  the  Fertilization  of  Flowers." — Journal  of  the  Linnean  Society. 
"We  are  much  pleased  with  this  volume  .  .  .  the  author's  style  is  MOST  CLEAR,  and his  treatment  that  of  a  PRACTISED  INSTRUCTOR.  .  .  .  The  Illustrations  are  very  goodr 
suitable  and  helpful.  The  Appendix  on  Practical  Work  will  be  INVALUABLE  to  the  private 
student  .  .  .  We  heartily  commend  the  work."— Schoolmaster. 
%*  Recommended  by  the  National  Home-Reading  Union  ;  and  also  for  use  in  the University  Correspondence  Classes. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
30  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATION'S. 
PROF.   DAVIS'S   WORKS — Continued. 
A    ZOOLOGICAL     POCKET-BOOK; 
OP,   Synopsis   of  Animal   Classification. 
Comprising  Definitions  of  the  Phyla,  Classes,  and  Orders,  with,  explanatory 
Remarks  and  Tables. 
BY    DR.    EMIL    SELENKA, 
Professor  in  the  University  of  Erlangen. 
Authorised  English  translation  from  the  Third  German  Edition.  In  Small 
Post  8vo,  Interleaved  for  the  use  of  Students.  Limp  Covers,  45. 
"Dr.  Selenka's  Manual  will  be  found  useful  by  all  Students  of  Zoology.  It  is  a  COMPRE- HENSIVE and  SUCCESSFUL  attempt  to  present  us  with  a  scheme  of  the  natural  arrangement  of 
the  animal  world." — Edin.  Med.  Journal. 
"  Will  prove  very  serviceable  to  those  who  are  attending  Biology  Lectures.  .  .  .  The 
translation  is  accurate  and  clear." — Lancet. 
INORGANIC  CHEMISTRY  (A  Short  Manual  of). 
BY  A.   DUPRE,    Ph.D.,   F.  R.  S.,   AND    WILSON    HAKE, 
Ph.D.,  F.I.C.,  F.C.S.,  of  the  Westminster  Hospital  Medical  School 
SECOND  EDITION,  Revised.       Crown  8vo.       Cloth,  7$.  6d. 
"A  well-written,  clear  and  accurate  Elementary  Manual  of  Inorganic  Chemistry.     .     . We  agree  heartily  in  the  system  adopted  by  Drs.  Duprd  and  Hake.     WILL  MAKE  EXPERI- 
MENTAL WORK  TREBLY  INTERESTING  BECAUSE  INTELLIGIBLE." — Saturday  Review. 
"There  is  no  question  that,  given  the  PERFECT  GROUNDING  of  the  Student  in  his  Science, the  remainder  comes  afterwards  to  him  in  a  manner  much  more  simple  and  easily  acquired. The  work  is  AN  EXAMPLE  OF  THE  ADVANTAGES  OF  THE  SYSTEMATIC  TREATMENT  of  a 
Science  over  the  fragmentary  style  so  generally  followed.  BY  A  LONG  WAY  THE  BEST  of  the 
•small  Manuals  for  Students." — Analyst. 
HINTS   ON   THE   PRESERVATION   OF   FISH, 
IN    REFERENCE    TO    FOOD    SUPPLY. 
BY    J.    COSSAR    EWART,    M.  D.,   F.  R.  S.  E., 
Regius  Professor  of  Natural  History,  University  of  Edinburgh. 
In  Crown  8vo.     Wrapper,  6d. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
STANDARD  PUBLICATIONS.  31 
Royal  Svo.      With  numerous  Illustrations  and  17  Lithographic  Plates. 
Handsome  Cloth.     Price  30*. 
BRIDGE-CONSTRUCTION (A  PRACTICAL  TREATISE  ON): 
Being  a  Text-Book  on  the   Construction  of  Bridges  in 
Iron  and  Steel. 
FOR  THE  USE  OF  STUDENTS,  DRAUGHTSMEN,  AND  ENGINEERS. 
BY 
T.  CLAXTON  FIDLER,  M.  INST.  C.E., 
Prof,  of  Engineering,  University  College,  Dundee. 
. 
"Of  late  years  the  American  treatises  on  Practical  and  Applied  Mechanics 
have  taken  the  lead  .  .  .  since  the  opening  up  of  a  vast  continent  has 
given  the  American  engineer  a  number  of  new  bridge -problems  to  solve 
.  .  .  but  we  look  to  the  PRESENT  TREATISE  ON  BRIDGE-CONSTRUCTION,  and 
the  Forth  Bridge,  to  bring  us  to  the  front  again." — Engineer. 
"  One  of  the  VERY  BEST  RECENT  WORKS  on  the  Strength  of  Materials  and  its 
application  to  Bridge-Construction.  .  .  .  Well  repays  a  careful  Stud}7." — Engineering. 
"An  INDISPENSABLE  HANDBOOK  for  the  practical  Engineer." — Nature. 
"  The  science  is  progressive,  and  as  an  exposition  of  its  LATEST  ADVANCES- 
we  are  glad  to  welcome  Mr.  Fidler's  well -written  treatise." — Architect. 
"  An  admirable  account  of  the!theory  and  process  of  bridge-design,  AT  ONCE 
SCIENTIFIC  AND  THOROUGHLY  PRACTICAL.  It  is  a  book  such  as  we  have  a  right 
to  expect  from  one  who  is  himself  a  substantial  contributor  to  the  theory  of 
the  subject,  as  well  as  a  bridge-builder  of  repute." — Saturday  Review. 
"This  book  is  a  model  of  what  an  engineering  treatise  ought  to  be." — 
Industries. 
"A  SCIENTIFIC  TREATISE  OF  GREAT  MERIT." — Westminster  Review. 
"Of  recent  text-books  on  subjects  of  mechanical  science,  there  has 
appeared  no  one  more  ABLE,  EXHAUSTIVE,  or  USEFUL  than  Mr.  Claxton 
Fidler's  work  on  Bridge-Construction." — Scotsman. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
3*  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
FOSTER  (C.  Le  Neve,  D.Sc.,  Professor  of  Mining, Royal  College  of  Science;  H.M.  Inspector  of  Mines,  Llandudno)  : 
ORE  AND  STONE  MINING  (A  Text-Book  of).  With  numerous 
Illustrations.  Large  Crown  8vo.  Cloth.  [Shortly. 
GRIFFIN'S    ELECTRICAL    PRICE-BOOK: For  the  Use  of  Electrical,  Civil,  Marine,  and  Borough  Engineers,  Local 
Authorities,  Architects,  Railway  Contractors,  &c.,  &c.  Edited  by 
H.  J.  DOWSING,  M.lNST.E.E.,  &c.  In  Crown  8vo.  Cloth.  [At  Press. 
•GRIFFIN  (John  Joseph,  F.C.S.)  : 
CHEMICAL  RECREATIONS :  A  Popular  Manual  of  Experimental 
Chemistry.  With  540  Engravings  of  Apparatus.  Tenth  Edition.  Crown 
4to.  Cloth. 
Part    I. — Elementary  Chemistry,  2/. 
Part  II.— The  Chemistry  of  the  Non-Metallic  Elements,  including  a 
Comprehensive  Course  of  Class  Experiments,  10/6. 
Or,  complete  in  one  volume,  cloth,  gilt  top,      .         .     12/6. 
OURDEN   (Richard  Lloyd,  Authorised   Surveyor for  the  Governments  of  New  South  Wales  and  Victoria)  : 
TRAVERSE  TABLES :  computed  to  Four  Places  Decimals  for  every 
Minute  of  Angle  up  to  100  of  Distance.  For  the  use  of  Surveyors  and 
Engineers.  Second  Edition.  Folio,  strongly  half-bound,  21 /. 
•%*  Published  with  Concurrence  of  the  Survey frs- General  for  New  South Wales  and  Victoria. 
"  Those  who  have  experience  in  exact  SURVEY-WORK  will  best  know  how  to  appreciate 
<the  enormous  amount  of  labour  represented  by  this  valuable  book.  The  computations 
enable  the  user  to  ascertain  the  sines  and  cosines  for  a  distance  of  twelve  miles  to  within 
half  an  inch,  and  this  BY  REFERENCE  TO  BUT  ONE  TABLE,  in  place  of  the  usual  Fifteen 
minute  computations  required.  This  alone  is  evidence  of  the  assistance  which  the  Tables 
ensure  to  every  user,  and  as  every  Surveyor  in  active  practice  has  felt  the  want  of  such 
assistance,  few  knowing  of  their  publication  will  remain  without  them." — Engineer, 
LONDON :   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL   WORKS. 33 
Griffin's   Standard    Publications 
ENGINEERS,  ELECTRICIANS,  ARCHITECTS,  BUILDERS, 
NAVAL  CONSTRUCTORS,  AND  SURVEYORS. 
Applied  Mechanics,  . 
,,       (Student's),  . Civil  Engineering-,    . Bridge-Construction,     . 
Design  of  Structures,  . 
Sewage  Disposal  Works, 
Traverse  Tables,    . 
Marine  Engineering-, Stability  of  Ships, 
The  Steam-Engine,   . 
(Student's), Boiler  Construction, 
„     Management, 
Fuel  and  Water  (for Steam  Users), 
Machinery  and  Millwork, 
Hydraulic  Machinery,  . Useful  Rules  and  Tables 
for  Engineers,  &e.,  . 
Electrical  Poeket-Book, 
Nystrom's  Poeket-Book, .   Electrical  Price-Book,  . 
PROF.  RANKINE, 
BROWNE,  JAMIESON, 
PROF.  RANKINE, 
PROF.  FIDLER, 
S.  ANGLIN,  . 
SANTO  CRIMP, 
R.  GURDEN, 
A.  E.  SEATON,     . 
SIR    E.  J.  REED, 
PROF.  RANKINE, 
PROF.  JAMIESON,          . 
T.  W.  TRAILL,     . 
R.  D.   MUNRO,     . 
f  SCHWACKHOFER    AND      ) 
(      BROWNE,  .          j 
PROF.  RANKINE, 
PROF.  ROBINSON, 
(  PROFS.  RANKINE  AND  ) 
(      JAMIESON,          .        J 
MUNRO  AND  JAMIESON, 
DENNIS  MARKS,  . 
H.  J.  DOWSING,  . 
PAGE 
44,  45 
26,  38 44 
31 
23 
28 32 
50 
46 
45 37 
51 
38 
49 44 
48 
45 40 
40 32 
For  a  COMPLETE  RECORD  of  the  PAPERS  read  before 
the  ENGINEERING,  ARCHITECTURAL,  and  ELECTRICAL 
SOCIETIES  throughout  the  United  Kingdom  during  each  year, 
vide  "THE  OFFICIAL  YEAR-BOOK  OF  THE  SCIENTIFIC AND  LEARNED  SOCIETIES  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN  AND 
IRELAND"  (page  53). 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
34 CHARLES  GRIFFIN  <k  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
Griffin's   Standard    Publications FOR 
MINE    OWNERS    AND    MANAGERS,    GEOLOGISTS, 
METALLURGISTS,  AND  MANUFACTURERS. 
Geology  (Stratigraphieal), 
(Physical),    . 
„  (Practical),    . 
Mine-Surveying, 
Mining-,  Coal 
,,  Ore  and  Stone,  . 
Blasting  and  Explosives, Metallurgy, 
,,     (Introduction  to), 
Assaying,    . 
Electro-Metallurgy, 
R.  ETHERIDGE,    . 
PROF.  SEELEY,     . 
PROF.  COLE, 
B.  H.  BROUGH,    . 
H.  W.  HUGHES, 
PAGB 
,  42 
,  41 
,  27 
,  26 
,  36 
PROF.  LE  NEVE  FOSTER,  32 
O.  GUTTMANN,     .         .  35 
PHILLIPS  AND  BAUERMAN,  43- 
PROF.  ROBERTS- AUSTEN,  47 
C.  &  J.  J.  BERINGER,  24 
W.    M'MlLLAN,     .  .          39 
OTHER   VOLUMES    IN    PREPARATION. 
Griffin's   Students'   Text-Books. 
Biology,.         .         .         Davis,  29 
Botany,  .         .         .         Davis,  29 
Chemistry- 
Inorganic,  Duprg&Hake,  30 
Qual.  Analysis,  Sexton,  49 
Quant.  „  „  49 
Recreations,  Griffin,  32 
Experiments,  Wright,  52 
Magnetism  and  Electricity, Jamieson,  38 
Mechanics,        .         Rankine,  45 
Physics  (Experiments), 
Wright,  52 
Physiology,      .          Stirling,  21 
Steam-Engine,      Jamieson,  37 
Zoology,            .             Davis,  30 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WOR&S.  35 
In  Large  J&vo,  with  Numerous  Illustrations  and  Folding  Plates, 
Cloth,   IDS.  6d. 
B  LAST  I  N  G: A   Handbook  for  the   Use  of  Engineers  and  others  Engaged  in 
Mining,  Tunnelling*   Quarrying,   &c. 
BY 
OSCAR   GUTTMANN,  Assoc.  M.  INST.  C.-E. 
Member  of  the  Societies- of  Civil  Engineers  and  Architects  of  Vienna,  and  Budapest, 
Corresponding  Member  of  the  Imp.  Roy.  Geological  Institution  of  Atistria,  &c. 
%*  Mr.  GUTTMANN'S  Blasting  is  the  ONLY  work  on  the  subject  which  gives  at  once  full information  as  to  the  NEW  METHODS  adopted  since  the  introduction  of  Dynamite,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  the  results  of  MANY  YEARS  PRACTICAL  EXPERIENCE  both  in  Mining  Work  and  in 
the  Manufacture  of  Explosives.  It  therefore  presents  in  concise  form  all  'that  has  been  proved good  in  the  various  methods  of  procedure.  The  Illustrations  form  a  special  and  valuable feature  of  the  work. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS.— Historical  Sketch— Blasting  Materials— Blasting  Pow: 
der— Various  Powder-mixtures — Gun-cotton — Nitro-glycerine  aid  Dynamite- 
Other  Nitro-compounds — Sprengel's  Liquid  (acid)  Explosives — Other  Means  of Blasting — Qualities,  Dangers,  and  Handling  of  Explosives — Choice  of  Blasting 
Materials— Apparatus  for  Measuring  Force — Blasting  in  Fiery  Mines — Means  of 
Igniting  Charges — Preparation  of  Blasts — Bore-holes — Machine-drilling — Chamber 
Mines — Charging  of  Bore-holes — Determination  of  the  Charge— Blasting  in  Bore- 
holes— Firing — Straw  and  Fuze  Firing— Electrical  Firing — Substitutes  for  Electrical 
Firing — Results  of  Working — Various  Blasting  Operations — Quarrying — Blasting 
Masonry,  Iron  Structures,  Wooden  Objects — Blasting  in  earth,  under  water,  of  ice, &c.,  &c. 
"  This  ADMIRABLE  work." — Colliery  Guardian. 
"  Should  prove  a  vade-mecum  to  Mining  Engineers  and  all  engaged  in  practical  work." — Iron  and  Coal  Trades  Review. 
HURST   (GEO.   H.,  F.G.S.) : 
PAINTERS'  COLOURS,  OILS,  AND  VARNISHES  :  A  Text-book 
for  Students  and  Practical  Men.  With  Numerous  Illustrations.  (Griffin's Technological  Series. )  \At  Press. 
KNECHT    (DR.),  RAWSON   (Chr.,  F.C.S.),  AND LOEWENTHAL  (DR.)  : 
A  MANUAL  OF  DYEING.  With  Numerous  Illustrations  and 
Specimens  of  Dyed  Fabrics.  (Griffin's  Technological  Series. ) 
[At  Press. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
COAL-MINING  (A  Text-Book  of): 
FOR   THE   USE  OF  COLLIERY   MANAGERS  AND   OTHERS 
ENGAGED   IN   COAL-MINING. 
HERBERT    WILLIAM    HUGHES,    F.G.S., 
Assoc.  Royal  School  of  Mines,  Certificated  Colliery  Manager. 
In  Demy  8vo,  Handsome  Cloth.      With  very  Ntttnerous  Illustrations,  mostly 
reduced  from  Working  Drawings. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
Geology  :  Rocks — Faults — Order  of  Succession— Carboniferous  System  in  Britain. Coal :  Definition  and  Formation  of  Coal—  Classification  and  Commercial  Value  of  Coals. 
Search  for  Coal :  Boring— various  appliances  used — Devices  employed  to  meet  Difficulties 
of  deep  Boring— Special  methods  of  Boring— Mather  &  Plait's,  American,  and  Diamond systems — Accidents  in  Boring — Cost  of  Boring— Use  of  Boreholes.  Breaking  Ground; 
Tools — Transmission  of  Power:  Compressed  Air,  Electricity — Power  Machine  Drills — Coal 
Cutting  by  Machinery— Cost  of  Coal  Cutting — Explosives— Blasting  in  Dry  and  Dusty 
Mines— Blasting  by  Electricity— Various  methods  to  supersede  Blasting.  Sinking: 
Position,  Form,  and  Size  of  shaft— Operation  of  getting  down  to  "  Stone-head" — Method  of proceeding  afterwards — Lining  shafts — Keeping  out  Water  by  Tubbing  — Cost  of  Tubbing- 
Sinking  by  Boring — Kind  -  Chaudron,  and  Lipmann  methods — Sinking  through  Quicksands 
—  Cost  of  Sinking.  Preliminary  Operations  :  Driving  underground  Roads — Supporting 
Roof:  Timbering,  Chocks  or  Cogs,  Iron  and  Steel  Supports  and  Masonry — Arrangement  of 
Inset.  Methods  of  Working :  Shaft,  Pillar,  and  Subsidence— Bord  and  Pillar  System- 
Lancashire  Method — Longwall  Method — Double  Stall  Method — Working  Steep  Seams — 
Working  Thick  Seams— Working  Seams  lying  near  together— Spontaneous  Combustion. 
Haulage:  Rails — Tubs— Haulage  by  Horses — Self-acting  Inclines — Direct-acting  Haulage 
— Main  and  Tail  Rope — Endless  Chain- Endless  Rope—Comparison.  Winding:  Pit 
Frames  —  Pulleys— Cages— Ropes— Guides — Engines— Drums — Brakes—  Counterbalancing — 
Expansion — Condensation — Compound  Engines — Prevention  of  Overwinding — Catches  at  pit 
top — Changing  Tubs — Tub  Controllers— Signalling.  Pumping:  Bucket  and  Plunger 
Pumps  —  Supporting  Pipes  in  Shaft  —  Valves  —  Suspended  lifts  for  Sinking — Cornish  and 
Bull  Engines— Davey  Differential  Engine — Worthington  Pump — Calculations  as  to  size  of 
Pumps — Draining  Deep  Workings — Dams.  Ventilation:  Quantity  of  air  required — Gases  met  with  in  Mines — Coal-dust — Laws  of  Friction — Production  of  Air-currents — 
Natural  Ventilation— Furnace  Ventilation — Mechanical  Ventilators— Efficiency  of  Fans — 
Comparison  of  Furnaces  and  Fans — Distribution  of  the  Air-current— Measurement  of  Air- 
currents.  Lighting:  Naked  Lights  —  Safety  Lamps — Modern  Lamps  —  Conclusions — 
Locking  and  Cleaning  Lamps— Electric  Light  Underground— Delicate  Indicators.  Works 
at  Surface ;  Boilers— Mechanical  Stoking — Coal  Conveyors— Workshops.  Preparation 
of  Coal  for  Market:  General  Considerations — Tipplers— Screens— Varying  the  Sizes  made 
by  Screens — Belts — Revolving  Tables — Loading  Shoots — Typical  Illustrations  of  the  arrange- 
ment of  Various  Screening  Establishments— Coal  Washing — Dry  Coal  Cleaning  -Briquettes. 
***  A  Novel  and  Important  Feature  will  be  found  in  the  BIBLIOGRAPHY  given  at  the  end of  each  Chapter. 
DETAILED    PROSPECTUS    POST-FREE   ON    APPLICATION. 
LONDON :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND   TECHNICAL  WORKS.  37 
W  O  H  K  S 
BY  ANDREW  JAMIESON,  M.lNST.C.E.,  F.R.S.E., Professor  of  Engineering,  Glasgow  and  West  oj  Scotland  Technical  College. 
SEVENTH  EDITION,  Revised  and  Enlarged.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  75.  6d. 
A    TEXT-BOOK    ON    STEAM    AND    STEAM-ENGINES. 
WITH  OVER  200  ILLUSTRATIONS,  FOLDING-PLATES,  AND 
EXAMINATION  QUESTIONS. 
"  Professor  Jamieson  fascinates  the  reader  by  his  CLEARNESS  OF  CONCEPTION  AND 
SIMPLICITY  OF  EXPRESSION.  His  treatment  recalls  the  lecturing  of  Faraday." — AtJtenceum. 
"  The  BEST  BOOK  yet  published  for  the  use  of  Students." — Engineer. 
"  Undoubtedly  the  MOST  VALUABLE  AND  MOST  COMPLETE  Hand-book  on  the  subject 
that  now  exists." — Marine  Engineer. 
A  POCKET-BOOK  of  ELECTRICAL  RULES  and  TABLES. 
FOR  THE  USE  OF  ELECTRICIANS  AND  ENGINEERS. 
Pocket  Size.     Leather,  8s.  6d.     Eighth  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 
(See  under  Mimro  and  famieson. ) 
ELECTRICITY  &  MAGNETISM  (An  Advanced  Text-Book  on) 
For  the  Use  of  Science  and  Art,   City  and  Guilds  of  London,  and  other Students.      With  Illustrations. 
[Shortly. 
PROF.  JAMIESON'S    ELEMENTARY    MANUALS    FOR FIRST-YEAR  STUDENTS. 
1.    STEAM   AND    THE   STEAM-ENGINE 
(AN   ELEMENTARY   MANUAL  ON): 
Forming  an  Introduction  to  the  larger  Work  by  the  same  Author.  With  very 
numerous  Illustrations  and  Examination  Questions.  Second  Edition. 
Crown  Svo.  Cloth,  35.  6d. 
"  Quite  the  right  sort  of  Book  .  .  .  well  illustrated  with  good  diagrams  and  drawings of  real  engines  and  details,  all  clearly  and  accurately  lettered.  .  .  .  CANNOT  FAIL  To  BE. 
A  MOST  SATISFACTORY  GUIDE  to  the  apprentice  and  Student."—  Engineer. 
"  Should  be  in  the  hands  of  EVERY  engineering  apprentice." — Practical  Engineer. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
jS  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  <k  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
PROF.  JAMIESON'S  ELEMENTARY  MANUALS— Continued. 
SECOND  EDITION.    Crown  8vo,  with  very  numerous  Illustrations. 
2.    MAGNETISM    AND    ELECTRICITY 
(AN  ELEMENTARY  MANUAL  ON). 
With  very  Numerous  Diagrams  and  Examination  Questions. 
Part  I —Magnetism.    Part  II.— Voltaic  Electricity.    Part  III  — 
Electro-Statics,  or  Frietional  Electricity. 
Complete  in  One  Volume,  3s.  6d. 
"  The  arrangement  is  as  good  as  it  well  can  be,  .  .  .  the  diagrams  are  EXCELLENT. .  .  .  The  subject  treated  as  an  essentially  practical  one,  and  very  clear  instructions 
given.  Teachers  are  to  be  congratulated  on  having  such  a  THOROUGHLY  TRUSTWORTHY 
TEXT- BOOK  at  their  disposal."— Nature. 
"An  excellent  and  very  PRACTICAL  elementary  treatise."—  Electrical  Review. 
"An  ADMIRABLE  Introduction  to  Magnetism  and  Electricity  .  .  .  the  production of  a  skilled  and  experienced  teacher.  .  .  .  Explained  at  every  point  by  simple 
experiments,  rendered  easier  by  admirable  illustrations."— British  Medical  Journal. 
"A  CAPITAL  TEXT-BOOK.  .  .  .  The  diagrams  are  an  important  feature." — Schoolmaster. 
3.  APPLIED  MECHANICS  (An  Elementary  Manual  on). 
With  very  numerous  Illustrations  drawn  expressly  for  the  work,  and 
Examination  Questions.     Crown  8vo. 
   [Shortly. 
SECOND  EDITION.     Enlarged,  and  very  fully  Illustrated.     Cloth,  4s.  Qd. 
STEAM  -  BOILERS: THEIR    DEFECTS,    MANAGEMENT,    AND    CONSTRUCTION. 
BY    R    D.    MTJNRO, 
Engineer  of  the  Scottish  Boiler  Insurance  and  Engine  Inspection  Company. 
This  work,  written  chiefly  to  meet  the  wants  of  Mechanics,  Engine- 
keepers,  and  Boiler-attendants,  also  contains  information  of  the  first  import- 
ance to  every  user  of  Steam-power.    It  is  a  PRACTICAL  work  written  for  PRAC- 
TICAL men,  the  language  and  rules  being  throughout  of  the  simplest  nature. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. — Explosions  caused  by  Overheating  of  Plates:  (a) 
Shortness  of  Water  :  (b)  Deposit — Explosions  caused  by  Defective  and 
Overloaded  Safety- Valves  — Area  of  Safety-Valves — Explosions  caused  by 
Corrosion — Explosions  caused  by  Defective  Design  and  Construction. 
%*  To  the  SECOND  EDITION,  a  Section  on  the  Management  of  Upright 
Internally-fired  Boilers,  and  a  Specification  and  detailed  Drawing  of  a  Lan- 
cashire Boiler  for  a  working  pressure  of  200  Ibs.  per  sq.  in.,  have  been  added. 
"A  valuable  companion  for  workmen  and  engineers  engaged  about  Steam 
Boilers,  ought  to  be  carefully  studied,  and  ALWAYS  AT  HAND."—  Coil.  Guardian. 
"  The  subjects  referred  to  are  handled  in  a  trustworthy,  clear,  and  practical manner.  .  .  .  The  book  is  VERY  USEFUL,  especially  to  steam  users, 
artisans,  and  young  engineers." — Engineer. 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS. 
39 
ELECTRO-METALLURGY   (A  Treatise  on) 
Embracing  the  Application  of  Electrolysis  to  the  Plating,  Depositing, 
Smelting,  and  Refining  of  various  Metals,  and  to  the  Repro- 
duction of  Printing  Surfaces  and  Art- Work,  &c. 
BY   WALTER   G.    M'MILLAN,    F.I.C.,    F.C.S., 
Chemist  and  Metallurgist  to  the  Cossipore  Foundry  and  Shell-Factory;  Late  Demonstrator 
of  Metallurgy  in  King's  College,  London. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.     Large  Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  10s.  6d. 
GENERAL   CONTENTS. 
Introductory  and  Historical — Theoreti- 
cal and  General — Sources  of  Current — 
General  Conditions  to  be  observed  in 
Electro-Plating  —  Plating  Adjuncts  and 
Disposition  of  Plant — Cleansing  and  Pre- 
paration of  Work  for  the  Depositing- Vat, 
and  Subsequent  Polishing  of  Plated  Goods 
— Electro-Deposition  of  Copper — Electro- 
typing — Electro-Deposition  of  Silver — of 
Gold— of  Nickel  and  Cobalt— of  Iron— of 
Platinum,  Zinc,  Cadmium,  Tin,  Lead, 
Antimony,  and  Bismuth;  Electro-chromy 
— Electro-Deposition  of  Alloys — Electro- 
Metallurgical  Extraction  and  Refining 
Processes  —  Recovery  of  certain  Metals from  their  Solutions  or  Waste  Substances 
—  Determination  of  the  Proportion  of 
Metal  in  certain  Depositing  Solutions — 
Glossary  of  Substances  commonly  em- 
ployed in  Electro-Metallurgy — Addenda  : 
Various  useful  Tables — The  Bronzing  or 
Copper  and  Brass  Surfaces — Antidotes  to Poisons. 
"This  excellent  treatise,  .  .  .  one  of  the  BEST  and  MOST  COMPLETE 
manuals  hitherto  published  on  Electro-Metallurgy."— Electrical  Review. 
"Well  brought  up  to  date,  including  descriptions  such  as  that  of 
Elmore's  recent  process  for  the  manufacture  of  seamless  copper  tubes  of 
extraordinary  strength  and  tenacity  by  electro-deposition  of  the  pure 
metal.  .  .  .  Illustrated  by  well-executed  and  effective  engravings." — 
Jowrnal  of  Soc.  of  Chem.  Industry. 
"  This  work  will  be  a  STANDARD." — Jeweller. 
"Any  metallurgical  process  which  REDUCES  the  COST  of  production 
must  of  necessity  prove  of  great  commercial  importance.  .  .  .  We 
recommend  this  manual  to  ALL  who  are  interested  in  the  PRACTICAL 
APPLICATION  of  electrolytic  processes." — Nature. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
40  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  <k  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
MUNRO  &  JAMIESON'S  ELECTRICAL  POCKET-BOOK. 
EIGHTH  EDITION,  Revised  and  Enlarged. 
A   POCKET-BOOK 
OF 
ELECTRICAL   RULES    &  TABLES FOR  THE  USE  OF  ELECTRICIANS  AND  ENGINEERS. 
BY 
JOHN  MUNRO,  C.E.,  &  PROF.  JAMIESON,  M.lNST.C.E.,  F.R.S.E. 
With  Numerous  Diagrams.     Pocket  Size.     Leather,  8s.  6d. 
This  work  is  fully  illustrated,  and  forms  an  extremely  convenient  POCKET 
COMPANION  for  reference  on  important  points  essential  to  ELECTRICIANS  AND ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERS. 
GENERAL      CONTENTS. 
UNITS  OF  MEASUREMENT. MEASURES. 
TESTING. 
CONDUCTORS. 
DIELECTRICS. 
SUBMARINE  CABLES. 
TELEGRAPHY. 
ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY. 
ELECTRO-METALLURGY. 
BATTERIES. 
DYNAMOS  AND  MOTOR: 
TRANSFORMERS. 
ELECTRIC  LIGHTING 
MISCELLANEOUS. 
LOGARITHMS. 
APPENDICES. 
"WONDERFULLY  PERFECT.  .  .  .  Worthy  of  the  highest  commendation  we  can give  it." — Electrician. 
"The  STERLING  VALUE  of  Messrs.  MUNRO  and  JAMIESON'S  POCKET-BOOK."— Electrical  Review. 
NYSTEOM'S   POCKET-BOOK OF 
MECHANICS  &  ENGINEERING. REVISED   AND    CORRECTED    BY 
W.  DENNIS  MARKS,  PH.B.,  C.E.  (YALE  s.s.s.), 
Whitney  Professor  of  Dynamical  Engineering,   University  of  Pennsylvania. 
'Pocket  Size.      Leather,   155.     TWENTIETH  EDITION.     Revised  and  greatly enlarged. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND   TECHNICAL    WORKS.  41 
Demy   8vo,   Handsome  cloth,   18s. 
PHYSICAL  GEOLOGY  AND 
PALEONTOLOGY, OJV  THE  BASIS   OF  PHILLIPS. 
BY 
HARRY     GOVIER     SEELEY,     F.  R.  S., PROFESSOR  OF  GEOGRAPHY  IN   KING'S  COLLEGE,  LONDON. 
TIClitb  ^frontispiece  in  Cbromo*Xftbo0rapb£t  anfc  ^lustrations. 
"  It  is  impossible  to  praise  too  highly  the  research  which  PROFESSOR  SEELEY'S 
'  PHYSICAL  GEOLOGY  '  evidences.  IT  is  FAR  MORE  THAN  A  TEXT- BOOK — it  is 
a  DIRECTORY  to  the  Student  in  prosecuting  his  researches." — Extract  from  the Presidential  Address  10  the  Geological  Society ,  1885,  by  Rev.  Professor  Bonney 
D.Sc.,  LL.D.,  F.R.S. 
"  PROFESSOR  SEELEY  maintains  in  his  '  PHYSICAL  GEOLOGY  '  the  high reputation  he  already  deservedly  bears  as  a  Teacher.  .  .  .  It  is  difficult, 
in  the  space  at  our  command,  to  do  fitting  justice  to  so  large  a  work.  .  .  . 
The  final  chapters,  which  are  replete  with  interest,  deal  with  the  Biological 
aspect  of  Palaeontology.  Here  we  find  discussed  the  origin,  the  extinction, 
succession,  migration,  persistence,  distribution,  relation,  and  variation  of  species 
— with  other  considerations,  such  as  the  Identification  of  Strata  by  Fossils, 
Homotaxis,  Local  Faunas,  Natural  History  Provinces,  and  the  relation  of 
Living  to  Extinct  forms." — Dr.  Henry  Woodward,  F.R.S.,  in  the  "  Geological 
Magazine" 
"  A  deeply  interesting  volume,  dealing  with  Physical  Geology  as  a  whole, and  also  presenting  us  with  an  animated  summary  of  the  leading  doctrines  and 
facts  of  Palaeontology,  as  looked  at  from  a  modern  standpoint." — Scotsman. 
"  PROFESSOR  SEELEY'S  work  includes  one  of  the  most  satisfactory  Treatises on  Lithology  in  the  English  language.  .  .  .  So  much  that  is  not  accessible 
in  other  works  is  presented  in  this  volume,  that  no  Student  of  Geology  can 
afford  to  be  without  it." — American  Journal  of  Engineering. 
"  Geology  from  the  point  of  view  of  Evolution." — Westminster  Review. 
"  PROFESSOR  SEELEY'S  PHYSICAL  GEOLOGY  is  full  of  instructive  matter, whilst  the  philosophical  spirit  which  it  displays  will  charm  many  a  reader. 
From  early  days  thu  author  gave  evidence  of  a  powerful  and  eminently  original 
genius.  No  one  has  shown  more  convincingly  than  the  author  that,  in  all 
ways,  the  past  contains  within  itself  the  interpretation  of  the  existing  world. " — Annals  of  Natural  History. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
42  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.  '8  P  UBLICA  TIONS. 
Demy  8vo,  Handsome  cloth, 
STRATIGRAPHICAL  GEOLOGY AND  PALEONTOLOGY, ON 
TEE    BASIS    OF   PHILLIPS. 
BY 
ROBERT    ETHERIDGE,    F.  R.  S., OF  THE  NATURAL  HIST.   DEPARTMENT,   BRITISH  MUSEUM,  LATE  PALAEONTOLOGIST  TO  THH 
GEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  GREAT  BRITAIN,  PAST  PRESIDENT  OF  THE 
GEOLOGICAL  SOCIETY,   ETC. 
dfcap,  Numerous  tables,  anfc  ZTbfctE=sfj  plates* 
"In  1854  Prof.  JOHN  MORRIS  published  the  Second  Edition  of  his '  Catalogue 
of  British  Fossils,'  then  numbering  1,280  genera  and  4.000  species.  Since that  date  3,000  genera  and  nearly  12,000  new  species  have  been  described, 
thus  bringing  up  the  muster-roll  of  extinct  life  in  the  British  Islands  alone  to 
3,680  genera  and  16,000  known  and  described  species. 
"  Numerous  TABLES  of  ORGANIC  REMAINS  have  been  prepared  and 
brought  down  to  1884,  embracing  the  accumulated  wealth  of  the  labours  of 
past  and  present  investigators  during  the  last  thirty  years.  Eleven  of  these 
Tables  contain  every  known  British  genus,  zoologically  or  systematically  placed, 
with  the  number  of  species  in  each,  showing  their  broad  distribution  through 
time.  The  remaining  105  Tables  are  devoted  to  the  analysis,  relation, 
historical  value,  and  distribution  of  specific  life  through  each  group  of  strata. 
These  tabular  deductions,  as  well  as  the  Palaeontological  Analyses  through  the 
text,  are,  for  the  first  time,  fully  prepared  for  English  students. " — Extract  from 
Author's  Preface. 
%*  PROSPECTUS  of  the  above  important  work— perhaps  the  MOST  ELABORATE  of its  kind  ever  written,  and  one  calculated  to  give  a  new  strength  to  the  study 
of  Geology  in  Bi  itain — may  be  had  on  application  to  the  Publishers. 
It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  the  work  will  be  found  to  occupy  a  place 
entirely  its  own,  and  will  become  an  indispensable  guide  to  every  British 
Geologist. 
"  No  such  compendium  of  geological  knowledge  has  ever  been  brought  together  before."' — Westminster  Review. 
"  If  PROF.  SKELEY'S  volume  was  remarkable  for  its  originality  and  the  breadth  of  its  views, 
Mr.  ETHERIDGE  fully  justifies  the  assertion  made  in  his  preface  that  his  book  differs  in  con- 
struction and  detail  from  any  known  manual.  .  .  .  Must  take  HIGH  RANK  AMONG  WORKS 
OF  REFERENCE." — Atlietueum. 
LONDON  :   EXETER   STREET,   STRANJX 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND   TECHNICAL    WORKS.     ,  43 
THIRD  EDITION,  Revised  by  Mr.  H.  Bauerman,  F.G.S. 
ELEMENTS    OF    METALLURGY; 
A  PRACTICAL  TREATISE  ON  THE  ART  OF  EXTRACTING  METALS 
FROM  THEIR  ORES, 
BY  J.  ARTHUR  PHILLIPS,  M.lNST.C.E.,  F.C.S   F.G.S.,  &c., 
AND 
H.    BAUERMAN,   V.  P.  G.  S. 
With  Folding  Plates  and  many  Illustrations.     Med.  8vo. 
Handsome  Cloth,  36s. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
Refractory  Materials. 
Fire-Clays. Fuels,  &c. 
Aluminium. 
Copper. Tin. 
Antimony. 
Arsenic. 
Zinc. Mercury. 
Bismuth. 
Lead. 
Iron. Cobalt. Nickel. 
Silver. 
Gold. 
Platinum. 
%*  Many  NOTABLE  ADDITIONS,  dealing  with  new  Processes  and  Developments will  be  found  in  the  Third  Edition. 
"  Of  the  THIRD  EDITION,  we  are  still  able  to  say  that,  as  a  Text-book  of 
Metallurgy,  it  is  THE  BEST  with  which  we  are  acquainted."— Engineer. .  "The  value  of  this  \vork  is  almost  inestimable.  There  can  be  no  question that  the  amount  of  time  and  labour  bestowed  on  it  is  enormous.  ...  There 
is  certainly  no  Metallurgical  Treatise  in  the  language  calculated  to  prove  of 
such  general  utility." — Mining  Journal. 
'"Elements  of  Metallurgy'  possesses  intrinsic  merits  of  the  highest  degree. Such  a  work  is  precisely  wanted  by  the  great  majority  of  students  and 
practical  workers,  and  its  very  compactness  is  in  itself  a  first-rate  recom- mendation. The  author  has  treated  with  great  skill  the  metallurgical  opera- tions relating  to  all  the  principal  metals.  The  methods  are  described  with 
surprising  clearness  and  exactness,  placing  an  easily,  intelligible  picture  of  each 
process  even  before  men  of  less  practical  experience,  and  illustrating  the  most 
important  contrivances  in  an  excellent  and  perspicuous  manner.  .  .  .  In 
our  opinion  the  best  work  ever  written  on  the  subject  with  a  view  to  its 
practical  treatment." — Westminster  Review. "  In  this  most  useful  and  handsome  volume  is  condensed  a  large  amount  of valuable  practical  knowledge.  A  careful  study  of  the  first  division  of,  the 
book,  on  Fuels,  will  be  found  to  be  of  great  value  to  every  one  in  training  for 
the  practical  applications  of  our  scientific  knowledge  to  any  of  our  metallurgi- 
cal operations." — Athenceum. 
'  "A  work  which  is  equally  valuable  to  the  Student  as  a  Text-book,  and  to the  practical  Smelter  as  a  Standard  Work  of  Reference.  .  .  .  The  Illustra- 
tions are  admirable  examples  of  Wood  Engraving."—  Chemical  News. 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,  ; STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
44  CHAPLES  GEIFFIN  &  CO. '8  PUBLICATIONS. 
SCIENTIFIC    MANUALS 
BY 
W.  J.  MACQUORN  RANKINE,  O.E.,  LLD.,  F.R.S., 
Late  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Engineering  in  the  University  of  Glasgow. 
THOROUGHLY  REVISED  BY  W.  J.  MILLAR,  C.E., 
Secretary  to  the  Institute  of  Engineers  and  Shipbuilders  in  Scotland. 
In  Crown  8vo.     Cloth. 
I.  RANKINE  (Prof.):  APPLIED  MECHANICS: 
comprising  the  Principles  of  Statics  and  Cinematics,  and  Theory  of  Struc- 
tures, Mechanism,  and  Machines.  With  numerous  Diagrams.  Thirteenth 
Edition,  12/6. 
"  Cannot  fail  to  be  adopted  as  a  text-book.     .     .     .     The  whole  of  the  information  is  so 
admirably  arranged  that  there  is  every  facility  for  reference." — Mining  Journal. 
II.  RANKINE  (Prof.):  CIVIL  ENGINEERING: 
comprising  Engineering  Surveys,  Earthwork,  Foundations,  Masonry, 
Carpentry,  Metal-work,  Roads,  Railways,  Canals,  Rivers,  Water-works, 
Harbours,  &c.  With  numerous  Tables  and  Illustrations.  Eighteenth 
Edition,  i6/. 
"  Far  surpasses  in  merit  every  existing  work  of  the  kind.  As  a  manual  for  the  hands of  the  professional  Civil  Engineer  it  is  sufficient  and  unrivalled,  and  even  when  we  say 
this,  we  fall  short  of  that  high  appreciation  of  Dr.  Rankine's  labours  which  we  should 
like  to  express." — The  Engineer. 
III.  RANKINE    (Prof.):    MACHINERY  AND 
MILLWORK :  comprising  the  Geometry,  Motions,  Work,  Strength, 
Construction,  and  Objects  of  Machines,  &c.  Illustrated  with  nearly  300 
Woodcuts.  Sixth  Edition,  12/6. 
"Professor  Rankine's  'Manual  of  Machinery  and  Millwork*  fully  maintains  the  high reputation  which  he  enjoys  as  a  scientific  author  ;  higher  praise  it  is  difficult  to  award  to 
any  book.  It  cannot  fail  to  be  a  lantern  to  the  feet  of  every  engineer.'' — The  Engineer. 
LONDON :   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND   TECHNICAL    WORKS.  45 
PROF.  RANKINE'S  WORKS— (Continued). 
IV.    RANKINE    (Prof.):    THE    STEAM    EN- GINE  and  OTHER  PRIME  MOVERS.  With  Diagram  of  the 
Mechanical  Properties  of  Steam,  Folding- Plates,  numerous  Tables  and 
Illustrations.  TJiirteenth  Edition,  12/6. 
V.  RANKINE    (Prof.):    USEFUL   RULES  and TABLES  for  Engineer?  and  others.  With  Appendix :  TABLES,  TESTS, 
and  FORMULAE  for  the.  vse  of  ELECTRICAL  ENGINEERS;  comprising 
Submarine  Electrical  Engineering,  Electric  Lighting,  and  Transmission 
of  Power.  By  ANDREW  JAMIESON,C.E.,F.R.S.E.  Seventh  Edition,  10/6. 
"Undoubtedly  the  most  useful  collection  of  engineering  data  hitherto  produced." — Mining  Journal. 
"  Every  Electrician  will  consult  it  with  profit" — Engineering. 
VI.    RANKINE     (Prof.):     A    MECHANICAL TEXT-BOOK,      by  Prof.  MACQUORN  RANKINE  and  E.  F.  BAMBER, 
C.E.     With  numerous  Illustrations.     Fourth  Edition,  $/. 
"  The  work,  as  a  whole,  is  very  complete,  and  likely  to  prove  invaluable  for  furnishing 
a  useful  and  reliable  outline  of  the  subjects  treated  of." — Mining  Journal. 
%*  THE  MECHANICAL  TEXT-BOOK  forms  a  simple  introduction  to  PROFESSOR  RANKINK'S SERIES  of  MANUALS  on  ENGINEERING  and  MECHANICS. 
VII.    RANKINE  (Prof.):    MISCELLANEOUS SCIENTIFIC  PAPERS.     Royal  8vo.     Cloth,  31/6. 
Part  I.  Papers  relating  to  Temperature,  Elasticity,  and  Expansion  of 
Vapours,  Liquids,  and  Solids.  Part  II.  Papers  on  Energy  and  its  Trans- 
formations. Part  III.  Papers  on  Wave-Forms,  Propulsion  of  Vessels,  &c. 
With  Memoir  by  Professor  TAIT,  M.  A.  Edited  by  W.  J.  MILLAR,  C.E. 
With  fine  Portrait  on  Steel,  Plates,  and  Diagrams. 
"  No  more  enduring  Memorial  of  Professor  Rankine  could  be  devised  than  the  publica- tion of  these  papers  in  an  accessible  form.  .  .  .  The  Collection  is  most  valuable  on 
account  of  the  nature  of  his  discoveries,  and  the  beauty  and  completeness  of  his  analysis. 
.  .  .  The  Volume  exceeds  in  importance  any  work  in  the  same  department  published 
in  our  time  "—  A  rcfiitect. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
46  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  efc  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 
Royal  8uo,  Handsome  Cloth,  25s. 
THE    STABILITY    OF    SHIPS. 
BY 
SIR  EDWARD   J.    REED,   K.C.B.,   F.R.S.,   M.R, 
KNIGHT    OF    THE    IMPERIAL    ORDERS    OF    ST.    STANILAUS    OF    RUSSIA;     FRANCIS    JOSEPH    OF 
AUSTRIA;    MEDJIDIE  OF  TURKEY;   AND  RISING  SUN  OF  JAPAN;   VICE- PRESIDENT  OF  THE  INSTITUTION  OF   NAVAL  ARCHITECTS. 
With  numerous  Illustrations  and  Tables. 
THIS  work  has  been  written  for  the  purpose  of  placing  in  the  hands  of  Naval  Constructors,. 
Shipbuilders,  Officers  of  the  Royal  and  Mercantile  Marines,  and  all  Students  of  Naval  Science, 
a  complete  Treatise  upon  the  Stability  of  Ships,  and  is  the  only  work  in  the  English 
Language  dealing  exhaustively  with  the  subject. 
The  plan  upon  which  it  has  been  designed  is  that  of  deriving  the  fundamental  principles 
and  definitions  from  the  most  elementary  forms  of  floating  bodies,  so  that  they  may  be 
clearly  understood  without  the  aid  of  mathematics :  advancing  thence  to  all  the  higher  and 
more  mathematical  developments  of  the  subject. 
The  work  also  embodies  a  very  full  account  of  the  historical  rise  and  progress  of  the 
Stability  question,  setting  forth  the  results  of  the  labours  of  BOUGUER,  BERNOULLI,  DON 
JUAN  D'ULLOA,  EULER,  CHAPMAN,  and  ROMME,  together  with  those  of  our  own  Countrymen, ATWOOD,  MOSELEY,  and  a  number  of  others. 
The  modern  developments  of  the  subject,  both  home  and  foreign,  are  likewise  treated 
with  much  fulness,  and  brought  down  to  the  very  latest  date,  so  as  to  include  the  labours  not 
only  of  DARGNIES,  REECH  (whose  famous  Memoire,  hitherto  a  sealed  book  to  the  majority 
of  English  naval  architects,  has  been  reproduced  in  the  present  work),  RISBEC,  FERRANTY, 
DUPIN,  GUYOU,  and  DAYMARD,  in  France,  but  also  those  of  RANKINE,  WOOLLEY,  ELGAR, 
JOHN,  WHITE,  GRAY,  DENNY,  INGLIS,  and  BENJAMIN,  in  Great  Britain. 
In  order  to  render  the  work  complete  for  the  purposes  of  the  Shipbuilder,  whether  at 
home  or  abroad,  the  Methods  of  Calculation  introduced  by  Mr.  F.  K.  BARNES,  Mr.  GRAY, 
M.  REECH,  M.  DAYMARD,  and  Mr.  BENJAMIN,  are  all  given  separately,  illustrated  by 
Tables  and  worked-out  examples.  The  book  contains  more  than  200  Diagrams,  and  is 
illustrated  by  a  large  number  of  actual  cases,  derived  from  ships  of  all  descriptions,  but 
especially  from  ships  of  the  Mercantile  Marine. 
The  work  will  thus  be  found  to  constitute  the  most  comprehensive  and  exhaustive  Treatise 
hitherto  presented  to  the  Profession  on  the  Science  of  the  STABILITY  OF  SHIPS. 
"  Sir  EDWARD  REED'S  '  STABILITY  OF  SHIPS  '  is  INVALUABLE.  In  it  the  STUDENT,  new to  the  subject,  will  find  the  path  prepared  for  him,  and  all  difficulties  explained  with  the 
utmost  care  and  accuracy ;  the  SHIP-DRAUGHTSMAN  will  find  all  the  methods  of  calculation  at 
present  in  use  fully  explained  and  illustrated,  and  accompanied  by  the  Tables  and  Forms 
employed  ;  the  SHIPOWNER  will  find  the  variations  in  the  Stability  of  Ships  due  to  differences 
in  forms  and  dimensions  fully  discussed,  and  the  devices  by  which  the  state  of  his  ships  under 
all  conditions  may  be  graphically  represented  and  easily  understood  ;  the  NAVAL  ARCHITECT 
will  find  brought  together  and  ready  to  his  hand,  a  mass  of  information  which  he  would  other- wise have  to  seek  in  an  almost  endless  variety  of  publications,  and  some  of  which  he  would 
possibly  not  be  able  to  obtain  at  all  elsewhere." — Stea.msh.ij>. 
"This  IMPORTANT  AND  VALUABLE  WORK  .  .  cannot  be  too  highly  recommended  to 
all  connected  with  shipping  interests." — Iron.  i 
"  This  VERY  IMPORTANT  TREATISE,      ...      the  MOST  INTELLIGIBLE,  INSTRUCTIVE,  and 
COMPLETE  that  has  ever  appeared." — Nature. 
"The  volume  is  an  ESSENTIAL  ONE  for  tha  shipbuilding  profession." — Westminster Review. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS.  47 
In  Large  Crown  8uo,  Handsome  Cloth,  with  Numerous 
Illustrations,  7s.  6d.     Second  Edition. 
METALLURGY 
(AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  STUDY  OF). 
BY 
W.   C.   ROBERTS-AUSTEN,  C.B.,  F.R.S., 
•CHEMIST  AND   ASSAYER   OF  THE  ROYAL  MINT  ;    PROFESSOR   OF  METALLURGY  IN 
THE  ROYAL  COLLEGE  OF  SCIENCE. 
GENERAL,    CONTENTS. 
RELATION  OF  METALLURGY  TO 
CHEMISTRY. 
PHYSICAL  PROPERTIES  OF 
METALS. 
ALLOYS. 
THE  THERMAL  TREATMENT 
OF  METALS. 
FUEL. 
MATERIALS  AND  PRODUCTS  OF 
METALLURGICAL  PROCESSES. 
FURNACES. 
MEANS  OF  SUPPLYING  AIR  TO 
FURNACES. 
TYPICAL  METALLURGICAL 
PROCESSES. 
ECONOMIC  CONSIDERATIONS. 
"  No  English  text-book  at  all  approaches  this  one  either  in  its  method  of treatment,  its  general  arrangement,  or  in  the  COMPLETENESS  with  which  the  most 
modern  views  on  the  subject  are  dealt  with.  Professor  Austen's  volume  will  be INVALUABLE,  not  only  to  the  student,  but  also  to  those  whose  knowledge  of  the 
-art  is  far  advanced." — Chemical  News. 
"  INVALUABLE  to  the  student.  .  .  .  Rich  in  matter  not  to  be  readily  found 
•elsewhere. " — Athenceum. 
' '  This  volume  amply  realises  the  expectations  formed  as  to  the  result  of  the 
labours  of  so  eminent  an  authority.  It  is  remarkable  for  its  ORIGINALITY  of  con- 
ception and  for  the  large  amount  of  information  which  it  contains.  .  .  .  The 
enormous  amount  of  care  and  trouble  expended  upon  it.  ...  We  recom- 
mend every  one  who  desires  information  not  only  to  consult,  but  to  STUDY  this 
work." — Engineering. 
"  Will  at  once  take  FRONT  RANK  as  a  text-book. — Science  and  Art. 
"  Prof.  ROBERTS- AUSTEN'S  book  marks  an  epoch  in  the  history  of  the  teaching 
of  metallurgy  in  this  country." — Industries. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
CHARLES  GRIFFIN  <k  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
Medium   8vo,  Handsome  cloth,  25s 
HYDRAULIC  POWER AND 
HYDRAULIC  MACHINERY. BY 
HENRY    ROBINSON,    M.    INST.    C.E.,   F.G.S., 
FELLOW    OF   KING'S   COLLEGE,    LONDON;    PROF.    OF   CIVIL   ENGINEERING, KING'S   COLLEGE,    ETC.,    ETC. 
•Qditb  numerous  Woo&cuts,  an&  43  Xitbo.  plates. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. 
The  Flow  of  Water  under  Pressure. 
General  Observations. 
Waterwheels. 
Turbines. 
Centrifugal  Pumps. 
Water-pressure  Pumps. 
The  Accumulator. 
Hydraulic  Pumping-Engine. 
Three-Cylinder   Engines   and 
Capstans. 
Motors  with  Variable  Power. 
Hydraulic  Presses  and  Lifts. 
Movable  Jigger  Hoist. 
Hydraulic  Waggon  Drop. 
The  Flow  of  Solids. 
Shop  Tools. 
Cranes. 
Hydraulic  Power  applied  to  Bridges. 
Dock- Gate  Machinery. 
Hydraulic   Coal-discharging 
Machines. 
Hydraulic  Machinery  on  board Ship. 
Hydraulic  Pile  Driver. 
Hydraulic  Excavator. 
Hydraulic  Drill. 
Hydraulic  Brake. 
Hydraulic  Gun- Carriages. 
Jets. Hydraulic  Ram. Packing. 
Power  Co-operation. 
Cost  of  Hydraulic  Power. 
Tapping  Pressure  Mains. 
Meters. 
Waste  Water  Meter. 
Pressure  Reducing  Valves. 
Pressure  Regulator. 
"A  Book  of  great  Professional  Usefulness."— Iron. 
A  full  Prospectus  of  the  above  important  work — giving  a  description  of  the 
Plates — may  be  had  on  application  to  the  Publishers. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS.  49 
SCHWACKHOFER    and    BROWNE: 
FUEL  AND  WATER :  A  Manual  for  Users  of  Steam  and  Water. 
By  Prof.  FRANZ  SCHWACKHOFER  of  Vienna,  and  WALTER 
R.  BROWNE,  M.A.,  C.E.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge. 
Demy  8vo,  with  Numerous  Illustrations,  9/. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. — Heat  and  Combustion — Fuel,  Varieties  of — Firing  Arrange- 
ments :  Furnace,  Flues,  Chimney  —  The  Boiler,  Choice  of —Varieties — Feed-water 
Heaters— Steam  Pipes — Water :  Composition,  Purification— Prevention  of  Scale,  &c.,  &c. 
"The  Section  on  Heat  is  one  of  the  best  and  most  lucid  ever  written." — Engineer, 
"  Contains  a  vast  amount  of  useful  knowledge.     .     .     .     Cannot  fail  to  be  valuable  t» 
thousands  compelled  to  use  steam  power." — Railway  Engineer, 
"  Its  practical  utility  is  beyond  question." — Mining  Journal. 
SHELTON-BEY  (W.   Vincent,   Foreman  to  the Imperial  Ottoman  Gun  Factories,  Constantinople)  : 
THE  MECHANIC'S  GUIDE  :  A  Hand- Book  for  Engineers  and Artizans.  With  Copious  Tables  and  Valuable  Recipes  for  Practical  Use. 
Illustrated.  Second  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth,  7/6. 
GENERAL  CONTENTS. — Arithmetic— Geometry— Mensuration — Velocities  in  Boring 
and  Wheel-Gearing—Wheel  and  Screw-Cutting—Miscellaneous  Subjects  and  Useful 
Recipes — The  Steam  Engine — The  Locomotive — Appendix :  Tables  for  Practical  Use. 
The  MECHANIC'S  GUIDE  will  answer  its  purpose  as  completely  as  a  whole  series  of 
elaborate  text-books." — Mining  Journal. 
WORKS  by  Prof.  HUMBOLDT  SEXTON,  F.I.C.,  F.C.S,  F.R.S.E., Glasgo-w  and  West  of  Scotland  Technical  College. 
OUTLINES  OF  QUANTITATIVE  ANALYSIS. FOR   THE   USE    OF    STUDENTS. 
With  Illustrations.      THIRD  EDITION.      Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  35. 
"A  practical  work  by  a  practical  man    .    .    .     will  further  the  attainment  of  accuracy  and 
thod."— Journal  of  Education. 
"An  ADMIRABLE  little  volume    .     .     .     well  fulfils  its  purpose." — Schoolmaster. 
"A  COMPACT  LABORATORY  GUIDE  for  beginners  was  wanted,  and  the  want  has  been  WELL 
SUPPLIED.  ...  A  good  and  useful  bcok."— Lancet. 
"  Mr.  Sexton's  book  will  be  welcome  to  many  teachers  ;  for  the  processes  are  WELL  CHOSEN, the  principle  which  underlies  each  method  is  always  CLEARLY  EXPLAINED,  and  the  directions 
are  both  SIMPLE  and  CLEAR." — Brit.  Med.  Journal. 
BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 
OUTLINES   OF   QUALITATIVE    ANALYSIS. FOR    THE    USE    OF    STUDENTS. 
With  Illustrations.     THIRD  EDITION.     Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  35.  6d. 
"The  work  of  a  thoroughly  practical  chemist     .     .     .    and  one  which  maybe  unhesitat- 
ingly recommended." — Kritish  Medical  Journal. 
"Compiled  with  great  care,  and  will  supply  a  want."— Journal  of  Education. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
$o  CHARLES  &RIEFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
Now  Ready,  Tenth  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlarg-ed,  Price  18s. 
Demy  Svo,  Cloth.      With  Numerous  Illustrations,  reduced  from 
Working  Drawings. 
A    M  A  N  U  A  L 
OF 
MARINE  ENGINEERING: COMPRISING 
THE  DESIGNING,  CONSTRUCTION,  AND  WORKING  OF 
MARINE  MACHINERY. 
IB-z-     J±.     IE.     SZE^TOUST, Lecturer  on  Marine  Engineering  to  the  Royal  Naval  College,  Greenwich;  Member  of  the. 
Inst.  of  Civil  Engineers ;  Member  of  Council  of  the  Inst.  of  A  aval  Architects ; 
Member  of  the  Inst.  of  Mech.  Engineers,  itc. 
GENKRAL     CONTENTS. 
Part  I. —Principles  of  Marine 
Propulsion. 
Part  II.— Principles  of  Steam 
Engineering.  Papt  IV. -Propellers. 
Part  III.— Details  of  Marine 
Engines:  Design  and  Cal- 
culations for  Cylinders, 
Pistons,  Valves,  Expansion 
Valves,  &e. 
Part    V.-Boilers. 
Part  VI.— Miscellaneous. 
"In  the  three-fold  capacity  of  enabling  a  Student  to  learn  how  to  design,  construct, and  work  a  modern  Marine  Steam- Engine,  Mr.  Seaton's  Manual  has  NO  RIVAL  as 
regards  comprehensiveness  of  purpose  and  lucidity  of  treatment." — Times. 
"The  important  subject  of  Marine  Engineering  is  here  treated  with  the  THOROUGH- NESS that  it  requires.  No  department  has  escaped  attention.  .  .  .  Gives  the 
results  of  mucn  close  study  and  "practical  work."— Engineering. 
"By  far  the  BEST  MANUAL  in  existence.  .  .  .  Gives  a  complete  account  of  the methods  of  solving,  with  the  utmost  possible  economy,  the  problems  before  the  Marine 
Engi  neer. '  '—Athenceum. 
"The  Student,  Draughtsman,  and  Engineer  will  find  this  work  the  MOST  VALUABLE 
HANDBOOK  of  Reference  on  the  Marine  Engine  now  in  existence."— Marine  Engineer. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS. 
SECOND  EDITION,  Revised  and  Enlarged.    Pocket-Sift,  Leather,  also. for  Office  Use,  Cloth,  12i 
BOILERS,   MARINE   AND  LAND; 
THEIR  CONSTRUCTION  AND  STRENGTH. 
A  HANDBOOK  OF  RULES,  FORMULAE,  TABLES,  &c.,  RELATIVE  TO  MATERIAL, 
SCANTLINGS,  AND  PRESSURES,  SAFETY  VALVES,  SPRINGS, 
FITTINGS  AND  MOUNTINGS,  &c. 
ffor  tbe  "Else  of  all  Steam^'Cteers, 
BY  T.   W.   TRAILL,    M.  INST.  0.  K,   F.E.RK, 
Engineer  Surveyor-in-Chief  to  the  Board  of  Trade. 
***  In  the  New  Issue  the  subject-matter  has  been  considerably  extended  ; 
Tables  have  been  added  for  Pressures  up  to  200  Ibs.  per  square  inch,  and  some 
of  the  Tables  have  been  altered,  besides  which  new  ones  and  other  matter 
have  been  introduced,  which  have  been  specially  prepared  and  computed  for 
the  SECOND  EDITION. 
"Very  unlike  any  of  the  numerous  treatises  on  Boilers  which  have  preceded  it.  ...  Really useful.  .  .  .  Contains  an  ENORMOUS  QUANTITY  OF  INFORMATION  arranged  in  a  very  convenient 
f9rm.  .  .  .  Those  who  have  to  design  boilers  will  find  that  they  can  settle  the  dimensions  for  any 
given  pressure  with  almost  no  calculation  with  its  aid.  ...  A  MOST  USEFUL  VOLUME  .  .'  . 
supplying  information  to  be  had  nowhere  else."—  The  Engineer. 
"As  a  handbook  of  rules,  formulae,  tables,  &c.,  relating  to  materials,  scantlings,  and  pressures,  this work  will  prove  MOST  USEFUL.  The  name  of  the  Author  is  a  sufficient  guarantee  for  its  accuracy.  It 
will  save  engineers,  inspectors,  and  draughtsmen  a  vast  amount  of  calculation."—  Nature. 
"Mr.  Traill  has  done  a  very  nseful  and  unpretentious  piece  of  work.  Rules  and  tables  are  given  in 
a  way  simple  enough  to  be  intelligible  to  the  most  unscientific  engineer."—  Saturday  Review. 
"  By  such  an  authority  cannot  hut  prove  a  welcome  addition  to  the  literature  of  the  subject.  In  the hands  of  the  practical  engineer  or  hoilermaker,  its  value  as  a  ready,  reliable,  and  widely  comprehensive 
book  of  reference,  must  prove  almost  inestimable.  .  .  .  Will  rank  high  as  a  standard  work  on  the 
.subject.  We  can  strongly  recommend  it  as  being  the  MOST  COMPLETE,  eminently  practical  work  on  the 
subject."—  Marine  Engineer. 
"To  the  engineer  and  practical  boiler-maker  it  -will  prove  INVALUABLE.  Copious  and  carefully worked-out  tables  will  save  much  of  the  calculating  drudgery.  .  .  .  Many  exceedingly  useful  and practical  hints  are  given  with  regard  to  the  treatment  of  iron  and  steel,  which  are  exceedingly  valuable, 
and  the  outcome  of  a  wide  experience.  The  tables  in  all  probability  are  the  most  exhaustive  yet 
published.  .  .  .  Certainly  deserves  a  place  on  the  shelf  in  the  drawing  office  of  every  boiler  shop.  — Practical  Engineer. 
"We  give  it  a  hearty  welcome.  .  .  .  A  handy  pocket-book.  .  .  .  Our  readers  cannot  do  better than  purchase  a  copy.  .  .  .  Cheap  at  five  times  the  price.  The  intelligent  engineer  can  make  a 
safe  investment  that  will  yield  him  a  rich  and  satisfactory  return."—  Engineers  Gazette. 
"From  the  author's  well-known  character  for  thoroughness  and  exactness,  there  is  every  reason  to believe  that,  the  results  given  in  the  tables  may  be  relied  on.  ...  The  great  experience  of  the  author 
in  all  that  relates  to  boiler  construction  constitutes  him  an  authority  that  no  one  need  be  ashamed  of 
quoting,  and  a  guide  as  safe  as  any  man  in  Britain."—  Shipping  World. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
52  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO:S  PUBLICATIONS. 
SECOND  EDITION.    With  very  Numerous  Illustrations.     Handsome  Cloth,  6s. 
Also  Presentation  Edition,  Gilt  and  Gilt  Edges,  7s.  6d. 
THE  THRESHOLD   OF  SCIENCE: 
A   VARIETY   OF    EXPERIMENTS   (Over   400) 
ILLUSTRATING 
SOME  OF  THE  CHIEF  PHYSICAL  AND  CHEMICAL  PROPERTIES  OF  SURROUNDING  OBJECTS, 
AND  THE  EFFECTS  UPON  THEM  OF  LIGHT  AND  HEAT, BY 
C.    K    ALDER   WRIGHT,    D.Sc.,    F.R.S., 
Lecturer  on  Chemistry  and  Physics  in  St.  Mary's  Hospital  Medical  School,  London. 
%*  To  the  NEW  EDITION  has  been  added  an  excellent  chapter  on  the Systematic  Order  in  which  Class  Experiments  should  be  carried  out  for 
Educational  purposes. 
"Its  capital  Index,  its  popular  phraseology,  its  range  of  subjects,  and 
numerous  Illustrations,  suggest  three  uses  which  Dr.  Alder  Wright's  Threshold 
of  Science  will  serve  : — 
"  1.  It  is  a  CAPITAL  LIBRARY  BOOK  for  Teachers  preparing  simple  object-lessons. 
"2.  In  the  HOME  LIBRARY  it  would  be  a  practical  ENCYCLOPEDIA  of  Science. 
"3.  Finally,  the  book  is  a  WORKING  BOOK  ;  every  point  taken  up  has  its accompanying  experiment — often  a  MOST  USEFUL  one — of  which  full  details  are 
given  ."—Schoolmaster. 
"Any.one  who  may  still  have  doubts  regarding  the  value  of  Elementary Science  as  an  organ  of  education  will  speedily  have  his  doubts  dispelled,  if  he 
takes  the  trouble  to  understand  the  methods  recommended  by  Dr.  Alder 
Wright.  The  Additions  to  the  Xew  Edition  will  be  of  great  service  to  all 
who  wish  to  use  the  volume,  not  merely  as  a  '  play-book,'  but  as  an  instrument 
for  the  TRAINING  of  the  MENTAL  FACULTIES."— Nature. 
"  A  FIRST-RATE  BOOK  to  place  in  the  hands  of  a  boy." — Educational  Times. 
"  An  ADMIRABLE  COLLECTION  of  Physical  and  Chemical  Experiments  .  .  . a  large  proportion  of  these  may  be  performed  at  home  without  any  costly 
-apparatus." — Journal  of  Education. 
"  The  work  is  quite  as  instructive  as  it  is  entertaining.  .  .  .  The 
language  throughout  is  clear  and  simple."— School  Guardian. 
"Will  teach  the  young  experimentalist  to  USE  HIS  HANDS,  and  last,  but  not 
least,  to  THINK  FOR  HIMSELF." — Industries. 
"  Just  the  kind  of  book  to  add  to  a  school  library." — Manchester  Guardian. 
"Dr.  Alder  Wright  has  accomplished  a  task  that  will  win  for  him  the hearts  of  all  intelligent  youths  with  scientific  leanings.  .  .  .  Step  by  step 
the  learner  is  here  gently  guided  through  the  paths  of  science,  made  easy  by  the 
perfect  knowledge  of  the  teacher,  and  made  flowery  by  the  most  striking  and 
curious  experiments.  Well  adapted  to  become  the  TREASURED  FRIEND  of  many 
a  bright  and  promising  lad." — Manchester  Examiner. 
"  From  the  nature  of  gases  to  the  making  of  soap-bubbles,  from  the  freezing 
of  water  to  the  principles  of  '  pin-hole '  photography,  Dr.  Alder  Wright's  book 
is  an  authority."— Liverpool  Mercury. 
LONDON :   EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNICAL  WORKS. 53 
Ninth  Annual  Issue.       Now  Ready. 
THE    OFFICIAL    YEAR-BOOK OF   THE 
SCIENTIFIC   AND    LEARNED   SOCIETIES   OF   GREAT 
BRITAIN  AND  IRELAND.     PRICE  7/6. 
COMPILED  FROM  OFFICIAL  SOURCES. 
Comprising  (together  with  other  Official  Information]  LISTS  of  the 
PAPERS  read  during  1891  before  the  ROYAL  SOCIETIES  of  LONDON 
and  EDINBURGH,  the  ROYAL  DUBLIN  SOCIETY,  the  BRITISH 
ASSOCIATION,  and  all  the  LEADING  SOCIETIES  throughout  the 
Kingdom  engaged  in  the  following  Departments  of  Research : — 
§  i.  Science  Generally :  i.e.,  Societies  occupy- ing themselves  with  several  Branches  of 
Science,  or  with  Science  and  Literature 
jointly. §  2.  Mathematics  and  Physics. 
§  3.  Chemistry  and  Photography. 
§  4.  Geology,  Geography,  and  Mineralogy. 
§  5.  Biology,  including  Microscopy  and  An- thropology. 
§    6.  Economic  Science  and  Statistics. 
5    7.  Mechanical  Science  and  Architecture. 
§   8.  Naval  and  Military  Science. 
§    9.  Agriculture  and  Horticulture. 
§  10.   Law. 
§11.  Medicine. 
§  12.  Literature. §13.  Psychology. §  14.  Archaeology. 
the "  The  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  is  a  Record  which  ought  to  be  of  the  greatest  use  for 
progress  of  Science."—  Sir  Lyon  Playfair,  F.R.S.,  K.C.B.,  M.P.,  Past-President of  tJie  British  Association. 
"  It  goes  almost  without  saying  that  a  Handbook  of  this  subject  will  be  in  time 
one  of  the  mo'st  generally  useful  works  for  the  library  or  the  desk."—  The  Times. 
"  The  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  meets  an  obvious  want,  and  promises  to  be  a  valuable work  of  reference." — A  theneeum. 
"  The  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SCIENTIFIC  AND  LEARNED  SOCIETIES  meets  a  want,  and  is  there- fore sure  of  a'welcome." — Westminster  Review. 
"  In  the  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  we  have  the  FIRST  ISSUE  of  what  is,  without  doubt, 
a  very  useful -work." — Spectator. "  The  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  fills  a  very  real  want.  The  volume  will  become  a Scientific  Directory,  chronicling  the  work  and  discoveries  of  the  year,  and  enabling  the  worker 
in  one  branch  to  try  his  hand  in  all  that  interests  him  in  kindred  lines  of  research.  We  trust 
that  it  will  meet  with  an  encouraging  reception." — Engineering. 
Copies  of  the  FIRST  ISSUE,  giving  an  Account  of  the  History, 
Organisation,  and  Conditions  of  Membership  of  the  various 
Societies  [with  Appendix  on  the  Leading  Scientific  Societies 
throughout  the  world],  and  forming  the  groundwork  of  the  Series, 
may  still  be  had,  price  7/6.  Also  Copies  of  the  following  Issues. 
The  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  forms  a  complete  INDEX  TO 
THE  SCIENTIFIC  WORK  of  the  year  in  the  various  Departments. 
It  is  used  as  a  ready  HANDBOOK  in  all  our  great  SCIENTIFIC 
CENTRES,  MUSEUMS,  and  LIBRARIES  throughout  the  Kingdom,  and 
will,  without  doubt,  become  an  INDISPENSABLE  BOOK  OF  REFERENCE 
to  every  one  engaged  in  Scientific  Work. We  predict  that  the  YEAR-BOOK  OF  SOCIETIES  will  speedily  become  one  of  those  Year- 
Books  WHICH  IT  WOULD  BE  IMPOSSIBLE  TO  DO  WITHOUT." — Bristol  Mercury. 
LONDON  :   EXETER   STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
54 CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
EDUCATIONAL    WORKS. 
***  Specimen    Copies  of  all  the  Educational   Works  published  by  Messrs. 
Charles  Griffin  and  Company  may  be  seen  at  the  Libraries  of  the  College  of 
Preceptors,  South  Kensington  Museum,  and  Crystal  Palace;  also  at  the  depdts 
of  the  Chief  Educational  Societies. 
Griffin's  Standard  Classical  Works. 
Prehistoric  Antiquities, 
Greek  Antiquities, 
Roman  Antiquities,    . 
„  Elementary, 
Greek  Literature, 
Roman  Literature, 
„         Specimens  of, 
Greek  Geography  and  My- 
thology,,        .        i 
Latin  Prosody,   . 
„  Elementary, 
Virgil:     Text    and    Notes 
(Illustrated),  . 
Horace :    Text  and  Notes 
(lUustrated),  . 
PAGE 
SCHRADER  and  JEVONS,  .       61 
F.  B.  JEVONS,  .         .  .59 
Prof.  RAMSAY,          .  .       60 
Prof.  RAMSAY,          .  .60 
F.  B.  JEVONS,  .         .  •       59 
Rev.  C.  T.  CRUTTWELL,  .  57 
CRUTTWELL  and  BANTON,  57 
DOERING  and  GR^ME,  .  58 
Prof.  RAMSAY,  .  .  60 
Prof.  RAMSAY,  .  .  60 
Dr.  BRYCE,  .  .  .  55 
Jos.  CURRIE,  .  .  .  55  ' 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
EDUCATIONAL    WORKS.  55 
BRYCE-  (Archibald    Hamilton,     D.C.L.,    LL.D., Senior  Classical  Moderator  in  the  University  of  Dublin)  : 
THE  WORKS  OF  VIRGIL.  Text  from  HEYNE  and  WAGNER. 
English  Notes,  original,  and  selected  from  the  leading  German,  and 
English  Commentators.  Illustrations  from  the  antique.  Complete  in 
One  Volume.  Fourteenth  Edition.  Fcap  8vo.  Cloth,  6/. 
Or,  in  Three  Parts  : 
Part      I.  BUCOLICS  and  GEORGICS,  .         .  2/6. 
Part    II.  THE^ENEID,  Books  I.-VL,       .  2/6. 
Part  III.  THE  ^ENEID,  Books  VII.-XIL, .  2/6. 
"  Contains  the  pith  of  what  has  been  written  by  the  best  scholars  on  the  subject. 
.  .  .  The  notes  comprise  everything  that  the  student  can  want." — Athentzum. 
"  The  most  complete,  as  well  as  elegant  and  correct  edition  of  Virgil  ever  published  in this  country." — Educational  Times. 
"The  best  commentary  on  Virgil  which  a  student  can  obtain." — Scotsman. 
COBBETT  (William):  ENGLISH  GRAMMAR, in  a  Series  of  Letters,  intended  for  the  use  of  Schools  and  Young  Persons 
in  general.  With  an  additional  chapter  on  Pronunciation,  by  the  Author's Son,  JAMES  PAUL  COBBETT.  1 he  only  correct  and  authorised  Edition. 
Fcap  8vo.  Cloth,  1/6. 
COBBETT   (William):  FRENCH  GRAMMAR. Fifteenth  Edition.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  3/6. 
"  Cobbett's  '  French  Grammar  '  comes  out  with  perennial  freshness.  There  are  few grammars  equal  to  it  for  those  who  are  learning,  or  desirous  of  learning,  French  without 
a  teacher.  The  work  is  excellently  arranged,  and  in  the  present  edition  we  note  certain 
careful  and  wise  revisions  of  the  text." — School  Board  Chronicle. 
COBBIN'S    MANGNALL:   MANGNALL'S HISTORICAL  AND  MISCELLANEOUS  QUESTIONS,  for  the  use 
of  Young  People.  By  RICHMAL  MANGNALL.  Greatly  enlarged  and 
corrected,  and  continued  to  the  present  time,  by  INGRAM  COBBIN,  M.A. 
Fifty-fourth  Thousand.  New  Illustrated  Edition.  I2mo.  Cloth,  4/.  . 
COLERIDGE  (Samuel  Taylor):  A  DISSER- TATION ON  THE  SCIENCE  OF  METHOD.  (Encyclopedia 
Metropolitan.}  With  a  Synopsis.  Ninth  Edition.  Cr.  8vo.  Cloth,  2/. 
CURRIE       (Joseph,     formerly    Head    Classical Master  of  Glasgow  Academy) : 
THE    WORKS   OF   HORACE:    Text  from   ORELLIUS.      English 
Notes,  original,  and  selected  from  the  best  Commentators.     Illustrations 
from  the  antique.     Complete  in  One  Volume.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  5/. Or  in  Two  Parts  : 
Part    I.— CARMINA,     .        .        .        .        .     3/. 
Part  II. — SATIRES  AND  EPISTLES,        .        .     37. 
"  The  notes  are  excellent  and  exhaustive." — Quarterly  Journal  of  Education. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
56  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATION'S. 
CRAIK'S   ENGLISH    LITERATURE. A    COMPENDIOUS      HISTORY     OF ENGLISH  LITERATURE  AND  OF  THE  ENGLISH  LANGUAGE 
FROM  THE  NORMAN  CONQUEST.  With  numerous  Specimens. 
By  GEORGE  LILLIE  CRAIK,  LL.D.,  late  Professor  of  History  and 
English  Literature,  Queen's  College,  Belfast.  New  Edition.  In  two vols.  Royal  8vo.  Handsomely  bound  in  cloth,  25/. 
GENERAL    CONTENTS. 
INTRODUCTORY. 
I.— THE  NORMAN  PERIOD — The  Conquest. 
II.— SECOND  ENGLISH— Commonly  called  Semi-Saxon. 
III. — THIHD  ENGLISH — Mixed,  or  Compound  English. IV. — MIDDLE  AND  LATTER  PART  OF  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY. 
V. — THE  CENTURY  BETWEEN  THE  ENGLISH  REVOLUTION  AND THE  FRENCH  REVOLUTION. 
VI. — THE  LATTER  PART  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  CENTURY. 
VII. — THE  NINETEENTH   CENTURY  (a)  THE  LAST  AGE  OF  THE GEORGES,    (b)  THE  VICTORIAN  AGE. 
With  numerous  Excerpts  and  Specimens  of  Style. 
"  Anyone  who  will  take  the  trouble  to  ascertain  the  fact,  will  find  how  completely even  our  great  poets  and  other  writers  of  the  last  generation  have  already  faded  from  the 
view  of  the  present,  with  the  most  numerous  class  of  the  educated  and  reading  public. 
Scarcely  anything  is  generally  read  except  the  publications  of  the  day.  YET  NOTHING 
IS   MORE    CERTAIN  THAN  THAT  NO  TRUE  CULTIVATION  CAN  BE  SO  ACQUIRED.       This    is 
the  extreme  case  of  that  entire  ignorance  of  history  which  has  been  affirmed,  not  with 
more  point  than  truth,  to  leave  a  person  always  a  child.  .  .  .  The  present  work combines  the  HISTORY  OF  THE  LITERATURE  with  the  HISTORY  OF  THE  LANGUAGE. 
The  scheme  of  the  course  and  revolutions  of  the  language  which  is  followed  here  is 
extremely  simple,  and  resting  not  upon  arbitrary,  but  upon  natural  or  real  distinctions, 
gives  us  the  only  view  of  the  subject  that  can  claim  to  be  regarded  as  of  a  scientific 
character." — Rxtract  from  the  Authors  Preface. 
"  Professor  Craik  has  succeeded  in  making  a  book  more  than  usually  agreeable." — The  Times. 
Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  7/6.     TENTH  EDITION. 
A  MANUAL  OF  ENGLISH  LITERATURE, 
for  the  use  of  Colleges,  Schools,  and  Civil  Service  Examinations. 
Selected  from  the  larger  work,  by  Dr.  CRAIK.  lenth  Edition.  With 
an  Additional  Section  on  Recent  Literature,  by  HENRY  CRAIK,  M.A., 
Author  of  "  A  Life  of  Swift." 
"  A  Manual  of  English  Literature  from  so  experienced  and  well-read  a  scholar  as 
Professor  Craik  needs  no  other  recommendation  than  the  mention  of  its  existence." — Spectator. 
"  This  augmented  effort  will,  we  doubt  not,  be  received  with  decided  approbation by  those  who  are  entitled  to  judge,  and  studied  with  much  profit  by  those  who  want 
to  learn.  ...  If  our  young  readers  will  give  healthy  perusal  to  Dr.  Craik's  work, 
they  will  greatly  benefit  by  the  wide  and  sound  views  he  has  placed  before  them." — Athen&um. 
"  The  preparation  of  the  NEW  ISSUE  has  been  entrusted  to  Mr.  HENRY  CRAIK, Secretary  to  the  Scotch  Education  Department,  and  well  known  in  literary  circles 
as  the  author  of  the  latest  and  best  Life  of  Swift.  .  .  .  A  Series  of  TEST  QUESTIONS 
is  added,  which  must  prove  of  great  service  to  Students  studying  alone." — Glasgow Herald. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
EDUCATIONAL  WORKS.  57 
WORKS  BY  REV.  C.  T.  CRUTTWELL,  M.A, Late  Fellow  of  Merton  College,  Oxford. 
A    HISTORY    OF    ROMAN    LITERATURE: 
From   the    Earliest   Period   to   the   Times   of  the   Antonines. 
FIFTH  EDITION.     Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  8/6. 
"  Mr.  CRUTTWELL  has  done  a  real  service  to  all  Students  of  the  Latin  Language  and 
Literature.  .  .  .  Full  of  good  scholarship  and  good  criticism."—  Athen&um. 
"A  most  serviceable— indeed,  indispensable — guide  for  the  Student.  .  .  .  The 
'general  reader'  will  be  both  charmed  and  instructed." — Saturday  Review. 
"The  Author  undertakes  to  make  Latin  Literature  interesting,  and  he  has  succeeded. 
There  is  not  a  dull  page  in  the  volume." — Academy. 
"  The  great  merit  of  the  work  is  its  fulness  and  accuracy."— Guardian. 
*'This  elaborate  and  careful  work,  in  every  respect  of  high  merit.  Nothing  at  all  equal 
to  it  has  hitherto  been  published  in  England." — British  Quarterly  Review. 
Companion  Volume.     Second  Edition. 
SPECIMENS   OF    ROMAN    LITERATURE: 
From  the   Earliest  Period  to  the  Times  of  the  Antonines. 
Passages  from  the  Works  of  Latin  Authors,  Prose  Writers,  and  Poets  : 
Part   I. — ROMAN   THOUGHT:    Religion,    Philosophy  and   Science,  Art and  Letters,  6/. 
Part   II.  —  ROMAN    STYLE  :    Descriptive,    Rhetorical,    and    Humorous Passages,  5/. 
Or  in  One  Volume  complete,  10/6. 
Edited  by  C.  T.  CRUTTWELL.   M.A.,   Merton   College,    Oxford;   and 
PEAKE  BANTON,  M.A.,  some  time  Scholar  of  Jesus  College,  Oxfoixl. 
''Specimens  of  Roman  Literature'  marks  a  new  era  in  the  study  of  Latin." — Eng- lish Churchman. 
"  A  work  which  is  not  only  useful  but  necessary.  .  .  .  The  plan  gives  it  a  standing- ground  of  its  own.  .  .  .  The  sound  judgment  exercised  in  plan  and  selection  calls  for 
hearty  commendation." — Saturday  Review. 
"It  is  hard  to  conceive  a  completer  or  handier  repertory  of  specimens  of  Latin 
thought  and  style." — Contemporary  Review. 
%*  KEY  to  PART  II.,  PERIOD  II.  (being  a  complete  TRANSLATION  of the  85  Passages  composing  the  Section),  by  THOS.  JOHNSTON,  M.A.,  may 
now  be  had  (by  Tutors  and  Schoolmasters  only)  on  application  to  the 
Publishers.  Price  2/6. 
A  HISTORY  OF  EARLY  CHRISTIAN   LITERATURE: 
FOP  the  use   of  Students  and.  General  Readers. 
8vo,  Handsome  Cloth.  [In  Preparation. 
LONDON:    EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
58  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
H  ELLAS; 
AN   INTRODUCTION    TO    GREEK   ANTIQUITIES, 
Comprising  the  Geography,  Religion  and  Myths,  History,  Art  and  Culture 
of  old  Greece. 
On  the  Basis  of  the  German  Work  by  E.  DOERING, 
With  Additions  by  ELLIOTT  GRAEME. 
In  Large  8vo,  with  Map  and  Ilfastrations. 
PART      I. 
The  Land  and  the  People :  the  Religion  and  Myths  of  Old  Greece. 
%*  In  the  English  version  of  Mr.  Doering's  work,  the  simple  and  interesting  style  of  the original — written  for  young  Students — has  been  retained ;  but,  throughout,  such  additions and  emendations  have  been  made  as  render  the  work  suitable  for  more  advanced  Students, 
and  for  all  who  desire  to  obtain,  within  moderate  compass,  more  than  a  superficial  acquaintance 
with  the  great  People  whose  genius  and  culture  have  so  largely  influenced  our  own.  The 
results  of  the  latest  researches  by  Dr.  SCHLIEMANN,  MM.  FOUQUE,  CARAPANOS,  and  others, 
are  incorporated.  [Shortly. 
D'ORSEY     (Rev.     Alex.    J.    D.,    B.D.,     Corpus Christ!  Coll.,  Cambridge,  Lecturer  at  King's  College,  London) : 
SPELLING  BY  DICTATION:  Progressive  Exercises  in  English 
Orthography,  for  Schools  and  Civil  Service  Examinations.  Sixteenth 
Thousand.  i8mo.  Cloth,  I/. 
FLEMING    (William,    D.D.,    late    Professor    of Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Glasgow) : 
THE  VOCABULARY  OF  PHILOSOPHY:  PSYCHOLOGICAL, 
ETHICAL,  AND  METAPHYSICAL.  With  Quotations  and  References  for  the 
Use  of  Students.  Revised  and  Edited  by  HENRY  CALDERWOOD,  LL.D., 
Professor  of  Moral  Philosophy  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  Fourth 
Edition,  enlarged.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth,  10/6. 
"  The  additions  by  the  Editor  bear  in  their  clear,  concise,  vigorous  expression,  the stamp  of  his  powerful  intellect,  and  thorough  command  of  our  language.  More  than 
ever,  the  work  is  now  likely  to  have  a  prolonged  and  useful  existence,  and  to  facilitate 
the  researches  of  those  entering  upon  philosophic  studies." — Weekly  Review. 
JAMES    (W.    Powell,    M.A.): 
FROM  SOURCE  TO  SEA  :  or,  Gleanings  about  Rivers  from  many 
Fields.  A  Chapter  in  Physical  Geography.  Cloth  elegant,  3/6. 
"  Excellent  reading    ...    a  book  of  popular  science  which  deserves  an  extensive circulation. " — Saturday  Review. 
LONDON:    EXETER   STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
EDUCATIONAL    WORKS.  59 
WORKS  BY  F.  B.   JEVONS,  M.A. 
Now  Ready.    SECOND  EDITION,  Revised.    Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  8s.  6d. 
A  HISTORY  OF  GREEK  LITERATURE. 
From  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Death  of  Demosthenes. 
BY   FRANK   BYRON   JEVONS,   M.A., 
Tutor  in  the  University  of  Durham. 
Part  I.— Epic,  Lyric,  and  the  Drama. 
Part  II.— History,  Oratory,  and  Philosophy. 
SECOND  EDITION.     With   Appendix   on   the   Present  State  of  the  Homeric 
Question  and  Examination-Questions  for  the  Use  of  Students. 
"  It  is  beyond  all  question  the  BEST  HISTORY  of  Greek  literature  that  has  hitherto  been 
published." — Spectator. 
"An  admirable  text-book." — Westminster  Review. 
"  Mr.  Jevons'  work  supplies  a  real  want."—  Contemporary  Review. 
"Mr.  Jevons'  work  is  distinguished  by  the  Author's  THOROUGH  ACQUAINTANCE  with  THE OLD  WRITERS,  and  his  DISCRIMINATING  USE  of  the  MODERN  LITERATURE  bearing  upon  the 
subject.  .  .  .  His  great  merit  lies  in  his  EXCELLENT  EXPOSITION  of  the  POLITICAL  AND 
SOCIAL  CAUSES  concerned  in  the  development  of  the  Literature  of  Greece."—  Berlin  Philolo- gische  Wochenschrift, 
"  As  a  Text-Book,  Mr.  Jevons'  work  from  its  excellence  deserves  to  SERVE  AS  A  MODEL.  ' — Deutsche  Litteraturzeitung. 
THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  ATHENIAN  DEMOCRACY. 
Crown  8vo,  is. 
A  MANUAL  OF  GREEK  ANTIQUITIES. 
FOR   THE    USE    OF    STUDENTS. 
'Cditb  dfcaps  anD  IKlumerous  Illustrations* 
[/«  Preparation. 
PREHISTORIC  ANTIQUITIES  OF  THE  ARYAN  PEOPLES, 
Translated  from  the  German  of  DR.  O.  SCHRADER  by  F.  B.  JEVONS,  M.A. 
(See  page  61,  under  SCHRADER.) 
LONDON:   EXETER   STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
60  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.'S  PUBLICATIONS. 
McBURNEY     (Isaiah,     LL.D.,) :     EXTRACTS 
FROM  OVID'S  METAMORPHOSES.     With  Notes,  Vocabulary,  &c. Adapted  for  Young  Scholars.      Third  Edition.     i8mo.     Cloth,  1/6. 
MENTAL  SCIENCE:  S.    T.    COLERIDGE'S celebrated  Essay  on  METHOD  ;   Archbishop  WHATELY'S  Treatises  on LOGIC  and  RHETORIC.      Tenth  Edition,     Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  5/. 
MILLER    (W.   Galbraith,   M.A,  LL.B.,   Lecturer on  Public  Law,  including  Jurisprudence  and  International  Law,  in  the 
University  of  Glasgow)  : 
THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  LAW,  LECTURES  ON.  Designed 
mainly  as  an  Introduction  to  the  Study  of  International  Law.  In  8vo. 
Handsome  Cloth,  I2/.  Now  Ready. 
"Mr.  MILLER'S  'PHILOSOPHY  OF  LAW'  bears  upon  it  the  stamp  of  a  wide  culture and  of  an  easy  acquaintanceship  with  what  is  best  in  modern  continental  speculation. 
.  .  .  Interesting  and  valuable,  because  suggestive."—  Journal  of  Jurisprudence. 
WORKS  BY  WILLIAM  RAMSAY,  M.A., Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  late  Professor  of  Humanity  in  the  University  of  Glasgow. 
A  MANUAL    OF    ROMAN    ANTIQUITIES. For  the  use  of  Advanced  Students.     With  Map,  130  Engravings,  and  very 
copious  Index.     Fourteenth  Edition.      Crown  8vo.     Cloth,  8/6. 
"  Comprises  all  the  results  of  modern  improved  scholarship  within  a  moderate  com- 
pass. "—A  thenautn . 
  AN     ELEMENTARY    MANUAL    OF ROMAN  ANTIQUITIES.    Adapted  for  Junior  Classes.    With  numerous 
Illustrations.     Eighth  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     Cloth,  4/. 
A   MANUAL  OF  LATIN  PROSODY, Illustrated   by   Copious  Examples  and   Critical  Remarks.     For  the  use 
of  Advanced  Students.     Seventh  Edition.     Crown  Svo.     Cloth,  5 /. 
"  There  is  no  other  work  on  the  subject  worthy  to  compete  with  it." — Athenceum. 
   AN    ELEMENTARY    MANUAL   OF 
LATIN  PROSODY.   Adapted  for  Junior  Classes.    Crown  Svo.    Cloth,  2 s. 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
EDUCATIONAL  WORKS.  61 
In  Large  8vo,  Handsome  Cloth,  Gilt  Top,  21s. 
PREHISTORIC    ANTIQUITIES 
OP   THE   ARYAN    PEOPLES, A  Manual  of  Comparative  Philology  and  the  Earliest  Culture. 
Being  the  Sprachvergleichuny  und   Urcjeschlchte  of 
DR.  o.  SCHRADE'R. Translated  from  the  SECOND  GERMAN  EDITION  by 
F.    B.    JEVONS,    M.A. 
In  DR.  SCHRADER'S  great  work  is  presented  to  the  reader  a  most  able and  judicious  summary  of  all  recent  researches  into  the  Origin  and  History 
of  those  Peoples,  Ancient  and  Modern,  to  whom  has  been  mainly  entrusted the  civilisation  and  culture  of  the  world. 
Dr.  Schrader's  pictures  of  the  Primeval  Indo-European  Period  in  all  its 
most  important  phases — The  Animal  Kingdom,  Cattle,  The  Plant-World, 
Agriculture,  Computation  of  Time,  Food  and  Drink,  Clothing,  Dwellings, 
Traffic  and  Trade,  The  Culture  of  the  Indo-Europeans,  and  The  Prehistoric 
Monuments  of  Europe  (especially  the  Swiss  Lake-Dwellings),  Family  and 
State,  Religion,  The  Original  Home— will  be  found  not  only  of  exceeding- 
interest  in  themselves,  but  of  great  value  to  the  Student  of  History,  as- 
throwing  light  upon  later  developments. 
PART     I. — HISTORY  OF  LINGUISTIC  PALAEONTOLOGY. 
PART   II.— RESEARCH  BY  MEANS  OF  LANGUAGE  AND  HISTORY. 
PART  III. — THE  FIRST  APPEARANCE  OF  THE  METALS. 
PART  IV. — THE  PRIMEVAL  PERIOD. 
*'  Dr.  SCHRADER'S  GREAT  WORK."—  Times. 
"  Mr.  Jevons  has  done  his  work  excellently,  and  Dr.  Schrader's  book  is  a  model  of industry,  erudition,  patience,  and,  what  is  rarest  of  all  in  these  obscure  studies,  of 
moderation  and  common  sense." — Saturday  Review. 
"  Ably  translated  by  that  well-known  scholar  Mr.  Jevons,  will  be  found  the  best 
COMPENDIUM  of  the  last  thirty  years'  research  into  the  early  history  and  speech  of  the 
Aryan  race.  .  .  .  INTERESTING  FROM  BEGINNING  TO  END.'"— Manchester  Guardian. "  In  comparison  with  the  First,  the  Second  Edition  has  gained  greatly— not  merely in  point  of  size,  but  of  worth.  We  are  convinced  that  the  success  which  it  deserves 
must  attend,  in  its  new  form,  a  book  so  interesting  and  STIMULATING."— Litter arisches Centralblatt. 
"When  a  book  like  this  reaches  a  Second  Edition,  we  have  in  the  fact  a  proof  that it  has,  in  a  happy  way,  solved  the  problem  how  to  rouse  the  sympathy  of  the  reader.'7 — Allgemeine  Zeitung. 
"  A  work  which  in  every  respect  may  be  described  as  of  CONSPICUOUS  EXCELLENCE." — B(ru)gm(ann) — Litterarisch.es  Centralblatt. 
"  I  must  confess  that,  for  long,  I  have  read  no  work  which  has  roused  in  me  so  lively 
an  interest  as  Dr.  SCHRADER'S.  Here  all  is  FRESH,  LIVING  INSIGHT,  AND  SOLID 
WELL-BALANCED  REASONING. "—With.  Geiger—Deutsche  LMeraturzeitung. 
'*  A  MOST  REMARKABLE  BOOK."— St(einthal)— Zeitsc/irift  fur  Volker psychologic  und Sprachwissenschaft. 
"  One  of  the  BEST  WORKS  published  of  late  years.  .  .  .  Every  one  who,  for  any reason  whatsoever,  is  interested  in  the  beginnings  of  European  Civilisation  and  Indo- 
European  Antiquity,  will  be  obliged  to  place  Dr.  SCHRADER'S  book  on  his  library shelves.  The  work  addresses  itselt  to  the  general  reader  as  well  as  to  the  learned." — 
Gustav  Meyer— Philologische  Woehenschrift. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
62  CHA  RLES  GRIFFIN  <k  CO.  'S  P  UBLICA  TIONS. 
SENIOR  (Nassau  William,   M.A.,  late   Professor of  Political  Economy  in  the  University  of  Oxford) : 
A    TREATISE    ON    POLITICAL    ECONOMY.      Sixth   Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     Cloth.     (Encyclopedia  Metropolitand),  4/. 
THOMSON   (James):    THE  SEASONS.    With 
an  Introduction  and  Notes  by  ROBERT  BELL,  Editor  of  the  ' '  Annotated 
Series  of  British  Poets."    Fourth  Edition.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  1/6. 
"An  admirable  introduction  to  the  study  of  our  English  classics." 
WHATELY  (Archbishop):   LOGIC— A  Treatise on.     With  Synopsis  and  Index.      (Encyclopedia  Mttropolitana}^  3/. 
RHETORIC— A    Treatise    on.       With 
Synopsis  and  Index.     (Encyclopedia  Metropolitana}^  3/6. 
WORKS    IN    GENERAL    LITERATURE. 
BELL  (Robert,  Editor  of  the  "Annotated  Series  of British  Poets  ") : 
GOLDEN  LEAVES  FROM  THE  WORKS  OF  THE  POETS 
AND  PAINTERS.  Illustrated  by  Sixty-four  superb  Engravings  on 
Steel,  after  Paintings  by  DAVID  ROBERTS,  STANFIELD,  LESLIE,  STO- 
THARD,  HAYDON,  CATTERMOLE,  NASMYTH.  Sir  THOMAS  LAWRENCE, 
and  many  others,  and  engraved  in  the  first  style  of  Art  by  FINDEN, 
GREATBACH,  LIGHTFOOT,  £c.  Second  Edition.  410.  Cloth  gilt,  2 1/. 
"  'Golden  Leaves'  is  by  far  the  most  important  book  of  the  season.  The  Illustrations 
are  really  works  of  art,  and  the  volume  does  credit  to  the  arts  of  England." — Saturday Review. 
"The  Poems  are  selected  with  taste  and  judgment." — Times. 
"The  engravings  are  from  drawings  by  Stothard,  Newton,  Danby,  Leslie,  and 
Turner,  and  it  is  needless  to  say  how  charming  are  many  of  the  above  here  given." — A  thetueum. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,    STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
GENERAL  LITERATURE.  63 
THE  WORKS  OF  WILLIAM  COBBETT. 
THE  ONLY  AUTHORISED  EDITIONS. 
COBBETT  (William)  :   ADVICE   TO  YOUNG Men  and  (incidentally)  to  Young  Women.     New  Edition.      With  admir- 
able Portrait  on  Steel.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  2/6. 
COTTAGE     ECONOMY. 
Eighteenth  Edition,  revised  by  the  Author's  Son.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  2/6. 
  EDUCATIONAL      WORKS. 
(See  page  25.) 
  A     LEGACY     TO     LABOURERS. 
With  a  Preface  by  the  Author's  Son,  JOHN  M.  COBBETT,  late  M.P.  for Oldham.  New  Edition.  Fcap  8vo.  Cloth,  1/6. 
  A    LEGACY     TO     PARSONS. 
New  Edition.     Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  1/6. 
GILMER'S  INTEREST  TABLES;  Tables  for Calculation  of  Interest,  on  any  sum,  for  any  number  of  days,  at  %,  I, 
iK>  2>  2K>  3>  3K»  4>  4K»  5  an<1  6  Per  Cent-  By  ROBERT  GILMER. 
Corrected  and  enlarged.  Eleventh  Edition.  I2mo.  Cloth,  5/. 
GR^ME  (Elliott)  :  BEETHOVEN  :    a  Memoir. With  Portrait,  Essay,  and  Remarks  on  the  Pianoforte  Sonatas,  with 
Hints  to  Students,  by  DR.  FERDINAND  HILLER,  of  Cologne.  Third 
Edition.  Crown  8vo.  Cloth  gilt,  elegant,  5/. 
"This  elegant  and  interesting  Memoir.  .  .  .  The  newest,  prettiest,  and  most 
readable  sketch  of  the  immortal  Master  of  Music." — Musical  Standard. 
"A  gracious  and  pleasant  Memorial  of  the  Centenary." — Spectator. 
"This  delightful  little  book  —  concise,  sympathetic,  judicious."  —  Manchester Examiner. 
"We  can,  without  reservation,  recommend  it  as  the  most  trustworthy  and  the 
pleasantest  Memoir  of  Beethoven  published  in  England." — Observer. "A  most  readable  volume,  which  ought  to  find  a  place  in  the  library  of  every 
admirer  of  the  great  Tone-Poet."— Edinburgh  Daily  Review. 
A    NOVEL    WITH    TWO    HEROES. 
Second  Edition.     In  2  vols.     Post  8vo.     Cloth,  2i/. 
"  A  decided  literary  success." — Athenceum. 
"  Clever  and  amusing  .  .  .  above  the  average  even  of  good  novels  .  .  .  free from  sensationalism,  but  full  of  interest  .  .  .  touches  the  deeper  chords  of  life 
.  .  .  delineation  of  character  remarkably  good." — Spectator. 
"  Superior  in  all  respects  to  the  common  run  of  novels." — Daily  News. 
"  A  story  of  deep  interest.  .  .  .  The  dramatic  scenes  are  powerful  almost  to  pain- 
fulness  in  their  intensity." — Scotsman. 
LONDON :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
64  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.S  PUBLICATIONS. 
THE  EMERALD  SERIES  OF  POETS. 
Illustrated    by    Engravings   oh   Steel,    after   STOTHARD,    LESLIE,    DAVID 
ROBERTS,    STAN  FIELD,    Sir  THOMAS  LAWRENCE,    CATTERMOLE,  &c. 
Fcap  8vo.     Cloth,  gilt. 
Particular  attention  is  requested  to  this  very  beautiful  series.  The  delicacy  of  the 
engravings,  the  excellence  of  the  typography,  and  the  quaint  antique  head  and  tail 
pieces,  render  them  the  most  beautiful  volumes  ever  issued  from  the  press  of  this 
country,  and  now,  unquestionably,  the  cheapest  of  their  class. 
BYRON  (Lord):   CHILDE   HAROLD'S   PIL- GRIMACE.  With  Memoir  by  Professor  SPALDING.  Illustrated  with 
Portrait  and  Engravings  on  Steel,  by  GREATBACH,  MILLER,  LIGHTFOOT, 
&c.,  from  Paintings  by  CATTERMOLE,  Sir  T.  LAWRENCE,  H.  HOWARD, 
and  STOTHARD.  Beautifully  printed  on  toned  paper.  Third  Thousand. 
Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
CAMPBELL   (Thomas):    THE    PLEASURES OF  HOPE.  With  Introductory  Memoir  by  the  Rev.  CHARLES  ROGERS, 
LL.D.,  and  several  Poems  never  before  published.  Illustrated  with  Por- 
trait and  Steel  Engravings.  Second  Thousand.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
CHATTERTON'S    (Thomas)    POETICAL WORKS.  With  an  Original  Memoir  by  FREDERICK  MARTIN,  and 
Portrait.  Beautifully  illustrated  on  Steel,  and  elegantly  printed.  Fourth 
Thousand.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
GOLDSMITH'S  (Oliver)  POETICAL  WORKS. With  Memoir  by  Professor  SPALDING.  Exquisitely  illustrated  with  Steel 
Engravings.  New  Edition.  Printed  on  superior  toned  paper.  Seventh 
Thousand.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
Eton  Edition,  with  the  Latin  Poems.     Sixth   Thousand. 
GRAY'S  (Thomas)  POETICAL  WOKKb.     With Life  by  the  Rev.  JOHN  MITFORD,  and  Essay  by  the  EARL  of  CARLISLE. 
With  Portrait  and  numerous  Engravings  on  Steel  and  Wood.  Elegantly 
printed  on  toned  paper.  .  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  5/. 
HERBERT'S    (George)    POETICAL  WORKS. With  Memoir  by  J.  NICHOL,  B.A.,  Oxon,  Prof,  of  English  Literature  in 
the  University  of  Glasgow.  Edited  by  CHARLES  COWDEN  CLARKE. 
Antique  headings  to  each  page.  Second  Thousand.  Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
KEBLE     (Rev.     John):    THE     CHRISTIAN YEAR.  With  Memoir  by  W.  TEMPLE,  Portrait,  and  Eight  beautiful 
.Engravings  on  Steel.  New  Edition. 
Cloth,  gilt  edges,         .         .  .       5/. 
FOE'S  (Edgar  Allan)  COMPLETE  POETICAL WORKS.  Edited,  with  Memoir,  by  JAMES  HANNAY.  Full-page  Illus- 
trations after  WEHNERT,  WEIR,  &c.  Toned  paper.  Thirteenth  Thousand. 
Cloth,  gilt  edges,  3/. 
LONDON  :  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---
GENERAL  LITERATURE.  65 
MACKEY'S   FREEMASONRY: A  LEXICON  OF  FREEMASONRY.  Containing  a  definition  of  its 
Communicable  Terms,  Notices  of  its  History,  Traditions,  and  Antiquities, 
and  an  Account  of  all  the  Rites  and  Mysteries  of  the  Ancient  World.  By 
ALBERT  G.  MACKEY,  M.D.,  Secretary- General  of  the  Supreme  Council 
of  the  U.S.,  &c.  Eighth  Edition,  thoroughly  revised  with  APPENDIX  by 
Michael  C.  Peck,  Prov.  Grand  Secretary  for  N.  and  E.  Yorkshire.  Hand- 
somely bound  in  cloth,  6/. 
"  Of  MACKEY'S  LEXICON  it  would  be  impossible  to  speak  in  too  high  terms  ;  suffice  it to  say,  that,  in  our  opinion,  it  ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  every  Mason  who  would 
thoroughly  understand  and  master  our  noble  Science.  .  .  .  No  Masonic  Lodge  or 
Library  should  be  without  a  copy  of  this  most  useful  work." — Masonic  News. 
HENRY  MAYHEWS  CELEBRATED  WORK  ON 
THE  STREET-FOLK  OF  LONDON. 
LONDON    LABOUR   AND   THE  LONDON 
POOR  :  A  Cyclopaedia  of  the  Condition  and  Earnings  of  those  that  will 
work  and  those  that  cannot  work.  By  HENRY  MAYHEW.  With  many 
full-page  Illustrations  from  Photographs.  In  three  vols.  Demy  8vo. Cloth.  Each  vol.  4/6. 
"  Every  page  of  the  work  is  full  of  valuable  information,  laid  down  in  so  interesting  a manner  that  the  reader  can  never  tire." — Illustrated  London  News. 
"  Mr.  Henry  Mayhew's  famous  record  of  the  habits,  earnings,  and  sufferings  of  the 
London  poor." — Lloyd's  Weekly  London  Newspaper. 
"  This  remarkable  book,  in  which  Mr.  Mayhew  gave  the  better  classes  their  first  real insight  into  the  habits,  modes  of  livelihood,  and  current  of  thought  of  the  London 
poor."—  The  Patriot. The  Extra  Volume. 
LONDON    LABOUR  AND   THE   LONDON 
POOR :  Those  that  will  not  work.  Comprising  the  Non-workers,  by 
HENRY  MAYHEW  ;  Prostitutes,  by  BRACEBRIDGE  HEMYNG  ;  Thieves, 
by  JOHN  BINNY  ;  Beggars,  by  ANDREW  HALLIDAY.  With  an  Intro- 
ductory Essay  on  the  Agencies  at  Present  in  Operation  in  the  Metropolis 
for  the  Suppression  of  Crime  and  Vice,  by  the  Rev.  WILLIAM  TTJCKNISS, 
B.A.,  Chaplain  to  the  Society  for  the  Rescue  of  Young  Women  and 
Children.  With  Illustrations  of  Scenes  and  Localities.  In  one  large 
vol.  Royal  8vo.  Cloth,  10/6. 
"The  work  is  full  of  interesting  matter  for  the  casual  reader,  while  the  philanthropist 
and  the  philosopher  will  find  details  of  the  greatest  import." — City  Press. 
Companion  volume  to  the  preceding, 
THE  CRIMINAL  PRISONS   OF  LONDON, and  Scenes  of  Prison  Life.  BY  HENRY  MAYHEW  and  JOHN  BINNY.  Illus- 
trated by  nearly  two  hundred  Engravings  on  Wood,  principally  from 
Photographs.  In  one  large  vol.  Imperial  8vo.  Cloth,  10/6. 
This   volume   concludes  Mr.  Henry  Mayhew's  account  of  his  researches  into  the crime  and  poverty  of  London.     The  amount  of  labour  of  one  kind  or  other,  which  the 
whole  series  of  his  publications  represents,  is  something  almost  incalculable. 
%*   This  celebrated  Record  of  Investigations  into   the  condition    of  the  Poor  of    the Metropolis,  undertaken  from  philanthropic  motives  by  Mr.  HENRY  MAYHEW,  first  gave  the 
wealthier  classes  of  England  some  idea  of  the  state  of  Heathenism,  Degradation,  and  Misery 
in  which  multitudes  of  their  poorer  brethren  languished. 
LONDON:   EXETER  STREET,   STRAND. 
3 

--- Page Break ---
A  BOOK  NO  FAMILY  SHOULD  BE  WITHOUT. 
New  issue  of  this  important  Work — Enlarged,  in  part  Re-written,  and 
thoroughly  Revised  to  date. 
TWENTY-SEVENTH  EDITION.     Royal  8vo,  Handsome  Cloth,  los.   6d. 
A    DICTIONARY    OF 
DOMESTIC  MEDICINE  AND  HOUSEHOLD  SURGERY J BY 
SPENCER   THOMSON,   M.D.,   EDIN.,   L.R.C.S., 
REVISED,  AND  IN  PART  RE-WRITTEN,  BY  THE  AUTHOR, 
AND   BY 
JOHN   CHARLES   STEELE,   M.D,, 
OF  GUY'S  HOSPITAL. 
With  Appendix  on  the  Management  of  the  Sick-room,  and  many  Hints  for  the 
Diet  and  Comfort  of  Invalids. 
In  its  New  Form,  DR.  SPENCER  THOMSON'S  "DICTIONARY  OF  DOMESTIC  MEDICINE" 
fully  sustains  its  reputation  as  the  "  Representative  Book  of  the  Medical  Knowledge  and Practice  of  the  Day  applied  to  Domestic  Requirements. 
The  most  recent  IMPROVEMENTS  in  the  TREATMENT  OF  THE  SICK — in  APPLIANCES 
for  the  RELIEF  OF  PAIN — and  in  all  matters  connected  with  SANITATION,  HYGIENE,  and the  MAINTENANCE  of  the  GENERAL  HEALTH — will  be  found  in  the  New  Issue  in  clear  and 
full  detail ;  the  experience  of  the  Editors  in  the  Spheres  of  Private  Practice  and  of  Hospital 
Treatment  respectively,  combining  to  render  the  Dictionary  perhaps  the  most  thoroughly 
practical  work  of  the  kind  in  the  English  Language.  Many  new  Engravings  have  been 
introduced — improved  Diagrams  of  different  parts  of  the  Human  Body,  and  Illustrations  of 
the  newest  Medical,  Surgical,  and  Sanitary  Apparatus. 
*«,*  All  Directions  given  in  such  a  form  as  to  be  readily  and  safely  followed. 
FROM  THE  AUTHOR'S  PREFATORY  ADDRESS. 
"  Without  entering  upon  that  difficult  ground  which  correct  professional  knowledge  and  educated  judg- ment can  alone  permit  to  be  safely  trodden,  there  is  a  wide  and  extensive  field  for  exertion,  and  for  usefulness, 
open  to  the  unprofessional,  in  the  kindly  offices  of  a  true  DOMESTIC  MEDICINE,  the  timely  help  and 
solace  of  a  simple  HOUSEHOLD  SURGERY,  or,  better  still,  in  the  watchful  care  more  generally  known  as 
'  SANITARY  PRECAUTION,'  which  tends  rather  to  preserve  health  than  to  cure  disease.  'The  touch  of  a 
gentle  hand  '  will  not  be  less  gentle  because  guided  by  knowledge,  nor  will  the  safe  domestic  remedies  be  less anxiously  or  carefully  administered.  Life  may  be  saved,  suffering  may  always  be  alleviated.  Even  to  the 
resident  in  the  midst  of  civilization,  the  'KNOWLEDGE  IS  POWER,'  to  do  good;  to  the  settler  and 
emigrant  it  is  INVALUABLE." 
"Dr.  Thomson  has  fully  succeeded  in  conveying  to  the  public  a  vast  amount  of  useful  professional 
knowledge."— Dublin  Journal  of  Medical  Science. 
"  The  amount  of  useful  knowledge  conveyed  in  this  Work  is  surprising.'' — Medical  Times  and  Gazette. 
"  WORTH  ITS  WEIGHT  IN  GOLD  TO  FAMILIES  AND  THB  CLKRGY."— Oxford  He-raid 
LONDON:  CHARLES  GRIFFIN  &  CO.,  LIMITED,  EXETER  STREET,  STRAND. 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA*  LIBRARY, 
BERKELEY 
THIS  BOOK  IS  DUE  ON  THE  LAST  DATE 
STAMPED  BELOW 
Books  not  returned  on  time  are  subject  to-a  fine  of 50c  per  volume  after  the  third  day  overdue,  increasing 
to  $1.00  per  volume  after  the  sixth  day.  Bo'oks  not  in demand  may  be  renewed  if  application  is  made  before 
expiration  of  loan  period. 
DEC  29  1980 
RIVERSIDE 
mi : 
; 
207M-1/22 

--- Page Break ---
A 
. 
18800  • 
m 

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
