
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
A TEXT-BOOK OF MINING GEOLOGY.

--- Page Break ---
GRIFFIN'S STANDARD PUBLICATIONS.
THE CYANIDE PROCESS OF GOLD EXTRACTION. ByJAMES PARK, F.G.S., M.Inst.MM. THIRD ENOLISH EDITION. In large 8vo.
Fully Illustrated. Cloth. 7s. 6d.
MEW LANDS: Their Resources and Prospective Advantages. By1
HUGH ROBERT MILL, D.Sc., LL.D., F.R.S.E. Fully Illustrated. 5s.
PROSPECTING FOR MINERALS. A Practical Handbook. By
S. HERBERT COX, A.R.S.M., F.G.S. THIRD EDITION. Illustrated. 5s.
FOOD SUPPLY. By ROBERT BRUCE. With Appendix on PRE-
SERVED FOODS by C. A. MITCHELL, M.A., F.I.C. 4s. 6d.
MINING LAW OF THE BRITISH EMPIRE. By CHARLES1 J. ALFORD, F.G.S., M.Inst.M.M. In Crown 8vo, Cloth. 8s. 6d. net.
AIDS IN PRACTICAL GEOLOGY. With a Section on PAL^ON-" TOLOQY. By PROP. GRENVILLE COLE, M.R.I.A., F.G.S. FIFTH EDITION,
Revised. 10s. 6d.
OPEN-AIR STUDIES IN GEOLOGY. By PROF. GRENVILLE^^ COLE, M.R.I.A, F.G.S. SECOND EDITION, Revised. Profusely Illustrated. 8s. 6d.
ASSAYING. By J. J. BERINGER, F.I.C., F.C.S., and C. BERINGER,
F.C.S. NINTH EDITION, Revised. With Diagrams. 10s. Gd.
METALLURGICAL ANALYSIS AND ASSAYING. A Three1 Years' Course for Students of Schools of Mines. By W. A. MACLEOD, B.A., B.Sc.,
and CHAS. WALKER, F.C.S. Fully Illustrated. 12s. 6d. net.
A TEXT-BOOK OF ELEMENTARY METALLURGY. By** A. HUMBOLDT SEXTON, F.I.C., F.C.S. THIRD EDITION, Revised. Illustrated
6s.
/"JETTING GOLD. A Gold-mining Handbook for Practical Men. By^* J. C. F. JOHNSON, F.G.S.. A.I.M.E. THIRD EDITION, Revised. With Plates and
Illustrations. 3s. 6d.
QOLD SEEKING IN SOUTH AFRICA. By THEO. KASSNER.^* In Crown 8vo. Fully Illustrated. With Chapter on the Agricultural Prospects of
South Africa. 4s. 6d.
HYANIDING GOLD AND SILVER ORES. By H. FORBESw JULIAN and EDGAR SMART, A.M.I.C.E. With numerous Maps, Plates, and
Illustrations. 21s. net.
AND STONE MINING. By SIR C. LE NEVE FOSTER,
D.Sc., F.R.S. SIXTH EDITION, Revised and Enlarged by BENNETT H. BROUGH
F.G.S. With 715 Illustrations. 34s.
THE ELEMENTS OF MINING AND QUARRYING. BySIR C. LE NEVE FOSTER, D.Sc., F.R.S. With nearly 300 Illustrations. 7s. Cxi.
net.
BLASTING: AND THE USE OF EXPLOSIVES. By OSCAR** GUTTMANN, Assoc.M.Inst.C.E. SECOND EDITION, thoroughly Revised. In lame
8vo. With Illustrations and Folding Plates. 10s. 6d.
LONDON: CHARLES GRIFFIN" & CO., LTD., EXETER STREET, STBAND.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
A TEXT-BOOK OF
MINING GEOLOGY
FOR THE USE OF MINING STUDENTS
AND MINERS.
BY
JAMES PARK,
PROFESSOR OP MINING AND MINING GEOLOGY;
DIRECTOR OP OTAGO UNIVERSITY SCHOOL OF MINKS ;
MEMBER OF THE INSTITUTION OF MINING AND METALLURGY ;
MEMBER OF THE AMERICAN INSTITUTE OF MINING ENGINEERS
FELLOW OF THE GEOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF LONDON ;
LATK PRESIDENT OF THE NEW ZEALAND
INSTITUTE OF MINING ENGINEERS.
TtGMb 78 SUustrattons anD 3 plates.
CHARLES GRIFFIN & COMPANY, LIMITED,
EXETER STREET, STRAND.
1906.
[All Rights Reserved.]

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
PREFACE.
IT is only in recent years that Mining Geology has been regarded
as of sufficient importance to warrant its elevation to the dignity
of a distinct department in the Mining Schools and Colleges of
English-speaking communities. For long enough it was treated
as a subordinate subject, being taught for the most part as
an introduction to the principles of mining, at a time in his
academic career when the young undergraduate, possessing no
personal experience of ore-bodies as they occur in Nature, was
least able to grasp the true bearing of the subject in its
relation to the economics of the mining industry. In the
mining academies of Continental Europe, economic geology has
always occupied a prominent and respected place.
The matter in the following pages comprises a series of
lectures issued in Bulletin form at the end of 1902. The
exhaustion of that little publication has encouraged the author
to present the same matter in this revised and enlarged form.
The new chapters on " Ores and Minerals Considered Economi-
cally," "Mine-Sampling and Ore-Valuation," and "The Examina-
tion and Valuation of Mines " have been added to comply with the
requirements of the new curriculum for the associate-diplomas
in Mining, Metallurgy, and Geology.
The genesis of ore-deposits is a subject surrounded by many
perplexing problems. The chief difficulty encountered by the
teacher is that the generalisations have not yet been crystallised
in forms sufficiently definite to be universally accepted as first
principles.
The publication of the late Professor Posepny's classic paper
on The Genesis of Ore-Deposits in 1888 may be said to
1561^0

--- Page Break ---
VI PREFACE.
have marked the beginning of a new era in the history of
economic geology. Since that date the literature of the subject
has been enriched by the writings of Vogt, Stelzner, Beck,
de Launay, Van Hise, Rickard, Becker, Emmons, Gregory, Kemp,
Chamberlain, Lindgren, Weed, Spurr, Sir C. Le Neve Foster,
S. Herbert Cox, Grenville Cole, and other distinguished geologists.
The American School has not endorsed the extreme views of
Posepny, or the fascinating theories of Sandberger, but gradually
developed a conception lying somewhere between the two, with
a distinct leaning towards the teachings of the former.
With respect to Mine Sampling and Valuation, it is manifest
that no hard and fast rules can be laid down. Of American,
English, and German mining engineers with whom the author
has been associated in mine examination, it is noteworthy that
all were agreed as to the prime essentials, although differing
within certain small limits in matters of procedure and routine.
Differences in minor details must always exist where men vary
in experience and temperament.
Students reading for advanced work and honours will find a
fertile field of reference in such excellent works as T/ie Genesis
of Ore-Deposits, published by the American Institute of Mining
Engineers ; the treatises on Ore-Deposits by Stelzner, Beck,
Phillips, and Louis ; The Sampling and Valuation of Mines,
by Rickard ; the splendid Memoirs and Reports of the Geological
Survey of the United States ; and the valuable papers scattered
through the Transactions of the American Institute of Mining
Engineers, of the Institution of Mining Engineers, of the
Institution of Mining and Metallurgy, and of the New Zealand
Institute of Mining Engineers. The acknowledgments of the
author are due to the writers of these papers and to friends
in many places for much valuable assistance in the preparation
of these pages.
THE AUTHOR.
UNIVERSITY, DUNEDIN, N.Z.,
March 1906.

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTORY.
The Scope and Purpose of Geology Geological Structure of the Earth-
Beginning of Geological Time The Action of Water in Destroying
and Re-forming The Earth's Crust mostly Sedimentary The
Alteration of Sedimentaries Fossil Contents Geological Time
marked by Distinctive Life Origin of Igneous Rocks Overflow
Rocks Dyke Rocks Plutonic Bosses Alteration of Igneous
Rocks Metals and Minerals in Igneous Rocks The Influence of
Dykes Classification of Igneous Rocks Importance of Petro-
graphy, ........
CHAPTER II.
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS.
The Basis of Classification Morphological Classification Superficial
Deposits Gold Placers River Placers Lacustrine Placers Black
Sand Beaches Deep Leads of Victoria Cement Placers Dry-
blowing Placers Forms of Alluvial Gold Associates of Alluvial
Gold Origin of Alluvial Gold Stream Tin Origin of Stream Tin
Platinum Placers Platinum in Russia and America Iron Sand
Placers Gem Placers, Diamond, Ruby, Sapphire Massive De-
posits Bog Iron Action of Descending Waters Salt Borax
Gypsum Sulphur Stratified Deposits Strike and Dip of Beds
Inclination of Beds Thickness of Beds Examples of Bedded
Deposits Coal Origin and Formation Mode of Occurrence
Age Inclined Position Faulting Extent of Faults Intrusive
Dykes and their Effects Irregularities Bending of Seams
Varieties of Coal Rand Banket Reefs Mansfeld Copper Shales
Silver Sandstones of Utah Lead Sandstone of Prussia Copper
Conglomerates of Lake Superior Coprolite Beds Gypsum Beds
Unstratified Deposits Deposits of Volcanic Origin Stockwork
Deposits Contact and Replacement Deposits Fahlbands Im-
pregnationsSegregated Veins Gash Veins True Fissure Veins,
vii

--- Page Break ---
Vlll CONTENTS.
CHAPTER III.
ORE VEINS THEIR FILLING, AGE STRUCTURE, WALL MOVEMENTS,
PAY SHOOTS, ETC.
PAGE
Filling of Cavities and Veins Origin of Vein Cavities Age of Vein-
filling Width of Lodes Length Stroke Inclination Depth
Arrangement of Lode Matter Horses in Veins Outcrops of Veins
Condition of Metallic Contents Position of Valuable Contents
Pay Shoots Gold Bonanzas Wall Movements Influence of
Country Productive Zones Vertical Distribution of Ores-
Secondary Enrichment of Veins Impoverishment of Veins in
Depth Indicator Beds Paragenesis Temperatures in Deep
Mining Recording Rock Temperatures Limits of Deep Mining
Metasomatic Replacement,...... 59
CHAPTER IV.
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS.
Definition of Faults Faults parallel with Bed Dip Faults Step
Faults Trough Faults Rules for Inclined Lodes Zimmerman's
Graphic Method,
. . . . . . .93
CHAPTER V.
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED.
Genetic Classification Magmatic Segregation Chromite in Peridotitc
Nickel Iron Native Copper Platinum Metals Ores formed by
Eruptive After-action Solfataric Action of Ascending Alkaline
Waters Fumarolic Contact Metamorphic Deposits Regional
Metamorphic Deposits Meteoric Waters Organic,
CHAPTER VI,
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION.
Eruptive Processes Theory of Lateral Secretion Ascension of Solu-
tionsSummary,
. . . . . . .129

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS. IX
CHAPTER VII.
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY.
PAGE
Alum Aluminium Antimony Arsenic Asbestos Asphaltum
Barytes Bismuth Borax Cement Chromium Coal Cobalt
Copper Cryolite Diamond Fireclay Fluorite Gold Graphite
Gypsum Iron Lead Magnesite Manganese Mica Molyb-
denum Nickel Oil Shale Petroleum Phosphate Rock
Platinum Quicksilver Silver Slate Sulphur Talc Tin
Tungsten Zinc, . . . . . . .142
CHAPTER VIII.
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE-VALUATION.
Sampling Equipment Sampling Intervals Record of Samples
Breaking the Sample Sampling Reduction of Sample Assay of
Samples Calculating Value Future Prospects Sample Values
and Mill Values Sampling Dumps and Heaps,
, . . 186
CHAPTER IX.
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES.
Valuation of Metal Mines Developed Mines and Going Concerns
Classification of Ore in a Mine Valuation of Coal Areas Valua-
tion of Alluvial Ground, . . . . . .196
INDEX, . . 214

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
or THF
UNIVERSITY i
MINING GEOLOGY.
CHAPTEK I.
INTRODUCTORY.
CONTENTS : The Scope and Purpose of Geology Geological Structure of
the Earth Beginning of Geological Time The Action of Water in
Destroying and Re-forming The Earth's Crust mostly Sedimentary
The Alteration of Sedimentaries Fossil Contents Geological Time
marked by Distinctive Life Origin of Igneous Rocks Overflow Rocks
Dyke Rocks Plutonic Bosses Alteration of Igneous Roc ks Metals
and Minerals in Igneous Rocks The Influence of Dykes Classification
of Igneous Rocks Importance of Petrography.
The Scope and Purpose of Geology. The study of
geology is undertaken by two classes of student. There is the
patient investigator who, in the interests of pure science, without
hope of material gain, is content not only to know that a rock is
composed of mineral matter, but extends his researches to the
investigation of the origin, composition, and structure of the rock.
Then there is the utilitarian, who views a mineral from a com-
mercial standpoint, and is willing to undergo a special course of
training in order to be able to distinguish the valuable from the
base and worthless.
The science may therefore be divided into Theoretical Geology,
which investigates the origin and structure of the rocky crust of
the earth ; and Economic or Mining Geology, which bears more
directly on mining, and the development of the mineral industry.
A knowledge of the fundamental principles of the first is necessary
to understand the second, and for this reason every miningstudent
should prepare himself for his profession by going through a
systematic course in Gfeneral Geology.
It is satisfactory to observe that many of the most eminent
mining engineers in Europe, America, and Australia are distin-
guished geologists. What anatomy is to the modern surgeon, so
is geology to the mining profession.
I

--- Page Break ---
2 MINING GEOLOGY.
Geological Structure of the Earth. The crust of the
earth is the great repository of minerals and inetals, and there-
fore a brief consideration of its origin and structure will afford
a better understanding of the manner in which ore-bodies and
mineral-deposits occur.
Beginning of Geological Time. Geological time dates
back to the first beginning of the physical conditions which now
prevail upon the earth. To make this clear, it will be necessary
to trace the evolution of the earth to its present form.
According to astronomers and physicists, the earth, like many
celestial bodies at the present time, once existed as a nebular
mass of glowing incandescent gases swinging through space. By
the radiation of its heat, this globe, in the course of countless
ages, became sufficiently cool for a thin skin or crust to form on
the outer surface. By the continued radiation of the heat, the
crust became thicker and thicker, and, in attempting to adapt
itself to the smaller dimensions of the molten mass below, became
crumpled and rucked up into ridges and valleys, like the skin of
a dried-up apple.
In the course of time the scarred and gnarled igneous crust
became cool enough to permit the condensation of the watery
vapours which enveloped the earth. The waters settled in the
hollows, and formed the first seas that ever existed on the face of
the globe.
The restless waters of the new-born seas at once began to wear
away the dry land, and the streams draining the valleys to deepen
and widen their channels. The denuded material was spread out
in layers and beds on the rocky floor of the seas, thus marking the
beginning of the conditions of sedimentation that have existed
without interruption up to the present day. These ancient fresh-
water sediments were the first records of geological time.
The Action ofWater in Destroying and Re-forming.From that date up till now, water has continued to be the most
powerful agency in sculpturing and modifying the surface of the
earth. In wasting and eroding the dry land, in transporting the
eroded material, in sorting and spreading it out, the action of
water has been unceasing throughout all time.
No portion of the original igneous crust, or even of the first-
formed sediments, has ever been found ; but shreds and patches
may still exist, buried beneath the deposits of later times.
The amount of matter forming the earth is practically a fixed
quantity ; hence it is evident that all the deposits and beds now
forming the surface of the earth must have been derived from the
destruction of the first igneous crust, or of sedimentary rocks of
later date.

--- Page Break ---
INTRODUCTORY. 3
Ever since the beginning of geological time the dry land has
been denuded by water, yielding the material to form new deposits
in seas and lakes. Through the continual crumpling of the crust
of the earth, these deposits in course of time became dry land,
and, in their turn, were subjected to the agents of erosion, again
yielding material to form still newer deposits or strata. This
action is still going on, the older formations providing the material
for the younger.
The same material has appeared re-sorted in different forms, in
different geological ages. It is now easy to understand how some
of the older formations have been entirely removed by this ever-
lasting denudation, or are represented only by isolated remnants
of small extent.
The Earth's Crust mostly Sedimentary. An examina-
tion of the crust of the earth shows that it is composed principally
of stratified rocks that is, rocks occurring in parallel beds or
layers. A study of the materials forming these rocks, and of their
fossil contents, shows us that they have been formed by the
gradual deposit of sediments on the floor of some sea or lake, in
some cases by precipitation from solutions, or by the growth and
accumulation of animal or vegetable organisms.
The physical structure of sedimentary or clastic rocks as they
are sometimes called is dependent on three main factors, namely,
the texture of the material, the character of the cementing
medium, and the amount of induration, alteration, or meta-
morphisin to which the material has been subjected.
Water has possessed through all time the same eroding, trans-
porting, and sorting power, and what we now see going on in our
valleys and on our shores is a fair example of what took place in
earliest geological time.
The gravels on the shores formed conglomerates ; the water-
borne sands formed sandstones ; the more distant muds became
shales ; while the littoral shell-beds and coral reefs became lime-
stones.
The Alteration ofSedimentaries. The older sedimentaries
have been subject to all the later movements which have affected
the crust of the earth. They have been indurated by the great
weight of superincumbent strata, plicated and contorted by
entanglement in great earth-folds, and altered by the simultaneous
action of pressure, heat, and circulating thermal waters. Thus
limestones have been changed to marbles, sandstones to quartzite,
mudstones and shales to slates or schist.
Fossil Contents. Examination has shown that the earlier
existing strata contain a few indistinct and badly preserved
remains of plants and animals of a very primitive and lowly type.

--- Page Break ---
4 MINING GEOLOGY.
Beds higher in the succession are found to contain a large and
varied assemblage of plant and animal remains, many of a highly
complex structure, such as molluscs, fishes, huge bird-like lizards,
saurians, palms, and tree-ferns. The higher or younger deposits
contain, besides molluscs and fishes, the remains of many
mammals which have representatives living at the present time.
In other words, there has been a gradual succession of life in time
from the lowly to the more highly organised forms.
Geological Time marked by Distinctive Life. Ex-
haustive investigation has shown that certain organic forms occur
only in certain beds. Such fossils are termed characteristic or
distinctive forms. Geologists have taken advantage of these to
divide geological time into periods, just as historic time is divided
into periods by succeeding dynasties or empires. These periods
are purely empirical, and are used for convenience of description
and study.
Geological time embraces three great periods, which are further
subdivided as shown below :
( Recent.
I Pleistocene.
TERTIARY, or Cainozoic Pliocene.
Miocene.
Eocene.
( Cretaceous.
SECONDARY, or Mesozoic I Jurassic.
( Triassic.
Permian.*^
Carboniferous.
PRIMARY, or Paleozoic \
Devonian.
bilunan.
Cambrian.
Laurentian.
1^
Such terms as Permian, Devonian, etc., are time names, and
cover vast aeons. When a rock is said to be of Miocene age, a
reference to the table will show that it is comparatively young ;
whereas a rock of Silurian age is one of extreme antiquity. For
purposes of close investigation, these time periods are sometimes
still further subdivided by geologists.
Origin of Igneous Rocks. Throughout all time the outer
shell or crust of the earth has been subject to the intrusion and
overflow of molten magmas from below; and there is abundant
evidence that these igneous intrusions or outbursts were more
frequent, more violent, and more widespread in earlier than in

--- Page Break ---
INTRODUCTORY. 5
later geological times. Yet, notwithstanding the frequency of
volcanic outbursts, the fact remains that probably nine-tenths of
the rocks forming the crust of the earth are of sedimentary or
aqueous origin.
Although subordinate in extent and mass, the eruptive rocks
play an important part in the distribution and occurrence of ore-
bodies and mineral deposits. Not only are they metalliferous
themselves, but in many cases their intrusion has caused a
fracturing of the rocks, which they penetrated, thereby forming
fissures which have subsequently been filled with mineral matter.
Overflow Rocks. An igneous magma, which issues from a
crack or vent and overflows the surrounding country, is called a
volcanic rock or lava. Such overflow magmas, if they cool
rapidly, are glassy in structure ; or, if they cool less rapidly,
consist of a glassy base, in which there develops a number of
minerals, either as grains or crystals.
Dyke Rocks. The portions of the magma which cool in
cracks and vents are termed dykes. In the majority of cases,
the existence of dykes is only revealed by the denudation of the
surrounding country.
Dykes necessarily cooled slowly, and under great pressure, the
latter being due to (a) the weight of the surrounding and over-
lying rocks; (b) the internal stress of the included gases and
steam ; and (c) the stress due to the molecular movement of the
constituents during the process of cooling ; and (d) gravitational
stress.
Magmas which cool slowly, under pressure, in most cases
assume a crystalline structure.
Plutonic Bosses. Magmas projected from below into the
adjoining rocks, in the form of huge, dome-shaped masses, which
did not reach the surface, but were subsequently exposed at the
present surface by denudation, are termed " bosses." Granite, for
example, often occurs in the form of bosses.
These bosses are generally believed to occupy deep-seated
cavities in the crust, and hence their appearance at the surface
is held to indicate a land surface long subjected to erosion. They
are completely crystalline in structure, even more entirely so than
dyke rocks.
Thus we see that, according to the varying conditions of
eruption, cooling, and pressure, the same magma may become
a volcanic glass, an ordinary lava, a dyke rock, or a highly
crystalline boss. The difference is one of physical constitution
rather than chemical composition.
Alteration of Igneous Rocks. All igneous rocks, like
sedimentaries, are subject to alteration. Pressure in the presence

--- Page Break ---
6 MINING GEOLOGY.
of superheated steam has often caused a rearrangement of the
constituents ; while the circulation of thermal waters has led to the
elimination of some, and the substitution of other, constituents
of secondary origin. Moreover, it is found that intense meta-
morphism may cause altered lavas and tuffs to assume a schistose
structure not unlike that induced in altered sedimentaries.
Metals and Minerals in Igneous Rocks. No volcanic
rock of recent date is known to contain metalliferous deposits of
commercial value. Traces of gold, silver, and most of the base
metals have been found in modern lavas ; but the only minerals
of economic importance associated with these rocks are sulphur
and gypsum, both of secondary origin.
The Miocene andesitic lavas and tuffs of the Sierra Nevada and
Cripple Creek districts in America; Transylvania and Banat in
Hungary ; of Borneo and Sumatra in Malaysia ; and of Hauraki
Peninsula in New Zealand, contain gold- and silver-bearing veins
of great value, in which ores of copper, lead, and zinc are some-
times present.
A flow of andesite near the Manukau Heads in New Zealand
contains large grains of native copper, an occurrence which is
rare and therefore of great scientific interest.
Volcanic tuffs and lavas are also the matrix of diamonds, opals,
and other precious stones.
The Influence of Dykes. Dyke rocks are not often them-
selves metalliferous ; but they have exercised a potent influence
on the distribution of metalliferous deposits. Many valuable
veins of gold and copper occur in the vicinity of dykes ; and
although there is little definite knowledge concerning the origin
of vein-matter, it seems fair to assume that the intrusion of the
dyke-material originated fractures and fissures in the adjacent
country, which then became channels or tracks for the circulation
of mineral-laden waters.
Intrusive bosses, such as those of granite, are often impregnated
with tin-stone near the contact with sedimentary strata ; and in
other cases the sedimentary rocks, in the neighbourhood of the
granite, are traversed by valuable veins of tin and copper.
The association of tin veins and granite bosses is too frequent
to be a mere coincidence ; and we are compelled to conclude that,
in some way which is not very clear to us, the vein and its
contents are connected with the presence of the boss.
The intrusion of the boss may possibly have tilted and fractured
the surrounding rocks ; or the boss may have been the anvil
against which the softer and more yielding sedimentaries were
crushed and fractured by the lateral stresses initiated by the
secular folding of the crust of the earth. Igneous magmas are

--- Page Break ---
INTRODUCTORY. 7
charged with water and gases. During the process of cooling,
most of the water and gases are expelled as highly heated steam,
and, as will be shown later on, there is much evidence to
support the belief that the steam and gases were laden with
dissolved metals, which were afterwards deposited in the zone of
fracture.
Classification ofIgneous Rocks. Forourpresent purposes,
igneous rocks may be classified in three principal and easily dis-
tinguishable groups as follows :
Altered or
Class. Volcanic Type. Holocrystalline
Type.
A. Basic,
. . Basalt. Diabase.
B. Intermediate,
. Andesite. Diorite.
C Acidic I (a> Trachyte. ( Syenite.1 C)
) (b) Rhyolite. { Granite.
The types which have proved the most productive are diabase,
diorite, andesite, and granite.
Importance of Petrography. Petrography was formerly a
narrow branch of general geology. Of late years it has de-
veloped into a distinct science, which concerns itself chiefly with
the minute structure, composition, and nomenclature of igneous
and crystalline rocks, and although the generalisations of petro-
graphy have little bearing upon the phenomena of structural
geology, it is needful that every geologist should have an
intimate knowledge of its leading features.
Valuable minerals are so frequently associated with igneous
rocks that it seems impossible to avoid the conclusion that a close
genetic relationship exists between them. What this relationship
really is has yet to be determined in the majority of ore-
deposits.
Rock-forming constituents are now known to separate in the
cooling magma in a definite order, and the investigation of the
laws governing magmatic differentiation promises to throw much
light on the genesis of ore-deposits.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER II.
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS.
CONTENTS: The Basis of Classification Morphological Classification-
Superficial Deposits Gold Placers River Placers Lacustrine Placers
Black Sand Beaches Deep Leads of Victoria Cement Placers Dry-
blowing Placers Forms of Alluvial Gold Associates of Alluvial Gold-
Origin of Alluvial Gold Stream Tin Origin of Stream Tin Platinum
Placers Platinum in Russia and America Iron Sand Placers Gem
Placers, Diamond, Ruby, Sapphire Massive Deposits Bog Iron-
Action of Descending Waters Salt Borax Gypsum Sulphur
Stratified Deposits Strike and Dip of Beds Inclination of Beds^-
Thickness of Beds Examples of Bedded Deposits Coal Origin and
Formation Mode of Occurrence Age Inclined Position Faulting
Extent of Faults Intrusive Dykes and their Effects Irregularities
Bending of Seams Varieties of Coal Rand Banket Reefs Mansfeld
Copper Shales Silver Sandstones of Utah Lead Sandstone of Prussia
Copper Conglomerates of Lake Superior Coprolite Beds Gypsum
Beds Unstratified Deposits Deposits of Volcanic Origin Stockwork
Deposits Contact and Replacement Deposits Fahlbands Impregna-
tionsSegregated Veins Gash Veins True Fissure Veins.
The Basis of Classification. Mineral deposits are found
in so many different forms, and under so many varying conditions,
that the attempts of different writers to formulate a classification,
founded upon a natural basis, have not been attended with much
success. In any case, it must be remembered that a classification
is only an empirical arrangement intended to facilitate the study
and investigation of mineral deposits.
The majority of the classifications hitherto proposed are based
upon either (a) morphological, or (b) genetic considerations, or (c)
a combination of the two.
The first principles of ore -
deposition are still imperfectly
understood. The most diverse theories are still advanced by
eminent authorities ; and it is doubtful if a theory has yet been
formulated that will satisfy all the conditions and explain all the
facts.
The basis for a natural classification has still to be discovered.
Until then, outward form and mode of occurrence seem to

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 9
offer the most convenient starting-point for the elementary
investigation.
The more advanced study, that is, the philosophical inquiry, as
to the origin, persistence, and probable value of ore-deposits can
only be pursued when some knowledge has been acquired of the
fundamental laws of ore-formation. In this case the investigation
must be pursued from the genetic standpoint.
We will first deal with mineral deposits from the morphological
and afterwards from the genetic standpoint.
MORPHOLOGICAL CLASSIFICATION.
A simple classification of veins and mineral deposits, based
upon outward form and mode of occurrence, but entirely indepen-
dent of age or mineral character, is as follows :
Class I. Superficial.
Class II. Stratified.
Class III. Unstratified.
For descriptive purposes, these classes may be subdivided into
groups or sub-classes, as under :
I. SUPERFICIAL DEPOSITS.
(a) Fragmentary Forming alluvial drifts.
(b) Massive Forming layers and sheets.
II.- STRATIFIED DEPOSITS.
(a) Constituting beds Forming members of a stratified
formation.
(6) Disseminated through a bed.
III. UXSTRATIFIED DEPOSITS.
(a) Deposits of volcanic origin.
(b) Stockwork deposits.
(c) Contact and replacement deposits.
(d) Fahlbands.
(e) Impregnations.
(/) Segregated veins,
(g) Gash veins.
(h) Truefissure veins.

--- Page Break ---
10 MINING GEOLOGY.
CLASS I.
SUPERFICIAL DEPOSITS.
(a) Fragmentary.
Definition of Placer Deposits. These embrace alluvial deposits
of all kinds, whether beach sands, river gravels, lake deposits, or
glacier drifts containing loose particles of gold, tin-ore, platinum,
iron ores, or precious stones. They also include the alluvial deep
leads, or deep placers, of California, Victoria, and New South
Wales, which are often covered with a sheet, or sheets of basalt.
Gold Placers.
That portion of the drift in which the gold is concentrated is
termed pay-wash, pay-dirt, or pay-streak. When the pay-wash is
covered by a considerable depth of gravel-drift or other cover, it is
termed a deep-lead.
Methods of working Placers. Alluvial drifts, according to their
situation, are worked as follows :
(1) By ground or gravitation sluicing with water not under
pressure.
(2) By hydraulicking that is, ground sluicing with water under
pressure.
(3) By hydraulicking and elevating with water under pressure.
This method is only resorted to when the configuration of the
ground renders it impossible, or too costly, to construct a tail-race
for gravitation sluicing. It is worked with much success at the
Blue Spur and other claims in New Zealand.
(4) By bucket and suction dredges, when the material is mainly
or partly below water-level, as, for example, on sea-beaches, mari-
time lagoons, lakes, river-beds, and river-flats.
Examples of Gold Placers. Familiar examples of gold-bearing-
gravels are the alluvial drifts of Victoria, West Australia, Klon-
dyke, California, New Zealand, and Altai Mountains, in Central
Siberia.
Gold-bearing beach-sands containing ironsand, mostly magnetite,
occuralong the shores of Westland and Southland, in New Zealand,
and the Gold Coast of West Africa.
Among later alluvial gold discoveries, that at Cape Nome, in
Alaska, is the most important. A sloping plane or tundra extends
from the sea back to the foot of the mountains. It consists of
a succession of beds of sand, gravel, and clay resting on the
upturned edges of the Palaeozoic basement rock. The surface is

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 11
covered with a layer of tundra moss and decaying vegetable peaty
matter to a depth of 18 inches or 24 inches. The gold-bearing
matter is found along the beach, being apparently a rewash or
concentrate of the tundra gravels and sand.
The tundra gravels bear no evidence of glacier origin, but
appear from their bedded and water-worn character to have been
deposited in a lake-basin or in a shallow sea near the estuary of a
large river.
Glacier Drifts. Country that was once overrun by glaciers is
found to contain two classes of transported matter one trans-
a
FIG. 1. Section of Glacier above Terminal Face.
(a) Moraines.
(6) Basement rock.
(c) Glacier tunnel.
(d) Glacier ice.
ported by ice, the other by water. The first forms tumbled
morainic masses, the latter water-worn gravels and sands deposited
FIG. 2. Section of Glacier Valley.
(a) Glacier moraines.
(6) Glacier gravels.
(c) Basement rock.
(d) Glacier river.
by the river which drained the bottom of the glacier. Both
classes are often mixed at certain points. When the country is
gold-bearing, the glacier gravels and morainic matter contain gold.
The moraines are formed by ice which cannot separate the gold
from the rock debris ; hence the gold is scattered through it just
as the glacier happened to drop it. The glacier gravels, on the

--- Page Break ---
12 MINING GEOLOGY.
other hand, being largely a rewash of the moraines, contain the
gold in a more concentrated form.
Many of the gold-bearing terraces in New Zealand and in the
higher valleys of the Rocky Mountains bear evidence of glacier-
river origin, while some are composed of a rewash of glacier
gravels and morainic matter.
Position of Pay-Wash. Experience has shown that alluvial gold
is deposited along the inner side of the curves in the course of the
river. Any stratum of good gravel in the opposite bank was
evidently laid down at some previous time, under similar conditions.
The accompanying diagram (fig. 3) shows the distribution of the
pay-wash. The gold is coarsest at the head of the bar, gradually
becoming finer and scarcer, and spreading out below, until the
dirt is too poor to pay. So long as the river retains its course,
FIG. 3. Plan of River-course, showing position of gravels.
the pay-streak will continue to form as the bar is extended from
year to year.
The average uniform size of the gravel seems to show that the
gold is only deposited where the current has a certain medium
velocity. At the points where the bends in the river are made
more permanent by rocky banks, the pay-gravel is generally deeper
and of greater extent than elsewhere.
The richest gold does not collect in the deep pot-holes in the
river, as might naturally be expected, but on the bars or rocky
ledges below. The reason for this may be that pot-holes gener-
ally occur in narrow, rock-bound parts where the velocity and
scour of the water are too great to permit the permanent
lodgment of the gold particles.
Position of Gold in Drifts. In alluvial deposits the gold is
found in a layer of pay-wash resting either on the slate or schist
bottom, or on a false-bottom. In river and creek workings, the

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 13
pay-wash lies invariably on the slate bottom ; but in the alluvia
of old lake basins it frequently rests on a false-bottom of stiff
clay or cement. In cases where the drift is of considerable thick-
ness, there often occur two or more streaks of pay-wash resting
on successive false-bottoms.
River Placers. A typical section of the river claims of the
Buller River, in New Zealand, is shown in the following diagram.
FIG. 4. Section of Gold-drifts in River Claim.
() Terrace gravels. (6) Pay-wash. (c) Slate floor rock.
Old River-Channels. It sometimes happens that the gold-
bearing wash does not occur in the present river-channel, but in
an old channel or bed near by. The following figure shows a
section of the Manuherikia Valley in Central Otago, New Zealand.1
The old river-bed was -excavated in mica-schist, and the gravels
which fill it have been saved from destruction by the rim of schist.
The old river-wash is being worked by ground-sluicing, and the
recent gravels in the present river-bed by bucket-dredges.
W
^
M
' ''
V
N
a E
FIG. 5. Section of Manuherikia Valley, showing old river-channel
containing gold-bearing wash. (After Park.)
(a) Mica-schist. (c) Recent gravels.
(&) Pliocene lacustrine beds. (d) Older gravels.
Lacustrine Placers. A typical example of lake beds con-
taining payable pay-wash resting on a false-bottom is shown in
the next figure.
2
Throughout the Manuherikia basin the lacustrine beds have
1
J. Park, Geological Explorations, 1888-89, p. 24, Wellington, N.Z.
2 Zoc. tit., p. 21.

--- Page Break ---
14 MINING GEOLOGY.
been tilted almost on edge, thereby greatly increasing the difficul-
ties of working the pay-wash with success.
Black Sand Beaches. The washing of beach sands is a
form of alluvial mining pursued on the sea-beaches of Westland
and Southland inNew Zealand. The black sand is principallymag-
netite derived from the disintegration of the neighbouring rocks.
The gold occurs in excessively fine particles, and is found con-
centrated with the black sand in layers along the sea beach, the
laving action of the retreating waves removing the lighter par-
ticles of quartz sand.
Deep-Leads of Victoria. The buried placers of this state
are of great extent and value. They may be taken as typical of
a class of deposit also found in California. They consist of gold-
W a
FIG. 6. Section showing Lacustrine Gold-bearing Wash. (After Park.)
(a) Recent gravels.
(6) Gray quartz sands.
(c) Ferruginous quartz sands.
(d] Carbonaceous sands.
(e) Gold-bearing wash.
(/) Stiff clay. (g) Schist.
bearing gravels covered by a single flow of basalt, or by a succession
of thin flows separated by beds of gravel.
The gold-bearing pay-wash lieson the floor ofancient river-valleys
into which the lava streams poured from crater-vents and fissures
situated in the higher lands. The ancient valleys when compara-
tively narrow were generally filled with the igneous magma to
such a depth as to cause the diversion of the streams into new
channels. In some cases the area was invaded by floods of
lava which overflowed the district for hundreds of square miles
and built up great basaltic plateaux on the sites of the river-
valleys and watercourses.
Where the river-valley down which the lava poured was wide,
the magma generally spread itself over the gravels in a thin
stream. This caused only a temporary or partial diversion of the
river, insufficient, it would seem, to compel the river to find a new
outlet in another river-system.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 15
Where a succession of gravel beds and basalt flows occurs,
it may be inferred that the thin flows only temporarily diverted
the river, which maintained its original watershed until the
accumulation of material had reached such a height as to com-
CAMP HILL
FIG. 7. Cross-section of Ballaarat Goldfield, showing deep-lead
underlying basalt. (After R. Brough Smyth.)
pletely choke up the old valley, whereby the waters were enabled
to command a new outlet through some low saddle or pass into a
neighbouring watershed.
Since the emission of the basalts the country has been dissected
WHITE H.A1
FIG. 8. Section of Deep-lead Ballaarat Goldfield, showing succession of
lava flows and river-gravels. (After R. Brough Smyth.)
by streams and sculptured into the existing ridges, plateaux, and
valleys. It is noticeable that the new river-courses are seldom
coincident with the old, which still lie buried under their load of
gravel and basalt except at the points where their course has been
crossed by the newer transverse streams.

--- Page Break ---
16 MINING GEOLOGY.
This process of denudation has in some cases removed the
barriers which bounded the ancient river-valley. Thus the floor
of the old valley, with its cap of hard basalt, now forms flat-topped
ridges, while the hills which formed the barriers have been worn
down into valleys and watercourses.
FIG. 9. Section of Mount Greenock, showing protective effects
of basalt cap. (After R. Brough Smyth.)
(a) Wash-dirt. (c) Wash-dirt underlying basalt.
(&) Existing watercourse. (d) Existing watercourse.
The pay-wash in the deep-leads of Victoria generally lies at the
base of the buried gravels resting in a rocky gutter or channel cut
in the basement rock.
FIG. 10. Section of Deep-Lead in Daylesford District, showing position
of gold-bearing wash. (After R. B. Smyth.)
The deep-leads, according to the contour of the ground, are
worked by shafts, or from adit-levels.
Cement Placers. Gold-bearing gravels have sometimes
become consolidated into hard cements, or even conglomerates,
by the cementing action of iron peroxide, carbonate of lime, or
silica deposited from waters which at one time circulated through
them.
Cemented placers are found in all geological formations from
the Silurian up to the present day. The most important are of
recent and younger Tertiary age.
The quartz grits and conglomerates which form the coal-
measures of the Miocene brown coals of New Zealand are gold-
bearing throughout Otago, Westland, and Nelson ; but only in a
few places are they rich enough to be worked for their gold contents.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 17
The importance of these old placers lies mainly in the circumstance
that many of the richest placers of a recent or Pleistocene date
derived their gold from them by a process of natural concentration.
Cemented gold-bearing gravels, mostly superficial, are common
enough in all alluvial fields, and many notable examples are found
in California and Central Siberia, more especially in old river-
channels.
Gold-bearing cements of a unique kind occur at Kintore,
Kanowna, Kalgoorlie, and elsewhere in Western Australia. They
differ from the fluviatile water-worn gravels which form the
cements in New Zealand and California. According to Rickard,
1
they consist variously of intermingled clays, sands, grits, kaolin,
FIG. 11. Section across Slate River, Collingwood, Xew Zealand, showing
gold-bearing cements below seam of coal. (After Park.)
1. Quartzites.
2. Brown coal lying on gold-bearing cement.
3. Gold-bearing segregated quartz-vein, the source of gold in cements.
4. Quaitzites.
broken rock, iron-stone and quartz, in most cases resting in
shallow depressions.
2
Their origin is due to peculiar geological and climatic conditions.
The climate is semi-tropical. The surface has been exposed to
sub-aerial influences since, probably, the early part of the Secondary
period, and is destitute of running streams. The materials are
the products of long-continued atmospheric disintegration and
erosion. They were transported to their present places by the
action of wind, rain, and flood-waters. In 110 case has the material,
or contained gold, travelled far from the parent source. The
working of the cements, at Kalgoorlie, led to the discovery of the
i
more valuable lode-formations.
1
T. A. Rickard, "The Alluvial Deposits of Western Australia," Trans.
Am. List. Min. Eng., vol. xxviii.
'
2 T. Blatchford, Bulletin No. 3, Geol. Survey of Western Australia.
i Perth, 1899.
2

--- Page Break ---
18 MINING GEOLOGY.
Dry-blowing Placers. As a result of the long-continued
sub-aerial disintegration, the surface of the flat country around
Kalgoorlie has become covered by a deposit of red sandy loam,
beneath which there is often blue clay. This material, which occurs
most frequently at the head of shallow gullies, is mixed with
fragments of iron-stone and a little quartz derived from the gold-
bearing lodes in the vicinity.
The gold in.this loose surface material is obtained, in the absence
of water, by the method peculiar to Australia, known as dnj-
blowing, which consists of screening, shaking, and dry-biowing,
(Plate I.).
Forms of Alluvial Gold. Excepting the larger nuggets,
which have been found of all shapes and sizes, up to thousands
of ounces, the coarse gold generally assumes a bean-shaped
form.
The finer gold occurs as small heavy shots, but more often as
thin flakes, ranging from the smallest particle, which almost floats
in water, to pieces like bran.
In river claims, where the gold has been derived from the denu-
dation of gold-bearing lodes, fragments of quartz with adhering
pieces of the precious metal are often met with.
Associates of Alluvial Gold. The constant associate of
alluvial gold in all countries is magnetite sand, the agencies which
led to the concentration of the gold having also collected the more
abundant magnetite. It is found that whatever heavy ores or
minerals are associated with the gold in the original country-rock
are also found with it in the resulting alluvial drifts.
In Collingwood, in New Zealand, considerable quantities of
native lead, in the form of round shot, have been found for many
years in the sluice-boxes, with the gold. In places it is so
abundant as to choke up the ripples. Samples collected by the
author, and submitted to chemical examination, disclosed the fact
that the lead is almost chemically pure, and sometimes encloses a
skeleton of gold.
In Takaka, near Collingwood, the alluvial gold, besides magnetite,
is associated with gray-coloured grains of osmium, iriditim, and
platinum ; in Orepuki, with one ounce of platinum for every
hundred ounces of gold ; on the West Coast and in the fiords with
garnets, locally known as rubies ; and in Central Otago with large
masses of scheelite and magnetite.
Throughout Australia the alluvial gold is often associated
with gem sands containing topaz, zircon, spinel, rubies, and
garnets.
Origin of Alluvial Gold. Alluvial gold originated from the
weathering and denudation of country containing gold-bearing veins

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
UN'-'

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 19
during countless ages, followed by the concentration of the gold
in leads, or channels, by a process of natural sluicing.
Some writers have thought that the occurrence of occasional
large nuggets in gravel drifts was an evidence that alluvial gold
had been deposited in situ from gold-bearing solutions circulating
through the gravels, but there is very little evidence to support
this contention.
It has been shown, experimentally, by various supporters of this
theory, that decomposing organic matter, such as wood, and some
base sulphides are capable of causing the precipitation of gold from
its solutions. All this is doubtless true, but the difficulties that
confront the theory are enormous.
Alluvial gold is found disseminated throughout gravels that are
continuous in extent over many square miles, and of great thick-
ness. In many placers the gold occurs in narrow, fairly well-
defined leads, on or near an impervious floor or bottom. In
others, but more rarely, it is scattered throughout a great thickness
of the gravels and sands.
It is impossible to conceive the origin of the vast volume of
gold-bearing solutions necessary to provide the gold, or the barriers
capable of confining the solutions to narrow leads winding in a
tortuous course through the drifts.
The authors of the precipitation theory maintain that alluvial
gold is purer than vein-gold, and -sometimes occurs in masses, or
nuggets, of dimensions unknown in vein-gold. Recent investiga-
tion by the author has entirely disproved the first contention, so
far as New Zealand is concerned ; and the discovery of a mass of
gold weighing 303 oz., in a quartz-vein near Coolgardie, some
years ago, throws discredit on the assumption contained in the
second.
The first gold discovered in the province of Auckland was
alluvial gold, found at Coromandel. It was of poor quality, being
alloyed with a large proportion of silver. Subsequently, when
gold-bearing veins were discovered in the district, it was found
that the gold was of poor quality, being in fineness and composi-
tion the same as the alluvial gold.
In Victoria, Western Australia, and California, the quality of the
vein and placer gold is practically the same within the limits
of variation to which gold in different parts of the same vein is
subject.
With the more exact knowledge we now possess, concerning the
occurrence of gold and formation of gold-drifts, we are unable to
escape the conclusion that alluvial gold was originally derived
from gold-bearing rock or veins, by a succession of natural opera-
tions identical with those that led to the production of stream-tin.

--- Page Break ---
20 MINING GEOLOGY.
STREAM-TIN.
Origin of Stream-Tin. Stream-tin originated from the
surface disintegration and denudation of tin-bearing lodes, or of
granitic masses containing tin-impregnations.
The Tin Placers of Malaysia. The tin-fields of Malaysia are
of great extent and value, the tin-bearing belt extending south-
ward from Burmah and Siam, through the Malay Peninsula, to
the outlying islands of Banca and Billiton, off the south-east coast
of Sumatra.
The tin-bearing gravels are deposited on the floor of the valleys
which intersect this rich zone of metalliferous country.
The geological features throughout are almost the same. The
basement rock is granite, which is variously overlain by gneiss,
schist, slaty shales, sandstone and limestone.1 Tin-stone has been
found in situ in veins traversing both the granite and slates, and
disseminated as impregnations in the granite near the contact
with the sedimentaries, and also in the limestone.2 The stream-
tin was manifestly derived from the tin-bearing veins and rock,
and concentrated in the gravels by the rivers and their lateral
streams.
In many places the gravels rest on &false-bottom of stiff kaolin,
derived from the disintegration of the granite outcrops. They
vary from 1 to 15 feet thick, and are overlain by an overburden
ranging from 5 to 80 feet deep. The richness of the gravels
varies from 5 Ib. to 40 Ib. per cubic yard.
The tin-stone of this region is very pure, generally containing
from 70 to 75 per cent, of the metal. The colour is often
black, and sometimes pale brown, or white. The ore is found in
pieces of all sizes, from fine sand to boulders half a ton in weight.
The associated minerals are magnetite and ilmenite.
The States of Perak, Selangor, Negri-Sembilan, Pahang, and the
Dutch East Indies yield two-thirds of the world's production of
tin. Of these, the State of Perak produces about one-third, and
the State of Selangor one-third of the total output.
3
The tin placers in the Kinta Valley, in the State of Perak,
cover an area 40 miles long, and about 25 miles wide, and yield
about three-fourths of the tin-stone raised in Perak. In 1904
Perak produced 26,400 tons of tin.
Other Tin Placers. There are stream-tin mines in Burmah,
Siam, and China, and in the Commonwealth of Australia, in the
States of New South Wales, Queensland, Victoria, and Tasmania.
1
R. A. F. Penrose, Jr., Journal of Geology, Feb. 1903.
-
Penrose, loc. cit.
''
F. Owen, "Mining in Perak," Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. vi. p. 51.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 21
The stream-tin deposits of Cornwall and Saxony have long been
exhausted.
Platinum Placers.
Platinum in Russia. Nearly 90 per cent, of the platinum of
commerce is found as loose grains in the gravels of the rivers
draining the eastern slopes of the Ural Mountains. The gravels
generally contain some alluvial gold.
A little platinum has been found in situ in peridotite and
olivine-gabbro, but not in payable quantity. Ultra-basic eruptives,
and sometimes chloritic and talcose schists, prevail in the neigh-
bourhood of the platinum placers ; and fragments of these rocks
predominate in the sands and gravels, thereby indicating pretty
conclusively that the noble metal was derived from the adjacent
area by the ordinary processes of weathering and erosion.
Platinum in America. The domestic supply of platinum,
in the United States, is obtained from the gold placers in Trinity
and Shasta counties, California. The gold-drifts in Colombia, in
South America, Brazil, British Columbia, and New Zealand also
yield a small quantity of the metal.
Platinum is always alloyed with a small proportion of iridium,
and often with a smaller amount of osmium.
Ironsand Placers.
Enormous deposits of black ironsand, mostly titaniferous, exist
on the coast of Chili ; on the north shore of the St Lawrence, in
Canada ; on the coast of California ; and in New Zealand, on the
coast between Taranaki and Wanganui.
These ironsand deposits were derived, in most cases, from
weathered and denuded later eruptive rocks, near the coast-line.
In some parts of the coasts of California and New Zealand, the
black sands contain payable gold.
Gem Placers.
Diamond Placers. River deposits yield diamonds, rubies,
sapphires, and other precious stones. The diamonds of Brazil
and New South Wales are obtained from gravels. The diamond
placers of the Vaal River, in South Africa, yield gems of great
size and purity.
Ruby Placers. The principal ruby-producing region, in
Burma, is situated near Mogok, about 90 miles due north of
Mandalay. The rubies are usually found in a somewhat tenacious

--- Page Break ---
22 MINING GEOLOGY.
clay, or in material passing from fine gravel to river sand. The
country rock is a very hard gneiss, passing in places into granite ;
or a soft friable micaceous schist.1
The district of Chantabun, in Siam, has long been famous for
its ruby and sapphire mines.
Sapphire Placers. In the sapphire fields of Anakie, in
Queensland, the wash is often clayey, and sometimes friable and
free from clay. In these deposits are also found other precious
stones, notably ruby, diamond, topaz, peridot, moonstone, cat's
eye, and cairngorm.
(b) Massive.
Deposits of this class occur as layers, or sheets, and irregular
masses, lying on the surface, or covered with soils, surface clays,
etc., of recent accumulation. They include deposits of bog-iron
ore, and in some places, those of manganese and rock-phosphate.
Bog-iron Deposits. Bog-iron generally occurs as irregular
layers or lenticular masses, which were deposited in shallow lakes
or swamps.
The iron, in the majority of cases, was derived from lodes or
deposits of iron in the adjacent country. The decomposition of
iron-bearing minerals has, doubtless, contributed its portion of
iron. Extensive beds of bog-iron are often found near the out-
crops of pyritic lodes, and of beds of the carbonate ore.
When iron pyrites is oxidised, a large portion of it passes into
salts, soluble in water ; while carbonate of iron is readily soluble
in water containing dissolved carbonic acid. Atmospheric
weathering must, therefore, daily liberate a large amount of iron
in a soluble form.
It is well known that when chalybeate waters are exposed in
shallow sheets, as in ponds, lagoons, and swamps, to the action of
the air, the iron is deposited as the carbonate. Freshly pre-
cipitated iron may be frequently seen in stagnant pools in swamps.
The precipitation is caused by the action of atmospheric carbon
dioxide. In some cases the iron is thrown down as the hydrated
oxide by decomposing vegetable products.
Bog-iron ores are porous, and cindery in structure. They
contain, in many cases, too high a proportion of phosphorus to be
useful for smelting purposes.
Action of Descending Waters. Where superficial ore-
bodies have been formed by the action of descending waters, it
will be found, as a general rule, that the waters have merely acted
1 T. T. Wynne, "The Ruby Mines of Burmah," Trans. List. Min. and
Met,, vol. v. 1897, p. 181.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 23
upon and concentrated ores disseminated in the adjacent country
rock. Such secondaiy concentration is often seen in the case of
iron, manganese, and phosphate deposits.
A typical example of this class of ore-body is the great deposit
of limonite at Parapara in Xew Zealand, which occurs as an
irregular sheet of ore lying on the surface in a depression formed
in Palaeozoic schist. The original source of the iron is the schist
and associated limestone.
Examples of the same kind are found in Pennsylvania.
1 The
ores are largely limonite. They occur as rounded or elongated
fragments with residual clay, in irregular deposits in cavities.
The source of the iron is the Palaeozoic shales and limestone in
which the primary iron is disseminated in the form of carbonate,
sulphide, and silicate.
FIG. 12. Section at the Pennsylvania Furnace Ore-bank, showing deposition
of limonite by descending waters in the bedding and joint planes, and
nodular iron ores in hollows in limestone. (After T. C. Hopkins.)
The manganese deposits of Cartersville in the Southern
Appalachians of the State of Georgia, are among the most import-
ant in America. They occur embedded in a thick deposit of
residual clays mainly derived from the decay of the Beaver lime-
stone and Weisner quartzites of Cambrian age.
According to T. L. Watson,
2 the ore is distributed irregularly
throughout the clays in the form of pockets, lenticular masses,
veins and stringers, single nodules and concretionary masses ; and
as small disseminated grains. In extreme cases the largest
pockets may yield as much as several hundred tons of ore. They
are rarely composed of solid ore, the usual form being that of
nodules thickly studded through the clay.
Of the manganese oxides which occur, pyrolusite and psilomelane
1 T. C. Hopkins, Bulletin Geol. Soc. Am., vol. xi. p. 475.
2 T. L. Watson, "The Manganese Ore Deposits of Georgia," Trans. Am.
Inst. M.E., vol. xxxiv. 1904, p. 222.

--- Page Break ---
24 MINING GEOLOGY.
greatly predominate. Beds of limonite occur separately or in
close association with themanganese oxides, forming manganiferous-
iron ores of varying grades of purity.
The immediate source of the manganese is held by Watson and
others to be rocks from which the residual clays enclosing the ores
were derived. The dissolution and concentration of the manganese
was effected by descending waters charged with oxygen, carbonic
and organic acids.
In the Cave Spring district, in the adjoining county, the
manganese ores are confined to residual clays derived from the
Knox dolomite stratigraphically higher than the quartzites and
limestones of Cartersville district. Massive cherty beds occur in
B B B
FIG. 13. Section in one of the Openings at the Dobbins Mine, near Carters-
ville, Georgia, showing the occurrence of manganese ore in the residual
clays. (Modified from Penrose by Watson.)
A, fragments and masses of partially decayed rock ; B, manganese ore ;
C, residual clay.
Horizontal and vertical scale, 1 in. =10 ft.
the limestone in places, and the decay of the rocks in these places
has formed manganiferous-chert breccias which, however, are not
of much economic importance. The following figure shows the
form of decay assumed by the Knox limestone which is ascribed to
the Silurian period.
The important manganese ores of Romaneche (Saone-et-Loire)
occur, according to De Launay,
1 both as veins which traverse the
granite and as irregular sheets in red clays intercalated in lime-
stone. The latter abut against a nearly vertical wall of granite.
The vertical boundary between the granite and the Secondary
1 Professor L. de Launay, Comptes Rendus, mil. Session Congres Geol. Inter-
nation., Paris, 1901, p. 968.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 25
rocks is occupied by a vein of manganese. These deposits appear
to be partly contact ores and partly replacements of the limestone.
The valuable iron-deposits on the Mesabi range, near the north
shore of Lake Superior, are believed to be due to secondary con-
centration by the action of descending water. Great bodies of
ore lie on the surface and pass under heavy deposits of glacial
drift.
Superficial Salt Deposits. This sub-class also includes the
surface deposits of salt in Asia, America, and Australia, as well as
the valuable deposits at Lake Albert Nyanza, in Africa.
Borax Deposits. A large proportion of the borax of com-
merce is obtained from muds and marsh sediments. The muds of
Daggett, Pa., contain valuable deposits of sodium borate, as also
do those of Turkey. The marshes of California and Nevada also
yield a small output.
FIG. 14. Section in Knox Dolomite, 2 miles east of Kingston, Georgia,
illustrating decay of the magnesian limestone by flow of underground
waters. (Modified from Spencer by Watson.)
A, residual clay ; B, magnesian limestone.
Superficial Gypsum Deposits. Gypsum is found forming
thick beds on the floor of crater-lakes in volcanic regions. A
notable example of this is seen at White Island in Ne\v Zealand,
where the banks and floor of the crater-lake are covered with an
incrustation of gypsum and sulphur many feet thick.
Gypsum also occurs as beds associated with calcareous and
argillaceous rocks ; and in disseminated crystals in clays and
marls.
Sulphur Deposits. Native sulphur occurs most frequently
in volcanic regions often associated with sulphur and celestine.

--- Page Break ---
26 MINING GEOLOGY.
It occurs in beds in the valleys of Noto and Mazzaro in Sicily ; at
Solfatara, near Naples ; also in Java, Japan, and New Zealand.
CLASS II. STRATIFIED DEPOSITS.
(a) Constituting beds or strata.
(b) Disseminated through a bed.
(a) Constituting Beds or Strata.
Strike and Dip of Beds. A bed or seam is a member of a
stratified formation, the overlying layer forming the roof, and the
underlying the floor.
The strike of a bed or seam is the direction of a horizontal line
drawn along the plane of the stratification.
The dip is the direction towards which a bed inclines, and is
always at right angles to the strike. If we assume that we are
standing upon the outcrop of a vein, running or striking north
and south, and facing north, it will be found that the dip may be
either to the right or left, that is, to the east or west.
The dip or direction of the inclination of a bed or vein must not
be confounded with the inclination or angle of dip.
The Inclination of Beds. The angle of dip is the down-
ward inclination measured in degrees from the horizontal.
The underlie is the downward inclination measured in degrees
from the vertical.
The dip and underlie are only the same when the inclination
FIGS. 15 and 16. Showing Inclination of Veins by Co-ordinates.
of the bed or vein is 45. The term underlie is in common
use among miners, and is apt to lead to confusion if used care-
lessly.
When describing a bed or seam a geologist will generally say,
"The seam strikes north-south, and dips east at an angle of 25."
This means that the direction towards which the seam inclines is

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 27
east ; and the angle of inclination, measured from the horizon,
is 25.
The inclination of a bed or vein is often expressed in rect-
angular co-ordinates. For instance, a dip of 1 in 3 signifies a
departure from the perpendicular of 1 inch, foot, or other unit,
for every three of vertical depth ; but the co-ordinate method
must not be confused with the method of expressing railway or
road gradients, in which a gradient of 1 in 1000 means a vertical
rise of 1 foot in a distance of 1000 feet measured along the slope.
The inclination or angle of dip is generally measured with a
clinometer (Abney level), or with a plumb-bob and foot-rule.
Thickness of Beds. The thickness of a bed or seam is the
length of a line, measured at right angles to the plane of the
bedding.
For example
:
Suppose the measured horizontal distance in fig. 17
between the points a and b were 500 feet, then the thickness of
the beds lying between points a and b would be equal to the
length of ac ; and if the average angle of inclination or dip of the
*> A/ / X _
FIG. 17. Showing Measurement of Thickness of Beds.
beds, measured from the horizon, were 60 deg., that is, the angle
at &,
Then sin 60 deg. x 500= ac= 433 feet.
Examples ofBedded Deposits. The useful minerals which
occur in beds, or as members of a stratified formation, are coal,
oil-shale, and spathic iron. In addition to these, roofing slates,
marbles, limestones, building stones, and natural cements are
quarried for commercial purposes.
Coal.
Origin and Formation. Coal is simply an altered form of
vegetable matter. At one time it was believed that there was
only one formation containing true coal, hence the origin of the
geological time-name Carboniferous. The discoveries of recent

--- Page Break ---
28 MINING GEOLOGY.
years, however, have shown that coal occurs in rock of all ages ;
and the investigation of the newer coal-measures has led to the
belief that coal-vegetation established itself wherever and when-
ever the conditions were favourable for its growth.
In tracing the succession of plant and animal life in geological
time, it is found that the earlier forms were of a very primitive
type. In ascending the geological scale, these earlier forms were
succeeded, and to a large extent displaced, by more highly
organised forms, doubtless better adapted to the prevailing con-
ditions of the time and place.
In respect to plant-life, the Primary period was specially
distinguished by the great development of mosses, ferns, and
other cryptogamic forms ; the Secondary period by the growth of
cycads and ferns ; and the Tertiary by deciduous trees and
flowering plants.
The coals of the different geological periods are formed of the
vegetation prevailing at that time. Hence the Carboniferous
coals of Europe are composed of the remains of ferns, mosses,
equisetums, lycopodiums, and lepidodendrons, many of which
grew to a gigantic size, resembling in their habit the forest trees
of the present time.
The great coal-deposits of Carboniferous age would indicate
that plant-life in this period reached its maximum development,
attaining a luxuriance unrivalled at any later geological period.
There is good reason for the belief that the coal-vegetation of
this and all later periods grew on wide tracts of low-lying, swampy
land,.adjacent to some sea or lake, enveloped in a cloud of steam-
ing vapour, through which the rays of the sun seldom penetrated.
Many of these ancient forests extended for hundreds of miles,
occupying the estuaries and deltas of great sluggish rivers laden
with mud and fine sediments.
A study of the coal-measures of every country and of every
age reveals the fact that the accumulated coal-vegetation was
E
reserved from destruction by the gradual submergence of the
md, which thus permitted the deposition of a great thickness of
protecting sediments.
The succession of seams met with in many coalfields indicates
successive periods of minor subsidence and elevation of the land,
each seam with its underclay marking the site of a new forest.
The thickness of the beds or strata between the different seams
affords some evidence of the extent and duration of each sub-
mergence ; but the clay partings met with in coal-seams cannot
always be taken as an evidence of submergence. They may mark
an encroachment of flood-waters on to the forests during an
abnormal inundation, whereby a layer of mud was deposited

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 29
among the vegetation, whose growth would be retarded, but not
destroyed.
Mode Of Occurrence. The character of the sediments
succeeding the coal naturally varied with the position of the
forests and their proximity to the sea, even for coals of the
same age.
Subsidence of the land was a fundamental requirement for the
preservation oftheaccumulated coal-vegetation. In mostcountries,
the coal is followed by shales or indurated clays, sandstones, and
limestones.
The shales are commonly formed of fluviatile muds, which
generally contain plant-remains ; the sandstones are fluvio-marine,
and often contain a rich molluscan fauna ; while the limestones
are composed of shells and corals, which indicate a true marine
littoral. In these cases the coal marks the beginning of a cycle of
deposition.
Where the coal-vegetation grew on the margins of lakes or in
lake estuaries, the coal-measures consist principally of shales, grits,
and sandstones. In most places the grits underlie the coal.
Age Of Coal Carbonaceous matter is found in rocks of all
ages, and in nearly all kinds of sedimentary rocks.
The graphite beds of Canada occur in rocks of Laurentian age.
The anthracite of County Cavan, in Ireland, is Silurian ; the great
coalfields of Great Britain, Continental Europe, and United States
are Carboniferous ; the coals of New South Wales, State of
Virginia, India, and China, Carboniferous and Perrno-carboniferous ;
the bituminous coals of New Zealand, Upper Cretaceous; the
brown coals of South Hungary, Pennsylvania, and North Germany,
Oolitic and Liassic ; of New Zealand and Vienna basin, Miocene ;
and the lignite beds of Ireland, Pliocene.
Inclined Position of Coal Seams. The coal-measures, with
their accompanying seams of coal, were originally deposited in a
more or less horizontal position. If the strata had remained
horizontal, it is evident that the task of procuring coal would have
been very laborious and expensive ; and in countries where the
overlying strata are thick the coal could not have been reached.
The secular movements of the crust of the earth have tilted the
strata at different angles, the dip varying from a few degrees to
angles which occasionally approach the vertical.
Faulting ofCoal Seams. Sudden dislocations or changes of
position are spoken of as throws, troubles, slips, orfaults.
In coal-strata faults often occur in a series of two or more,
having a parallel bearing. They sometimes all dip one way, but
frequently in opposite directions.
Step-faults are often met with in coal-measures. Where the

--- Page Break ---
30 MINING GEOLOGY.
dislocations do not exceed the thickness of the coal-seam they are
termed hitches.
Extent of Faults. Fault-lines are often so thin as to be
easily mistaken for the ordinary jointing of the beds which they
traverse. More frequently, however, the opposite faces present
smooth, glassy, slicken-sided walls, with a space partially or
entirely filled with clay or debris derived from the adjoining
rocks.
In many cases the faulting has been caused by lodes or cross-
courses, which often contain threads or pockets of iron-pyrites,
known to coal-miners as brasses ; and, where they intersect a coal-
seam, quantities of sooty coal mixed with clay.
Intrusive Dykes and their Effects. Dykes consist of
wall-like masses of igneous rock, often basaltic. They are
vertical, or inclined at various angles, and sometimes act the part
of faults by displacing the strata on the opposite walls. They
sometimes run parallel to faults.
In the coalfields of Scotland sheets of basalt have been forced
along the surfaces of coal-seams, and even along their centre, so as
to form a bed or sheet in the middle of the seam.
Intrusive dykes and sheets or sills sometimes cause great loss of
coal, and extra expense in the working of the seam.
The coal in the vicinity of an igneous mass is often coked, and
rendered cindery or sooty.
But the effects are not always destructive. At Malvern Hills, in
New Zealand, a seam of brown coal was dehydrated and converted
into anthracite of good quality by a sheet of basalt.
Coal may also be altered by the same agency into graphite.
Among the debris on the slopes of Mount Egmont, in New Zealand
(a beautiful volcanic cone which is piled up to a height of 8000
feet upon a floor of the lower Tertiary brown-coal measures),
masses of sandstone with adhering layers of graphite of fine
quality are of not uncommon occurrence.
Igneous dykes often dam back water in coal-mines ; and in
some cases they have effectually prevented the spread of fire.
Irregularities of Coal Seams. The troubles met with in
coal-mining are known as balks, nips, gaws, saddle-backs, swellies,
pot-bottoms, horses, and shaken coal.
Ballcs are sudden thinnings in the coal, occasioned by a
depression of the roof of the seam, accompanied by a correspond-
ing rising of the floor.
When the stratum above the coal invades the thickness of the
seam, so as to almost or entirely take the place of the coal, it is
called a nip or want.
Gaws and saddle-backs appear to be the reverse of nips, as the

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 31
floor is either irregular or rises into and interferes with the
continuity of the coal-seam.
In sweUies and pot-bottoms the ordinary thickness of the coal is
increased by a depression of the floor.
Coal-seams which rest close to the basement rock are always
the most subject to irregularities in thickness. This is a very
noticeable feature of the Auckland coalfields of New Zealand,
where the seams of brown coal conform to some extent to the
contour of the basement rock. The result of this conformity is
that the coal thins where the basement rock rises in ridges, and
thickens in the hollows. In the depressions the seam is some-
times 60 feet thick, and on the ridges only a few feet. The thick-
ening and thinning of the seam does not necessarily imply that
the coal is detrital, for it is manifest that the wet, spongy, peaty
mass of vegetable matter from which the coal was formed would
slowly gravitate towards, and accumulate in the hollows existing in
the land surface on which the vegetation grew.
Shaken coal is coal which appears to have been completely
crushed by some pressure or movement of the strata. It is
often a mere heap of shapeless coal-dust, which is so soft that it
may be dug out with a spade.
Bending" of Coal Seams. The effect of faults, volcanic
intrusions, or lateral pressure due to the contraction of the crust
of the earth has been sometimes to bend the coal strata, and in
some cases throw them into complicated folds, which increase the
cost of working, and cause a great waste of coal in mining.
Examples of the folding of the strata in the anthracite coalfields
of Pennsylvania are shown in the figs. 18 and 19.
FIG. 18. Cross-section of New Boston Basin, Pennsylvania anthracite
region. (Reduced by B. S. Lyman from the cross-section sheet of the
Pennsylvania Geological Survey. )
In fig. 19 we have an instructive example of inverted folding on
the same coalfields.
The complicated manner in which coal-measures are folded is

--- Page Break ---
32 MINING GEOLOGY.
well illustrated in the coal-basin of Saint Eloy in France. A
typical section of this field, drawn byDe Launay,
1 isshown in fig. 20.
FIG. 19. Cross-section Shenandah Basin, Pennsylvania anthracite region,
showing inverted folding of coal-measures. (Reduced by P>. S. Lyman
from cross-section sheet of the Pennsylvania Geological Survey.)
FIG. 20. Section of Coal Basin, Saint Eloy. (After De Launay.)
Varieties of Coal and Influence of Enclosing Rock.
Assuming coal to be a form of altered vegetable matter, the pro-
gressive stages in its formation are indicated by the following
kinds :
(1) Peat.
(2) Lignite.
(3) Brown coal.
(4) Cannel-coal.
(5) Bituminous or caking coal.
(6) Semi-anthracite smokeless coal.
(7) Anthracite.
The quality of a coal is not so much dependent upon the age of
the coal as upon the thickness and lithological character of the coal-
measures. A great thickness of close-grained impervious strata
enables the alteration of the vegetable matter to proceed without
1 Professor L. de Launay, Comptes Rendus, viii. Session Congres GeoL
International, Paris, 1901, p. 959.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 33
access of air or water, thereby producing coals of high quality
without regard to age.
The fine bituminous steam-coals of the west coast of New Zea-
land, of Upper Cretaceous age, are enclosed in a great thickness
of close-grained sandstones and shales. The coals of the same age
on the east coast are enclosed in porous quartz grits, and are little
better than lignite.
Another example of the influence exercised by the enclosing
rocks upon the character of the coal is seen in the coalfields of
eastern Texas.1 In the Fayette, Yegua, and Timber Belt divisions,
where the enclosing rocks are chiefly soft, sandy clays, and shales,
the coal is only a lignite, while in Webb County where the measures
are sandstones and shales, it is so superior as to be classed by
Penrose in the bituminous group of coals.
(b) Disseminated through a Bed.
Sedimentary rocks containing well-defined horizons impregnated
with ores and minerals of greater or less economic value are found
in many parts of the globe. The origin of the metallic contents
of these beds is a problem not yet satisfactorily determined. The
metals were either introduced contemporaneously with the deposi-
tion of the sediments in which they occur, or after the consolida-
tion and elevation of the sediments above water. The subject
awaits further investigation. A few typical examples of this class
of deposit are given below.
The Rand Banket Reefs. In this classmay be included the
celebrated so-called banket, or almond, reefs of the Witwatersrand,
in the Transvaal.
The basement rock is granite,
2 which is intruded by dykes of
felsite, syenite, granulite, etc. The granite is overlain by the
Quartzite-shale group, which consists of a great thickness of
quartzite and ferruginous shales, dipping south, at angles varying
from 20 to 50. This group wraps round the north side
of Johannesburg. It contains several thin conglomerate or banket
beds, which are gold-bearing.
The Quartzite-shale group is followed, apparently comformably,
by the Witwatersrand group the gold-bearing series proper-
consisting principally of quartzites, with which are associated beds
of conglomerate or banket, sandstones and shales. The dip is
south, at somewhat lower angles than the underlying series.
The Witwatersrand group is overlain by an enormous pile of
amygdaloidal diabase, in its turn followed by the Black Reef
1 Ht-inrich Ries, Mines and Minerals, Scranton, Pa., Oct. 1905, p. 104.
2 S. J. Truscott, The Witwatersrand Goldfields, 1898, p. 18.
3

--- Page Break ---
34 MINING GEOLOGY.
formation. The latter consists" of alternating quartzites and
shale ; and, at its base, contains conglomerates of the banket type
varying from a few inches to 14 feet thick. It is separated from
the diabase by a few inches of ferruginous clay.
The bulk of the gold in the Rand is derived from the Main
Reef series, in the Witwatersrand group, which comprises three
important banket reefs, namely
:
(a) The Main Reef (the lowest).
(b) The Main Reef Leader.
(c) The South Reef.
In addition to these, there are the less important bankets, known
as the North Reef, the Middle Reef, and the Bastard South Reefs.
FIG. 21. Cross-section across Robinson Mine. (After Gibson.)
(1 and 2) Bastard South Reefs ; (3) Diabase Dyke ; (4) South Reef ; (5)
Middle Reef ; (6) Main Reef Leader ; (7) Main Reef ; (8) North Reef.
Thebanket beds consist of pyritic quartz conglomerates,composed
of rounded or sub-angular pebbles of bluish-gray quartz, embedded
in a quartzose matrix.
The Main Reef series comprises three more or less payable reefs
or banket beds namely, the Main Reef, which is often 12 feet
thick, and very low grade ; the Main Reef Leader, about 15
inches thick, and very rich ; and the South Reef, varying from
a few inches to 6 feet thick, and payable in most places. This
series can be traced for 46 miles, and is the main source of the
gold produced in the Transvaal.
A characteristic feature of the bankets is their uniform value.
The even distribution of the gold has been an important factor
in the development of the Rand goldfield. The gold does not
occur in the enclosed pebbles but in the cementing medium a
circumstance which tends to show that the conglomerates are
simply consolidated lacustrine or estuarine deposits, in which the
gold was deposited from circulating gold-bearing solutions.
Mansfeld Copper Shales. The copper-bearing shales (Kup-
ferschiefer) of Mansfeld, in Prussian Saxony, are of Permian age.
They are 18 inches thick, and extend for many miles. In places

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 35
only the upper few inches are rich enough to pay. The copper
contents vary from 2 to 5 per cent.
The ore is chiefly argentiferous fahlerz, but zinc blende, iron
and copper pyrites, cuprite, and native copper are also present. It
is believed by geologists that the copper was deposited contempor-
aneously with the shales, but the origin of the copper-bearing
solutions is very difficult to explain, and the difficulty is increased
by the wide distribution of copper-bearing rocks of Permian age
in different parts of the globe.
Copper sandstones, of great extent, occur in Southern Russia,
in many parts of Germany, in Great Britain and America, and all
are believed to be of Permian age. The copper-bearing sandstones
of the Keweenawan series near Lake Superior belong to a much
earlier period.
Copper Conglomerates of Lake Superior. The copper
mines on the southern shore of Lake Superior, in the State of
Michigan, have long been celebrated for their productiveness.
Geologically, this copper region is highly interesting and
instructive.
The copper-bearing belt, with a width varying from 4 to 5
miles, lies on a long peninsula, which projects into Lake Superior
for a distance of some 60 miles. It consists of older Palaeozoic
sandstones and conglomerates, interstratified with sheets of
eruptive rock, chiefly amygdaloidal diabase, and flanked by
sandstones of Huronian age.
1
The copper occurs almost wholly in the native state. It is
found
(a) Disseminated in beds of conglomerate and sandstone, which
are intercalated with diabase flows.
(b) In old lava flows of amygdaloidal diabase.
(c) In veins which run at right angles to the general trend of
the beds, and stand almost vertical.
In the beds of conglomerate and sandstone the copper occurs
as the cementing material of the pebbles and grains of sand. In
the Calumet and Hecla mine, which is the most productive, the
bed of copper-bearing conglomerate varies from 8 to 25 feet
thick.
The amygdaloidal rocks are everywhere much altered. The
copper which they contain is very irregularly distributed, except
in the Atlantic mine.
Silver Sandstones of Utah. The silver sandstones of Utah,
in Washington County, are as puzzling as the copper shales of
R. D. Irving, "The Copper-bearing Rocks of Lake Superior," Mono-
graph, United States Geological Survey. Washington, 1883.

--- Page Break ---
36 MINING GEOLOGY.
Europe. They consist of alternating shales and sandstones of
Triassic age.
The White Reef and Buck-eye Reef are two sandstone beds,
from 3000 feet to 4000 feet apart. Above water-level they are
impregnated with kerargyrite, or horn silver; and below water-
level the chloride is replaced by sulphides. The metal-bearing
rock varies from 30 to 90 feet wide, and yields an average of 25 oz.
of silver per ton. A small percentage of copper also occurs with
the silver.
Nearly all geologists are agreed that the silver and copper were
introduced subsequently to the tilting of the beds.
Lead Sandstone of Prussia. The lead sandstone of
Commern, in Rhenish Prussia, is believed to be lower Triassic in
age. The rock is a white sandstone, of great thickness. The
upper part is charged with small concretions, varying from a pin-
head to a pea in size, composed of quartzose sand, cemented with
galena.
The concretions are called knots, hence the miners' name,
knotten-sandstein. They contain a little chromium, vanadium,
and titanium ; the latter in the greatest proportion. The ore is
mined partly by open-cast and partly by underground workings.
Lead-bearing sedimentary rocks belonging to this class occur in
several parts of Germany, and in the counties of Nottingham and
Leicestershire, in England.
Beds containing Coprolites. Coprolites are found dis-
seminated in greensands interbedded with strata of younger
Secondary age in the south of England. The coprolite bearing
greensands of the Cretaceous Waipara series of New Zealand are
of too low a grade to be of economic value.
Gypsum Beds. Gypsum occurs in beds associated with
calcareous and clayey rocks. It is found in great quantity in the
Paris basin at Montmartre. Its occurrence in volcanic regions has
already been noted.
CLASS III. UNSTRATIFIED DEPOSITS.
(a) Deposits of volcanic origin.
(b) Stockwork deposits.
(c} Contact and replacement deposits.
(d) Fahlbands.
(e) Impregnations.
(/) Segregated veins,
(g) Gash veins.
(h) Truefissure veins.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 37
(a) Deposits of Volcanic Origin.
These include the deposits of sulphur and borax, which
accumulate in and around funiaroles in the form of sublimates.
Notable examples of sulphur-deposits are found at Mount Etna
and Mount Vesuvius; White Island and Rotorua, in New
Zealand ; and in Japan.
At White Island the bulk of the sulphur is of very low grade,
being mixed with a very large proportion of gypsum. At Rotorua,
thousands of tons of both yellow and black sulphur of high grade
are being mined by the natives for export.
The steam fumaroles of Pisa and Grosetto, in Italy, yield a
large annual output of boric acid.
(b) Stockwork Deposits.
The term "stockwork " was first used in Europe to distinguish
the quarry-method of mining certain mineralised rock-masses
intersected by small reticulating veinlets of ore. It no longer
refers to the method of working, but is applied to metalliferous
ore-bodies possessing the characteristics of the deposits first mined
as stockworks.
A stockwork may be defined as a rock-mass traversed by
numerous small veins of ore that mutually intersect each other,
but are too small to be worked separately.
The veins seldom possess clearly defined walls, but merge
imperceptibly into the country
- rock which itself is often
impregnated with mineral matter to a greater or less extent.
Stockworks are sometimes of great width and length. They
are mostly of low grade ; and from necessity are commonlyworked
by the quarry or open-cut system of mining, which enables a large
output of ore to be produced at a small cost.
Alaska Treadwell Stockworks. The celebrated gold-
bearing ore-bodies in the Treadwell mines, Douglas Island, in
Alaska, according to Spencer,
1 consist of mineralised dykes of
albite-diorite lying between greenstone on the hanging-wall and
slate on the foot-wall, with a few smaller dykes near by in the
slate. They generally conform to the strike and dip of the
slates.
The greenstones are, as a rule, greatly altered, and in places
possess a schistose or slaty structure. They are supposed to be
ancient andesites and basalts that were erupted at the time the
slates were formed.
1
A. C. Spencer, "The Geology of the Treadwell Ore Deposits, Douglas
Island, Alaska," Trans. Am. Inst. M.E. Pamphlet, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
38 MINING GEOLOGY.
The ore mainly consists of altered diorite impregnated with
sulphides, chiefly iron pyrites. The rock is also partly shattered
and filled with a network of thin calcite and quartz veins that
carry a fair proportion of sulphides.
1 The dykes are considerably
mineralised, and often the whole mass can be mined. In general
the best ore is that which contains the greatest number of calcite
and quartz veinlets.
The gangue is felspar, calcite, and quartz. The gold is associ-
ated with about 2 per cent, of pyrites and some magnetite.
Pyrrhotite often accompanies, or replaces, the pyrites.
The ore is of very low grade, averaging about twelve shillings
per ton, but the large output, free-milling character of the ore,
and skilful management have enabled the mines to pay handsome
profits for many years. The ore-bodies are mined partly by open-
cuts and partly by underground workings.
Other Stockworks. At Zinnwald, in Bohemia, in a dome-
shaped mass of greisen (quartz and mica), there are narrow, hori-
zontal veins of tin-ore that form stockworks.
At Altenberg there is a greisen-like rock, locally called Zwitter,
in which tin-ore is disseminated to the extent of one-third to one-
half per cent., thus forming a stockwork. Somewhat similar
deposits occur in granite in the form of impregnations.
Near Stanthorpe, in Queensland, grains of tin are disseminated
through a granitic rock, as if forming one of its original constituents.
At Monte Catini, in Tuscany, the Cretaceous strata are broken
through by serpentine and gabbro, containing large pockets of
copper ore, mostly erubescite and copper pyrites.
In Cuba and Newfoundland rich deposits of copper occur in
serpentine.
In Cornwall granites and slaty shales, locally called killas,
containing from 8 Ibs. to 9 Ibs. of tin stuff to the ton of rock, yield
a good profit. In some cases 2 Ibs. of tin stun have been sufficient
to pay all expenses. A man can break from 1J to 2 tons of the
hard rock per day, and 7 to 8 tons of soft killas.
In the mineral bolt near Nelson, in New Zealand, native copper
and cuprite occur in serpentine, and chromite of iron in massive
olivine.
At Kimberley, in South Africa, diamonds are found dissemi-
nated in tuffs and agglomerates occupying the necks of ancient
volcanoes.
() Contact and Replacement Deposits.
A contact-deposit is one which occurs at, or near, the contact of
a sedimentary rock and an intrusive mass or dyke.
1
A. C. Spencer, loc. cit. t p. 25.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 39
Valuable deposits of magnetite, specular iron, and of copper,
lead, and zinc sulphides are not uncommon along the junction
between the intrusive and country-rock, frequently near the
boundary, but never outside the metamorphosed zone.
In most, probably in all, cases the ore-body is a mineralised
replacement of the country-rock following certain well-defined
zones of fracture or crush which are genetically connected with
the igneous intrusive mass. Petrological methods of examination
FIG. 22. Section showing Contact Deposit.
(a) Granite. (6) Slate. (c) Contact Deposits.
have shown that progressive stages of alteration can be traced
from the unaltered rock to the mineralised ore-body.
The alteration, removal, and replacement were due to ascending
highly heated waters laden with mineral matter derived from a
deeper zone, probably the cooling intrusive rock-magma itself.
Valuable deposits of magnetite are found at the contact of im-
pure limestones and granite, in the Christiania district, in Norway.
Near Frainont, in the Vosges, in France, masses of specular
iron are found wrapping round a boss of quartz-porphyry.
Pyritic Ore-Bodies. Rio Tinto Copper Contact. Of pyritic
contact-deposits the most typical in Europe are those of Rio
Tinto, Tharsis, and San Domingo, in Spain, and adjacent part of
Portugal, which occur at the boundary between altered slate and
felspar-porphyry.
The famous copper mines of Rio Tinto are contained in a great
belt of mineralised country, 140 miles long and 30 miles wide,
stretching from Huelva, in Spain, into Portugal. The country is
slate of Upper Devonian age, often locally altered into jasper,
talc-schist, and chiastolite schist, and intruded by great masses of
quartz- and felspar-porphyry diabase, quartz-syenite, and granite.
The ore is a fine-grained and compact iron pyrites, containing
on an average less than 3 per cent, of copper. Small veins of
copper pyrites, erubescite, and occasionally copper glance, more or
less mixed with iron pyrites, quartz, blende, and other minerals,
traverse the mass.

--- Page Break ---
40 MINING GEOLOGY.
Contact Ores in America. The argentiferous lead ores of Lead-
ville, in Colorado, have been described by Emmons l as contact-
deposits occurring along the contact planes of eruptive porphyry
dykes, which have broken into and overlain a bed of dolomitic
limestone.
c
FIG. 23. Section of Rio Tinto Pyritic Contact Deposit.
(a] Altered slate. (6) Felspar-porphyry. (c) Cupriferous pyrites.
The lead-zinc ores of South Mountain, in the State of Idaho,
occur along the contact of limestone and diorite or granite. They
have been described by Lindgren
2 as true contact-deposits.
In the Seven Devils district, in the same State, there are copper-
deposits which occur as (a) fissure-veins, (b) zones of impregnation,
and (c) contact-deposits. The country-rocks consist of Triassic
slate and limestone, intercalated with basic lavas. In several
places this series is intruded by diorites ; and all the ore-bearing
bodies appear to be genetically connected with these intrusive
masses.
The sedimentary series, in different places, has been fissured
in the zone of metamorphism, and also outside of it. The fissures,
in the zone of metamorphism, when filled with mineral matter,
formed contact-deposits, while those outside of it became fissure-
veins. Morphologically they differ, but genetically they are the
same.
The valuable copper deposits of Arizona occur associated with
Carboniferous limestone, generally at the line of contact of granite,
or other eruptive rock.
Gold- and copper-bearing contact-veins are common in Mexico,
occurring generally between Cretaceous limestone and eruptive
rocks, which are nearly always diorite.3
1 S. F. Emmons, "The Genesis of Certain Ore Deposits," Trans. Am. List,
M.E., vol. xv., p. 125, 1886.
2 W. Lindgren, "The Genesis and Character of Certain Contact Deposits."
Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xxxi. p. 226 ; and " Genesis of Ore Deposits,"
p. 721.
3
Lindgren, loc. cit., p. 724.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 41
Rammelsberg Pyritic Deposit. Pyritic ore-bodies associated
with, but not actually in contact with, eruptive masses, are found
in all parts of the world. Of such ore-bodies that at Ramrnels-
berg, in the Hartz, said to have been worked for 900 years,
Mount Lyell lodes, in Tasmania, and the Broken Hill lode, in
New South Wales, may be cited as typical examples.
Vogt
l describes the Rammelsberg deposit as an irregular lens
of ore with a curious lateral branch like the Broken Hill lode.
The deposit is 1500 yards long and from 49 to 65 feet wide. It
NW SE
Pyrites
FIG. 24. Ideal Section of Rammelsberg Pyritic Deposit. (After Vogt.)
is enclosed in Upper Devonian slates, occupying the centre of a
shear zone. Its genesis is believed by Vogt to be closely
connected with certain lines of eruption of granite in the
immediate neighbourhood.
Mount Lyell Ore Deposits. Professor 3. W. Gregory
2
groups
the ore-deposits of this district into two classes, namely, (a) huge,
lens-shaped pyritic masses, and (b) mineralised bands of schist,
1 Professor J. H. L. Vogt, " Ueber die Kieslagerstatten vom Typus Rb'ros,
Vigsnas, Sulitelma in Norwegen und Rammelsberg in Deutschland," Zeit.
Prakt. GeoL, 1894.
2 Professor J. W. Gregory, "The Mount Lyell Mining Field Tasmania."
Traits. Aust. Inst. M.K, vol. x., 1905, p. 26.

--- Page Break ---
42 MINING GEOLOGY.
forming fahlbands. The former are the source of the great bulk
of the valuable mineral mined in the field ; the latter are
economically of little importance.
The rocks consist of Devonian conglomerates and quartzites
flanked by Silurian and Cambrian schists. The structure is not
complicated by folding, but the country is traversed by a complex
of great faults.
The ore-bodies occur as detached masses along the line of
contact of the quartzites and conglomerates on the east, and
schists on the west side.
Of the two main pyritic masses, the largest and most important
is known as the Big Mine or Parent Mine. Professor Gregory
describes it as irregularly boat-shaped in form, being an elliptical
mass which tapers gradually downwards and is then cut off
with a rounded base. The extension in depth is limited by a
great thrust plane which brings the conglomerates under the ore
and schists. 1
The oxidised gossan consisted mainly of silica, barite, and iron
oxide containing about 15 oz. of silver and 15 dwt. of gold per
ton.
The pyritic ore is chiefly pyrites with copper, gold, and silver.
Small patches of very rich ore, probably the result of secondary
enrichment, were met with at the bottom of the oxidised zone.
They contained redruthite, bornite, fahlore, and argentite.
The main pyritic mass is of very low grade. It contains from
0'5 to 2 per cent, of copper, from 1'5 to 3 oz. of silver, and
from 0'04 to 0'07 oz. of gold per ton of ore.
W. T. Batchelor 2 states that a feature of the ore-bodies is their
peculiarity of splitting into one or more legs or branches as they
descend, a feature so characteristic of the Broken Hill lode in
New South Wales.
The genesis of the Mount Lyell ore-bodies is still a question of
doubt. Professor Gregory thinks they may be classed as contact-
deposits, although not directly connected with igneous masses.
The main ore-body lies in a c.rush-zone at the contact of the
quartzites and schists, and its formation may possibly be connected
with the granite intrusions of Mount Heemskirk range. A
petrological examination of the wall-rock and ore would probably
show that the Mount Lyell ores, like those of other pyritic masses
elsewhere, are metasomatic replacements of the enclosing rock.
The great faults which traverse the lodes are thought by some
writers to have a genetic association with the ore-bodies, but this
connection has not yet been proved. The manner in which the
lodes are faulted and displaced horizontally by thrust-faults
1
Loc. cit., p. 118. 2 Loc. tit., p. 141.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 43
would lead to the conclusion that the faults are of later date than
the ore-deposits which they displace.
FIG. 25. Cross-section of Mount Lyell Ore Deposits. (After Batchelor.)
(a) Quartzites and conglomerates. (b) Schists. (c) Isolated masses of
quartzite enclosed in lode, (d) Pyritic ore-bodies.
Broken Hill Lode. Broken Hill itself is a ridge, about 2 miles
long, flanked on both sides by the plain. The rocks are mainly
slates, schist, and gneiss, of probably Silurian age. The summit
of the hill is crowned by the oxidised outcrop or gossan of the
lode, which was impregnated more or less with cerussite, embolite,
and iodyrite.
In the oxidised zone, below the ironstone cap, the mineral

--- Page Break ---
44 MINING GEOLOGY.
contents were principally cerussite, native silver, chlorides,
bromides, and iodides of silver, associated with kaolin, garnet, and
quartz.
Below the oxidised products came what are locally termed
sooty sulphides, consisting of loose aggregates of galena and blende,
enclosed in a gaiigue of quartz and garnet. The friable sulphides
JAMIESON SHAFT.
i
i
'<'l7//f/</'/\\'
f'" ''KI'l'l'
Scale
(,0 180
Feet
FIG. 26. Cross-section of Broken Hill Lode Broken Hill Proprietary
Mine. (Copied from the Company's plan.)
passed downward into solid sulphides (blendeand galena), enclosed
in a gangue of quartz, garnet, and rhodonite, containing also iron
pyrites, and a little chalcopyrite. The sooty sulphides were
frequently very rich, and apparently represented a zone of
secondary enrichment.
Between the 200 and 300 feet levels, the lode divides into two
spurs or branches, which follow the trend of the enclosing rocks.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 45
The walls of the lodes are not slicken-sided. In many places the
rock is impregnated or replaced more or less with ore.
The gneiss and schist are associated with numerous dykes of
diorite,
1 to the intrusion of which the folding of the rocks and
subsequent filling of the cavities along the axial line of main
flexure may be ascribed.
The character and genesis of this lode is still a matter of dis-
agreement among Australian geologists. Pittman and Jaquet
2
contend that the lode is a large saddle-reef enclosed in altered
sedimentaries. Professor Gregory,
3 on the other hand, maintains
that the position of the lode has been determined by a series of
powerful faults along which mineralisation has taken place. He
contends that the containing rocks are not sedimentary and never
were. The gneisses and schists beside the lode are, he affirms, a
series of altered igneous rocks. Pittman and Jaquet oppose this
view with the statement that the same, or similar gneisses and
schists, in the adjacent district, contain bands of limestone which
clearly prove a sedimentary origin for the series.
Duckton Ore Deposits, Tennessee. The pyritic ore-bodies in this
region may be taken as typical of this class of ore-deposit in
America. The rocks consist of gneiss and micaceous schists or
slates which have been thrown into close folds.
FIG. 27. Ideal Section, N.W. to S.E., showing probable structure of
Duckton region. (After Henrich.)
The ore-bodies consist of masses of pyrrhotite with which occur
sulphides of copper, zinc, and lead. The portions near the surface
have been oxidised into gossan. Carl Henrich4 states that below
1
J. B. Jaquet,
" Geology of the Broken Hill Lode and Barrier Ranges
Mineral Field, New South Wales," Memoir GeoL Survey N.S. W., No. 5, 1894.
2 E. F. Pittman and J. B. Jaquet, "The Genesis of Broken Hill Lode,"
Australian Mining Standard, October 1904.
3 Professor J. W. Gregory, F.R.S., "The Genesis of Broken Hill Lode,"
Melbourne Argus, September 1904.
4 Carl Henrich, " Ducktown Ore Deposits and Treatment of Copper Ores,"
Trans. Am. Inst. M.E., vol. xxv., 1896, p. 206.

--- Page Break ---
46 MINING GEOLOGY.
the gossan and above the unaltered sulphides there is a zone of
secondary enrichment consisting of partly oxidised copper ore or
" black copper." Frequently a floor of white quartz occurs below
the enriched zone frequently containing dispersed grains or
bunches of marcasite.
The ore-deposits do not occur in direct association with igneous
intrusions, but are found along the planes of fault-fissures, the
fault-plane in all cases, according to Henrich, forming the east or
hanging-wall of the deposit, which is always sharply defined.
That writer is of the opinion that the Duckton ore-deposits are
replacements of igneous dykes which at one time occupied the
present places of the ore-bodies.
(d) Fahlbands.
These are beds or strata of crystalline metamorphic rock, so
highly impregnated with ore as to be of commercial value. The
silver-bearing fahlbands (or gray beds) of Norway are among the
best-known examples. They follow, more or less closely, the
strike and dip of the gneissoid and schistose strata by which they
are bounded. They extend for several miles, and in cases attain
a width of several hundred feet.
In the Kongsberg district these bands are crossed nearly at
right angles by narrow fissure veins, varying in width from a few
inches up to 2 feet, and are productive of silver only where
they intersect the fahlbands. The fahlbands are important in this
district solely from the fact that the small fissure-veins are en-
riched in passing through them, more especially when two such
veins intersect within the mineralised belt.
FIG. 28. Section of Fahlband at Dusky Sound, New Zealand. (After Park.)
(a) Schists. (6) Fahlband.
At Dusky Sound, in New Zealand, there is a mineralised band
of mica and chlorite schists, containing pyrrhotite, pyrite, with a
little chalcopyrite and nickel, associated with epidote and garnet
minerals. The band can be traced southward, across the moun-
tains, for several miles, but it has not yet been shown to contain
payable^ore of any kind.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 47
Fahlbands are related to bed-impregnations, which probably
owe their origin to aqueous and gaseous emanations arising from
a cooling intrusive magma.
I (e) Impregnations.
It has sometimes happened that when a rock has been cracked
or fissured a portion of the rock on one or both walls has become
impregnated with some metallic substance, disseminated as grains,
nests, or bunches throughout the mass in the vicinity of the
fissure.
Such an occurrence is called an impregnation, implying that
the mineral has been introduced as a secondary product by
mineral waters or superheated steam.
The term impregnation implies a reference to the genesis
rather than the form of an ore-deposit, and when used in a
morphological sense is somewhat vague and meaningless.
Genetically the majority of stockworks, contact-deposits, and
fahlbands may be properly regarded as impregnations, as well
as the Silver Sandstones of Utah, the Copper Conglomerates of
Lake Superior, the Copper Shales of Mansfeld, and the Gold
Bankets of the Rand, all of which probably derived their metallic
contents from aqueous and gaseous emanations expelled from a
cooling magma.
Tin Impregnations. The ore most frequently found as an
impregnation is cassiterite or tin-stone, and the rock in which it
occurs in this manner is commonly granite. Many examples of
this class of tin-deposit are met with in Australia and in
Tasmania.
FIG. 29. Tin Impregnation.
(a) Granite. (&) Tin impregnation.
At Mount Wills, in Victoria, tin-ore is found in veins and in
disseminated grains in a granite, forming a true stockwork.
At Vegetable Creek, in New South Wales, it is found filling
contraction cracks and joints in a granite, near the junction with

--- Page Break ---
48 MINING GEOLOGY.
clay slates. In the Emmaville division, in the same State, the
tin-bearing ore occurs in veins and impregnations in the outer
crust of a granitic boss.
In the Herberton district, which produces the bulk of the tin
raised in Queensland, the tin-stone occurs in veins, bunches, and
impregnations in granite.
At the famous tin-mine, at Mount Bischoff,
1 the tin-stone occurs
in strings, bunches, veins, and impregnations in quartz-porphyry,
eurite, and topaz-porphyry, which have intruded slates, sandstones,
and quartzose rocks.
Impregnations, like fahlbands, form a group of metalliferous
deposits not very clearly denned. Genetically, they are closely
related to contact-deposits.
(f) Segregated Veins.
Deposits of this kind generally occur in the shape of lenticular
masses, and often succeed one another in length and depth in such
a manner as to constitute a more or less continuous vein. They
are only found in sedimentary rocks that have been sharply folded,
whereby cracks or fissures have been formed more or less parallel
with the bedding planes, and dipping at right angles to the axial
line of elevation.
Characteristics of Segregated Veins. The chief char-
acteristics of segregated veins are as follows :
(1) Uncertain both in depth and linear extension ; that is, they
are seldom continuous either in length or depth, but occur
as a succession of disconnected, lentil-shaped masses,
which may contain a few tons, or many thousands of tons,
of quartz.
(2) Irregular in width.
(3) Seldom possess more than one well-defined wall.
(4) Frequently receive small veins in their course.
(5) Conform more or less to bedding planes of country-rock.
(6) They are only found in bedded sedimentaries, which are
generally slates, claystones or sandstones.
Origin of Segregated Veins. The origin of segregated
deposits of this class is somewhat obscure. They generally occur
along the bedding-plane of the country-rock. The cavities they
fill have apparently been formed by the folding of the enclosing-
rock; and this folding may have been caused by secular earth-
movements, or the intrusion of an igneous mass.
New Zealand Segregations. The productive quartz-veins
1
H. W. F. Kayser,
" Mount Bischoff," Aust. Assoc. Advt. Science, 1892.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 49
in the Reefton, Inangahua, and Lyell goldfields consist of a
succession of lenticular masses which generally conform to
the bedding planes of the enclosing claystones and sandstones.
Some of the larger ore-bodies swell out to a width of 20 feet at
their widest part, but the majority are shaped like flat lenses with
a thickness varying from 3 to 6 feet. There are no dykes or
intrusive bosses in the vicinity of the veins, which occupy cavities
formed along the bedding planes of a monoclinal.
Saddle Reefs. These are so named from their resemblance
in form to a stockman's saddle. They are merely segregated veins
formed in cavities along the bedding planes of sedimentary rocks
which have been bent into anticlinal and synclinal folds.
E. J. Dunn,
1 who worked out the morphology of the saddle-
reefs of Bendigo goldfield, in Victoria, defines a saddle-reef as :
"A lenticular quartz-lode lying between bedding planes of rock,
bent over in anticlinal or synclinal folds."
The chief characteristics of saddle-reefs are as follows :
(1) They occur in bedded, banded, or foliated rocks.
(2) They fill cavities which conform to the planes of bedding or
foliation of the rocks.
(3) The greatest mass of ore occurs along the crown of the
anticlinal arch forming the saddle from which the legs
descend, one on each side of the arch.
(4) The legs diminish rapidly in size as they descend, and
finally die out.
(5) Two or more saddle-reefs may succeed each other in vertical
depth under the axis of the same anticlinal fold.
(6) The greatest thickness of ore in inverted saddle-reefs,
formed in synclinal folds, is found along the axis of the
trough.
The saddle-reefs of Bendigo consist of arch-like masses of gold-
bearing quartz conforming to the bedding planes of the enclosing
slate and sandstone of Silurian age. Dunn has shown that in
most cases the folding of the rocks was caused by the intrusion of
igneous dykes.
Inverted Saddle Reefs. The gold-bearing veins at Cape
Terawhiti, near Wellington, in New Zealand, are interesting ex-
amples of saddle-reefs which exhibit both an anticlinal and
synclinal arrangement, as shown in fig. 31.
The rocks are Triassic claystones and sandstones which have
been eroded into steep ridges and deep valleys, with the result that
the veins have been correspondingly denuded. The ore-bodies
1
E. J. Dunn, Report on Bendigo Goldfield, Dept. of Mines, Victoria,
Melbourne, 1893.
4

--- Page Break ---
50 MINING GEOLOGY.
SADDLE REEF
FIG. 30. Sections showing Formation of Saddle-Reefs. (After E. J. Dunn.)

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 51
now remaining are only the truncated ends or legs of what were
at one time true saddle-reefs.
The Monte Christo lode, in Nerrena, or Little Bendigo goldfield,
Fio. 31. Section at Cape Terawhiti.
(a) Segregated veins.
is a segregated ore-body which sends out peculiar parallel lateral
spurs or branches into the adjoining slates and sandstones. The
form assumed by lodes of this class is always determined by the
shape of the original cavity.
FIG. 32. Cross-section of Monte Christo Lode, Little Bendigo.
(After W.Bradford.)
(g) Gash Veins.
These are metalliferous deposits occupying lenticular or wedge-
shaped cavities, or gashes in limestone. They generally occur
along the bedding planes, often at the points of intersection of
cross-joints where cavities, and sometimes large caverns, have been
formed by the action of surface waters charged with carbonic acid.

--- Page Break ---
52 MINING GEOLOGY.
The ores most commonly found in gash-veins are galena and
zinc blende. Veins of this class have no distinct walls, and, being
confined to a single stratum of the formation in which they occur,
are limited in extent.
FIG. 33. Gash Veins, Wangapeka, New Zealand.
(a) Silurian limestone. (6) Silurian slates.
(c) Gash veins containing galena and blende.
Qi) True Fissure Veins.
Veins of this class are generally admitted to have originated in
fissures caused either by secular folding, or by igneous intrusions,
and are believed to possess great depth. They pass through all
kinds of rocks in their course, independently of any bedding or
stratification ; but in some part they may chance to coincide with
the dip and strike of the containing formation.
FIG. 34. True Fissure Vein.
(a) Limestone.
(b) Slates.
(c) Granite.
(d) Fissure-vein.
The mineral contents of these veins were deposited from
ascending aqueous solutions, which were, probably, genetically
connected with deep-seated magmatic intrusions.
The banded arrangement of the vein-matter of the fissure-veins
of Cornwall is very similar to that of the solfataric veins of the
Hauraki goldfields, which would tend to show that the filling took

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 53
place in the later stages of the after-actions following the igneous
intrusion.
The two walls do not always coincide, that is, the fissure is
often a fault, and of variable width. A true vein, like a segregated
vein, may throw out spurs or branches from one or both walls.
Lodes of Cornwall. The lodes of Cornwall are familiar
examples of true fissure-veins. They pass in depth successively
through limestone, slate, and granite. In the limestone, the
principal commercial product was lead ; in the slate, copper ; and
in the granite, tin.
Lodes of Bavarian Forest. The three gigantic quartz
lodes on the slopes of the Bavarian Forest are regarded by Suess 1
as the greatest monuments of linear dislocation known in Europe.
They are true fissure-veins, and are believed by that distinguished
geologist to occupy great fault-fractures, on the existence of which
he finds support for his celebrated theory of mountain building
by horsts und grdben.
Of these, the Asch lode begins in the most north-westerly part
of Bohemia, north-west of Asch, runs to the south-east trans-
versely across the mica-schist, gneiss, and granite of Erzgebirge
Mountains ; then cuts across the narrow outcrop of gneiss near
Seeberg, disappears beneath the Tertiary covering in the basin
of Franzensbad and Eger, and reappears immediately on the other
side of this in the granite mass of Sandan, finally extending
through this up to the south of Kb'nigswart. The total length of
outcrop is nearly 25 miles.
Near Hals, where the Asch lode ends, there appears the begin-
ning of the great vein known as the Bohemian Pfahl which strikes
south-south-east, then curves to the east, then turns back to the
straight course and crosses the Bavarian frontier near Furth.
The length of outcrop is about 34 miles, and the average width
about 100 feet. For a long distance the lode runs between the
gneiss and hornblende rock, but where the hornblende rocks bend,
it passes completely into the latter.
The third and greatest of these lodes is the Great Pfahl. It
strikes N. 58 W., and for the greater part of its course varies
from 225 to 370 feet wide. For a distance of 27 miles in a south-
east course, it separates the granite from the Triassic and middle
Jurassic strata, and then to the west of the chain passes com-
pletely into the Archaean region ; thence it continues in a straight
line as far as the Austrian frontier. The total length of outcrop
of this remarkable lode is 92 miles.
Veins of Cripple Creek. The gold-bearing veins at Cripple
Creek, in Colorado, traverse andesitic tuffs and phonolite of lower
1 Eduard Suess, The Face of the Earth, English edition, vol. i. p. 207.

--- Page Break ---
54 MINING GEOLOGY.
Tertiary age. They are fissure-veins, grouped around old volcanic
centres of eruption.
The Comstock Lode. The celebrated Comstock lode, in
Nevada, traverses propylitised andesite, dacite, diabase, diorite,
etc., of older Tertiary age. In the middle portion of its course it
occupies the line of contact between masses of diorite and
diabase, the latter lying on the hanging-wall. The basement
rocks are granite, schists, slates, and limestones.1
The lode has been traced for a distance of over 22,000 feet in a
nearly due north and south direction. It dips towards the east,
and has a thickness varying from 20 to 60 feet. The vein-
fissure is also a fault. The vein-matter consists of crushed and
decomposed rock, clay, and quartz. The lode is remarkable for
the high temperature of the mine-water in the lower levels.
The mines on the Comstock lode have yielded a fabulous
amount of gold and silver since they were opened in 1859. The
gold exists as free gold, associated with sulphides of silver.
Mother Lode of California. The Great Mother lode of
California is one of the most remarkable fissure-veins in the globe.
It is traceable for a distance of 70 miles, extending through five
counties, and in many places is a mineralised belt, rather than a
true vein.
This immense vein, or group of veins, generally occurs in a belt
of black slate of Triassic age, and runs nearly parallel with the
planes of stratification, dipping in the same direction at nearly
the same angle of inclination. At different parts of its course, it
traverses slate, diorite, diabase, serpentine, and granite.
The mines on the Mother lode and the rich placers on its
course have yielded a large proportion of the gold produced in
California for many years.
2
Lode Formations of Kalgoorlie. The famous lode-
formations of Kalgoorlie in Western Australia possess many
features of peculiar interest to the mining geologist. They
are grouped together in an area about a square mile in extent,
locally named the Golden Mile. The country-rocks in this area
have undergone extreme alteration, which renders the determina-
tion of their original character very difficult.
In the oxidised ground, there is no sharp line of demarcation
between the lode-formations and the country-rock,
3 which is
1 G. F. Becker, "Geology of the Comstock Lode and Washoe District,"
Monograph Hi. of U.S. GeoL Survey. Washington, 1882.
2 J. D. Whitney, The Auriferous Gravels of the Sierra Nevada of
California, Cambridge, U.S., 1880, p. 45.
3 H. C. Hoover, "The Superficial Alteration of Western Australian Ore
Deposits," Trans. Amer. List. Mm. Eny., vol. xxviii. p. 785.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 55
generally admitted to be of an eruptive character, probably of an
acidic hornblende type.
The lode-formations are believed by some to be belts of country-
rock, more altered and mineralised than the remaining rocks ; by
others to be igneous dykes which intruded the older eruptives,
and subsequently became mineralised by ascending thermal
waters in the waning or solfataric phase of eruptive after-actions.
The schistose structure observed in the lode-matter may have
been induced by tangential stress due to secular folding and
elevation, subsequent to the formation of the lodes. The presence
of sericite favours the view that it was induced by pressure.
The evidence available at present seems to suggest that
metasomatic replacement on a large scale, operating along lines
of fracture, probably contraction fissures, played an important
part in the genesis of the Kalgoorlie lodes.
The oxidised portion of the lodes extends from 50 to 400 feet
below the present surface, the depth to which it extends being
apparently independent of existing water-level or surface contours. 1
The gold in it is free and extremely fine. Generally speaking,
the richer and more heavily mineralised parts are found to be
oxidised to the greatest depth.
2
In the oxidised zone the lode-matter consists chiefly of hydrated
oxides of iron,hydrated silicates of alumina,and magnesia.
3
Calcite,
sericite, chlorite, and other alteration products are also present.
The lode-formations are often intersected by small veins of
decomposed quartz,
4 and Woodward states that it is where these
are met with that the ore is richest.
The ore-bodies, or courses of rich ore, occur in irregular lens-
shaped masses, varying from a mere thread to many feet in width.
They are not continuous, but occur in echelon one lens over-
lapping the other.
Below the oxidised zone the lodes are more clearly defined,
particularly in the richer mines.5 The country-rock is massive, but
extremely altered, while the lode-matter is schistose, in places
showing alteration to chlorite and sericite, and plentifully charged
with disseminated iron pyrites.
In some mines the vein-filling consists chiefly of quartz. The
1
H. C. Hoover, loc. cit., p. 758.
-
H. P. Woodward, "The so-called Lode Formations of Hannan's and
Telluride Deposits," Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. vi. p. 17.
3 Loc. cit., p. 16.
Western Australia." Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. vi., 1898, p. 141.
6 Loc. cit., p. 144.

--- Page Break ---
56 MINING GEOLOGY.
quartz, however, is in many cases replaced by calcite, which is an
important gangue material, sometimes occurring in large masses,
with calaverite.1
The gold occurs mainly in tellurides and sulphides, only a minor
proportion existing in the free state. The principal accessory
minerals are magnetite, siderite, iron pyrites, and arsenical
pyrites.
The tellurides occur as veins, splashes, and disseminated minute
crystals throughout the entire mass.
Mount Morgan Lode. The great ore-body in Mount Morgan
mine in Queensland is believed by some to be a huge pyritic lode.
In the upper part of the deposit, it consists of siliceous haematite
or gossan, often with a porous, cavernous structure ; and in the
lower part, of massive pyritic gold-bearing ore. A zone of
d
FIG. 35. Cross-section of Mount Morgan Lode. (After E. J. Dunn.'
(a and b} Sandstones, etc.
(c) Dykes.
(d) Igneous rock.
(e) Cellular siliceous ore.
(/) Siliceous sulphides.
(g] Oxidised enriched zone.
secondary enrichment of great value was met with in the oxidised
zone.
The action of sea-water is held by E. J. Dunn 2 to sufficiently
account for the secondary oxidised ores, without calling in the aid
of thermal springs, as contended by Dr Jack.
The country-rocks are highly metamorphosed strata of Permo-
1
G. W. Card, "Notes on tlie Country Rocks of the Kalgoorlie Goldfield,
Western Australia," Records of the Geol. Survey of N.S. W., vol. vi.
Part I.
2 E. J. Dunn, "Mount Morgan Gold Mine," Proc. Royal Society of
Victoria, 1905.

--- Page Break ---
CLASSIFICATION OF MINERAL DEPOSITS. 57
Carboniferous age, traversed by intrusions of hornblende-granite
and dolerite.1
The ore-body itself is nearly surrounded by dykes of dolerite,
often altered and serpentinised.
The evidence supplied by Dr Jack, Wilkinson, and others seems
to indicate that this unique lode is a true fissure-vein, genetically
connected with the intrusion of the dolerites. It bears many
points of resemblance to the famous copper-contact deposits at
Rio Tinto in Spain.
The distinction between contact-deposits and fissure-veins is one
of geologic occurrence rather than genetic origin. As will be
shown later, the after-actions of a magmatic intrusion may be the
genetic cause in the formation of fissure-veins, contact-deposits,
or even bed-impregnation.
Tin Lodes of Malaysia. The tin lodes of the Malay
Peninsula, the erosion of which has produced the valuable alluvial
placers of the Straits Settlements, are fissure-veins passing from
clay slates downward into the basement rock granite.
2
Gold Veins of Charters Towers. In this rich goldfield a
large number of the veins are enclosed in granite, but some occur
in porphyry. The vein-gangue is principally quartz, containing
iron pyrites and often pyrrhotite, both of which contain gold.
Copper Lodes of Butte City. The copper-deposits near
Butte City, in the State of Montana, are among the richest in the
globe. The country-rock is granite, traversed by dykes of rhyolite
trending north and south.3
A number of mining companies are operating on a lode or
mineralised belt, which can be traced for over 3 miles, in a
course running nearly east and west.
The direction of the mineral belt follows the general trend of
the fissure planes, which are approximately parallel to each other,
uniting in places, running out and uniting again.
Emmons concludes that the granite was fissured by the rhyolite
intrusions, which were followed by the usual sequence of eruptive
after-actions, including at one stage the circulation of hot ascend-
ing solutions. Through the agency of these solutions, the granite
became decomposed along the lines of fracture, and the ore-bodies
formed by rnetasoinatic interchange.
Much of the ore occurs in thin interlacing veins, some of it
impregnating the granite, and some as huge ore-masses.
1 C. S. Wilkinson, Notes on a Collection of Rocks and Minerals from
Mount Morgan," Records of Geol. Survey of N.S. IV., 1891, vol. ii. p. 86.
2 W. H. Derrick, Notes on Lode Tin Mining in the Malay Peninsula,"
Trans. List. Min. and Met., vol. vii., 1898-1899, p. 12.
3 S. F. Emmons, "The Copper Resources of the United States," Trans.
Amer. List. Min. Eng., vol. xix. p. 678.

--- Page Break ---
58 MINING GEOLOGY.
The oxidised portion carried silver, mainly the chloride, and no
copper of any moment, down to a depth of about 400 feet, where
a zone of secondary enrichment was met with, containing rich
oxysulphides and other secondary ores of copper. Below this zone
appeared the normal sulphide ore, which consists principally of
chalcopyrite, bornite, and copper glance, containing from 6 to
10 per cent, of copper, and a little silver.1
The width of the lodes varies considerably, but on an average
may be taken at about 10 feet.
1
Douglas, "The Copper Resources of the United States," Trans. Am.
Inst. Min. Eng.> vol. xix. p. 679.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER III.
ORE VEINS-THEIR FILLING, AGE, STRUC-
TURE, WALL MOVEMENTS, PAY SHOOTS,
ETC.
CONTENTS :
Filling of Cavities and Veins Origin of Vein Cavities Age of
Vein-filling Width of Lodes Length Stroke Inclination Depth
Arrangement of Lode Matter Horses in Veins Outcrops of Veins
Condition of Metallic Contents Position of Valuable Contents Pay
Shoots Gold Bonanzas Wall Movements Influence of Country
Productive Zones Vertical Distribution of Ores Secondary Enrichment
of Veins Impoverishment of Veins in Depth Indicator Beds Para-
genesis Temperatures in Deep Mining Recording Rock Temperatures
Limits of Deep Mining Metasomatic Replacement.
Filling of Cavities and Veins. The precipitation of dis-
solved matter from circulating underground solutions and gases
was, doubtless, in most cases, due to a combination of physical
and chemical causes operating in conformity with well-known
physical laws.
The problem is one of the most difficult connected with the
genesis of ore-bodies, and is made more so by our lack of knowledge
of the chemical constitution of the substances held in solution.
It is not uncommon to find a vein containing sulphides of iron,
copper, lead, zinc, antimony, and silver, all enclosed in a matrix
of quartz.
In many cases there is a symmetrical arrangement of the vein-
matter ; but in other cases the sulphides are deposited throughout
the matrix irregularly, and apparently without order or system,
forming masses intimately associated, yet still only mechanically
mixed, clearly suggesting that the process of deposition had a
nuclear tendency, in consequence of which each ore went to itself,
and formed aggregates, both small and great.
Deposition of vein-matter from underground solutions may be
effected by one or more of the following causes :
(a) The cooling of solutions charged with dissolved mineral
matter.
59

--- Page Break ---
60 MINING GEOLOGY.
(b) A decrease of pressure.
(c) Electro-chemical action.
(d) Chemical precipitation.
(e) By other contact with other mineralised solutions.
(/) By gaseous emanations.
(g) By absorption of metals by gelatinous silica, etc.
Origin of Vein Cavities. The solutions either found the
cavities awaiting them, or they formed their own channels by a
process of slow progressive replacement of the wall-rock parallel to
primary fractures.
If the cavities were pre-existing, they were formed mechanically
by forces either (a) internal, or (b) etxernal to the rock affected.
In the case of eruptive magmas unequal cooling of the igneous
mass would tend to create unequal internal tensions, with the
result that fissures of contraction would be formed. Magmas, like
the molten charge in a blast furnace, will corrode the walls of
their cavern, and the "
plucking
" action of the rising pasty mass
will tend to detach fragments from the roof and sides. Daly
l
concludes that the digestion of solid rock by a magma causes an
increase of volume of the magmas, thereby furnishing sufficient
energy to fracture the overlying rocks and force the magma itself
along planes of weakness.
Sedimentary and older eruptive rocks may be fractured by an
igneous intrusion, or by the lateral and tangential stresses created
by the secular folding of the crust of the earth. Such forces are
external to the rock-mass affected ; and if we consider the manner
in which they act, we shall find that igneous intrusions play a
more important part in the genesis of vein-cavities than the more
ponderous secular earth-movements.
Secular movement is extremely slow, seldom exceeding a few
inches in a century. The folding which it causes being for the
most part of wide structural or tectonic importance, is continental
rather than local. When the stress exceeds the elastic limit
of the material the resultant effects are faulting and shearing,
plication and sharp infolding.
The fracturing which produces open fissures and cavities is
chiefly the work of igneous intrusions and volcanic forces. These
agencies having made the cavities, also provide the mineralised
gases and solutions that corrode and replace the shattered rock
and fill the fissures with mineral matter.
Ore-bodies are often formed along joint and fault planes, and
at the intersection of joints, simple fractures, and faults. A
1
Daly, R. A., "Mechanics of Igneous Intrusion," Amer. Journ. Sci. [4],
vol. xvi. p. 107, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 61
typical example of this class of deposit in Bendigo goldfield,
Victoria, has been shown by T. A. Rickard. 1
a
FIG. 36. Typical Section of Ore Body at Intersection of Fractures.
(After T. A. Rickard.)
(a) Sandstone. (b) Slate. (cc) Fractures.
(d) Gold-bearing quartz in the form of a.false-saddle reef.
The sulphide ores of Monte Cristo, in the State of Washington,
are stated by Spurr
2 to be replacements of the country-rock
tonalite. The ores, which are chiefly galena, blende, chalcopyrite,
pyrite, and arseno-pyrite, are concentrated along joint planes and
intersections in the manner shown in the next figure.
Age of Vein Filling. It sometimes happens that the lodes
in a district are of different ages, and that the members of one
system make an angle with those of another system. When
displacement takes place, it is evident that the vein which
displaces another vein is younger than the displaced vein.
In the case of large fissures now filled with mineral matter, it
is highly improbable that they remained as open chasms without
support until they were filled. It is generally believed that in
the beginning the fissures were of small size, and gradually
1
T. A. Rickard, Trans. Am. List. M.E., vol. xx. p. 469.
2 J. E. Spurr, "Ore Deposits of Monte Cristo, Washington," 22nd Annual
Heport United States Geol. Survey, 1900-1901, Part II. p. 849.

--- Page Break ---
62 MINING GEOLOGY.
increased in length, depth, and width as the mineral matter
accumulated in them to afford the necessary support. In other
words, the enlargement of the lode was the work of metasomatic
replacement operating upon the rock forming the walls of the
original fissure.
It might be expected that if later movement took place, it
would tend to follow an old line of fissure rather than initiate a
new one, and in support of this view there is internal evidence in
many lodes that they have been reopened at different periods.
Portions of the Martha lode at Waihi have been brecciated by
FIG. 37. Sketch-section of Tunnel and Vein Exposure in Vertical Cliff,
Glacier Creek, showing mineralisation along joints by, probably,
descending waters. Shaded areas represent impregnation of tonalite
with sulphides along joints, sometimes becoming solid ores. (After
Spurr. )
wall-movements and re-cemented ; and evidences of a similar
character are not uncommon elsewhere.
Weed,
1 who made a special examination of the copper-veins of
Butte, in Montana, states that the veins there are of several ages
and systems, and that the older primary quartz-pyrite veins were
reopened by later movements, which he correlates with a period
of volcanic activity. This reopening, he says, resulted in the
deposition of the copper sulpharsenide, enargite, which is now
found to be the chief ore of some of the veins.
As a rule the formation of vein-matter took place after the
formation of the enclosing rock.
1
W. H. Weed, "Ore Deposition and Vein Enrichment by Ascending Hot
Waters," Trans. Am. List. M.E., vol. xxxiii., 1903.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 63
In many lodes there is evidence that there were several periods
of ore-formation. Recent investigation has shown that the age
of a lode may be of comparatively late date even in very old
rocks.
The metalliferous andesitic rocks in South America, Nevada,
Transylvania, and New Zealand were erupted in middle Tertiary
times ; hence the contained veins must be of later date, probably
of older Pliocene age. The majority of veins occurring in clastic
rocks are supposed to have been formed in later geological times.
Width of Lodes. Lodes vary considerably in width both
along their course and in depth. The Comstock lode is in parts
200 feet to 300 feet wide, and in others not more than 20 feet.
The Premier lode at Te Aroha varies from 20 feet to 60 feet wide,
and stands up like the wall of a house along the flanks of the
mountain for miles. The Martha lode, at Waihi, varies from 10
FIG. 38. Showing"Effects of Faulting.
(a) Before faulting. (b) After faulting.
to 90 feet wide. The Bohemian Pfahl in a length of 34 miles
maintains an average width of 100 feet, but in places widens out
to 375 feet, while the Great Pfahl in its course of 92 miles varies
from 225 to 370 feet in width.
The variations in width may be due to several causes. The
rock may have yielded more at one point than at another during
the formation of the fissure.
A fracture that passes through alternating bands of hard and
soft rock generally follows a sinuous course ; for while the
fracture tends to pass through the softer rock in a direction
normal to its course, the resistance offered by the hard rock
causes it to take the shortest distance through the resisting
medium, which will be a course at right angles to the bedding or
foliation plane.
When faulting takes place on the walls of such a sinuous
fissure, the result is a succession of wide and narrow cavities, as
shown in fig. 38.

--- Page Break ---
64 MINING GEOLOGY.
The Temperance lode in the Nerrena or Little Bendigo goldfield
in Victoria is a typical example of an ore-body composed of a
string of lozenge-shaped masses. According to W. Bradford,
1
the
lode traverses a series of alternating slates and sandstones of
Silurian age. In vertical distance, it consists of a succession of
wide and narrow parts, the wide parts forming in the slates and
the narrow in the harder sandstones, as drawn in the accompany-
ing figure, which, however, does not show any appearance of
faulting.
Again, it is possible that erosion, either chemical or mechanical,
may have acted in one portion of a fissure more than in another.
FIG. 39. Section of Temperance Lode, showing "makes" of quartz in
slates. Scale, 1 in. to 40 ft. (After W. Bradford.)
Lodes are generally widest in soft or moderately soft ground,
and narrowest in hard rocks such as unaltered granite, andesite,
and diorite. In hard rock, a lode will frequently dwindle down to
a mere crack or clay parting, and expand to its normal size on
entering softer country.
Length of Lodes. The longest lodes are generally those
which are broadest. Of the three great lodes traversing the slopes
of the Bavarian Forest the Asch lode is traceable for a distance
of 25 miles, the Bohemian Pfahl for 34 miles, and the Great
Pfahl for a length of 92 miles.
In Cornwall the average length of a load is about a mile, in
Saxony 3 to 4 miles, and in the Harz Mountains 8 to 10
1
W. Bradford, Bulletin No. 15, GeoL Survey of Victoria, Melbourne,
1905, p. 6.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 65
miles. In California the Great Mother lode has been traced for
over 70 miles.
In the Hauraki goldfields, in New Zealand, the Tokatea lode can
be traced for 3 miles ; the Waiotahi lode, 2 miles ; the Premier
lode, Te Aroha, 4 miles.
Strike or Bearing of Lodes. In many mining districts the
main lodes possess a general bearing. Thus in -Cornwall the
general strike is E.N.E.-W.S.W., and in the north of England E.
and W. In Prussia many of the iron lodes strike N. and S. In
the Hauraki goldfields the trend of the most productive lodes is
N.N.E.-S.S.W. On the other hand, the lodes in the Freiberg
district run in various directions. A change of strike has some-
times an influence in the enrichment of a lode.
In some mining regions there is a great similarity in the contents
of the lodes running in the same direction. Thus in Cornwall the
E.N.E lodes yield tin, copper, and a little lead, while the N.S. lodes
yield clay and lead. But the exceptions are too many to allow a
safe generalisation to be made.
Inclination of Lodes. The dip of a lode may vary as it
descends in depth, or may vary at different points along its course.
The dip is spoken of as flat or steep. It is always at right angles
to the strike.
The Samson lode at Andreasberg, the Talisman lode at
Karangahake, and the Empire lode in the VVaihi mine in New
Zealand, dip in opposite directions in different parts of their
course.
Moissenet, in his classical work on the Lodes of Cornwall,
fully endorses the generalisations of Kenwood relating to the
influence of inclination, strike, and character of country upon the
contents of the lodes of that country. With respect to these he
formulated the following laws :
(1) Those parts of the lode whose inclination is most nearly
vertical are always the most productive.
(2) In the rich parts the lode is enclosed in country of mode-
rate hardness.
(3) The "courses'-' or "shoots" generally dip in the same
direction as the "
country," and very often also the groups
of bunches contained in the same lode.
(4) The bearing of the rich parts is generally that of the
stratigraphical system with which the initial fracture of
the lode in the region under observation is connected.
These laws hold good for the lodes of Cornwall. It is doubtful
if they can be safely applied in other mining regions, and each of
them has been disproved in different places.
Take the first law. The richest bonanzas in the Thames gold-
5

--- Page Break ---
66 MINING GEOLOGY.
field were found in the Caledonia and Cambria reefs, in places
where the angle of dip was under 30. Both above and below the
bonanzas the dip was about 45.
Depth of Lodes. With the exception of gash-veins, which
are wedge-shaped openings from the surface the depth which
veins may attain has not yet found a limit.
The greatest depth to which a lode has been followed down-
wards is at Przibram, in Bohemia, where one of the mines has
reached a depth of nearly 4000 feet, and is still being deepened.
The gold-mines of Victoria and the copper-mines at Lake Superior
have reached depths ranging from 2000 feet to 5000 feet.
It seems likely that fissure-veins will descend to a greater depth
than mining operations can follow them.
Arrangement of Lode Matter. The gangue or matrix of
most veins is quartz. The most notable exception is lead, which
often occurs in veins of calcite or fluor-spar.
The quartz may be flinty or chalcedonic, finely or coarsely
crystalline. It may be banded, ribbon-like, concentric, brecciated,
FIG. 40. Showing Ribbon Structure of Vein Matter.
compact, vuggy, granular, disseminated, or in loose sugary grains.
The arrangement of the lode-matter should always be observed,
since the structure and arrangement will almost always tell us
something about its history.
In lodes of the base metals the contents are sometimes arranged
in bands or layers parallel to the walls, the minerals and ores

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 67
on one wall being represented by corresponding layers on the
other wall.
When the bands are made up of crystalline aggregates, the
individual crystals are arranged with their longer axis at right
angles to the plane of the walls. This arrangement is sometimes
termed comb-structure.
Such symmetrical arrangement is, however, rare. Generally
the layers are thicker on one wall than on the other; and fre-
quently a layer of ore on one wall has no corresponding repre-
sentative on the other.
Lodes filled with chalcedonic quartz like the upper part of the
Martha lode at Waihi, or with sugary quartz like the Comstock
lode, exhibit little or no symmetrical arrangement of mineral
contents.
In some cases the vein-filling consists of broken rock, wholly or
partly filling the vein-cavity ; in others, a band of friction-
breccia occupies one wall.
The Cambria lode at Thames has a band of breccia on the
hanging-wall varying from 2 to 4 feet thick. The breccia is not
co-extensive with the vein-matter, but occurs in flat lenticular layers.
Horses in Veins. A mass of country-rock embedded in the
matrix of a lode, and more or less completely detached from the
FIG. 41. Horse or Floater in a Vein.
walls, is termed when large a horse, and when small a floater, or
rider.
A horse is a slice of rock that has become detached from the
hanging-wall while the siliceous filling was still in a gelatinous
\ condition.

--- Page Break ---
68 MINING GEOLOGY.
In Cornwall and elsewhere experience has shown that the occur-
rence of a horse is often attended with an enrichment of the
contents of the lode, a circumstance which doubtless originated
the Cornish aphorism, A hor*e pays for itself, meaning that
the increased richness of the lode more than compensates the
extra labour and expense of working caused by the appearance of
the horse.
In the steeply inclined gold-bearing veins of the Thames horses
of rock were often met with, and in almost every instance they
caused local enrichment, the increased values being generally
confined to one split or branch of the lode.
Investigation showed that this enrichment was not due to a
concentration of the values into one branch, but to an actual
increase in the mean values previously ruling in the main lode.
Outcrops of Veins. Professor Van Hise *
distinguishes the
different zones of rock-alteration by a nomenclature suggested by
the biological terms used to designate the somewhat parallel
changes in animal life. His subdivisions are as follows :
1. Zone of Katamorphism.
a. Belt of weathering.
I). Belt of cementation.
2. Zone of Anamorphism.
The Katamorphic zone is that in which complex compounds are
broken down and altered into simple compounds. In other words
it is the zone of oxidation.
In the Anamorphic zone the alteration of rock masses results in
the production or building up of complex compounds from simple
compounds.
The belt of weathering extends down from the surface to
ground water-level, the belt of cementation from ground water-
level to the zone of Anamorphism.
Chemical action is very active in the zone of Katamorphism,
and is in most cases accomplished by descending solutions. The
changes effected in this zone are :
(a) oxidation, (b) hydration,
and (c) carbonation.
By long-continued exposure to atmospheric agencies and the
action of descending meteoric waters, the outcrops of iron, copper,
and silver sulphide lodes are often oxidised and so altered by
removal and replacement as to bear little resemblance io the
unaltered vein-matter which will generally be found at a greater
depth.
1
Chas. Richard Van Hise, "A Treatise on Metamorphism,
" U.S. Geol.
Survey. Washington, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 69
The iron sulphides are oxidised first to sulphates and then to
oxides, while the copper is removed by water in the form of
soluble sulphates, or is oxidised to carbonates, which stain the
rocks green and blue. Silver sulphides are altered to the chloride
near the surface, or the dissolved metallic contents are found
concentrated at or below water-level.
In many sulphide lodes iron is the predominating constituent,
and its oxidation generally results in the outcrop assuming a
porous, honey-combed appearance, the removal of the sulphides
leaving cavities which are only partially filled with oxide. The
ferruginous solution flowing from the outcrop stains and discolours
the surrounding rocks and soil.
Such ironstone outcrops are known as gossan in Cornwall, iron-
hat in Germany, and ironshme blows in Australia.
The nature of the gossan varies with the character of the
original sulphide ore-body. If much quartz is present, the out-
crop is cavernous and cindery, red or brown-coloured ; but if the
ore-body is composed mainly of iron pyrites, the gossan will consist
of ochre and brown haematite, often in botryoidal and stalactitic
forms.
The oxidation and leaching of lode-matter has often proceeded
to a depth of 500 feet below the surface outcrop, in some cases
far below the present water-level. Sometimes there is a sharp
line of demarcation between the oxidised and unaltered portions
of a lode, but more often the passage is gradual, the suphides at
first making their appearance in detached nodules, bunches, or
small lenticular masses, which gradually become more plentiful
with increasing depth.
A gossan is always an indication of a lode below, and, for this
reason, forms a valuable guide to the prospector.
Gossan outcrops should be carefully sampled and assayed, as
they may contain valuable minerals the presence of which could
not be detected by panning.
The valuable gold and silver lodes of the Hauraki goldfields
give little or no indication of their value by crushing and panning.
The gold exists in such a finely divided state that a colour is rarely
seen in the ore, and the value can only be ascertained by careful
sampling and fire-assay.
The rich, unoxidised sulpho-telluride ores of Western Australia
possess no physical feature of a striking character to indicate
their great value, and when tested by the prospector's ready
method of rough crushing and panning appear valueless.
Each mineral possesses certain characteristic indications peculiar
to itself, and must be considered separately. Thus an iridescent
film or layer of oil on a pool of water, or an emanation of car-

--- Page Break ---
70 MINING GEOLOGY.
buretted hydrogen, may direct attention to the existence of
petroleum in the vicinity.
Brine springs point to deposits of salt, and chalybeate springs
to iron, though not necessarily of commercial value. Puffs of
steam or the smell of sulphuretted hydrogen in a volcanic region
may point to the existence of sulphur. For instance, at Rotorua
and White Island, in New Zealand, extensive deposits of sulphur
are found around the numerous fumaroles, both active and
extinct, and at both places the odour of sulphuretted hydrogen is
plainly perceptible long before the deposits are reached.
Condition of Metallic Contents of Veins. Gold occurs
in the native or uncombined form, but at Cripple Creek and Kal-
goorlie much of it exists combined with tellurium.
In the portions of the veins that have been subject to the
oxidising influences of surface waters, gold occurs in a free-milling
condition that is to say, it unites readily with mercury to form
amalgam, being free from tellurium and base sulphides.
1
Below the reach of oxidising influences, the gold is often
associated with metallic sulphides, generally iron pyrites, in which
it often exists entangled in an excessively fine condition, so fine
that when the recovery of the gold is attempted by chemical
dissolution with aqueous solutions of potassium cyanide, sufficient
extractions can only be obtained when the sulphides have been
ground extremely fine, so as to enable each particle of gold to come
in contact with the solvent.
The Waihi bullion extracted by the cyanide process from the
Martha Hill lodes contains from one-quarter to one-third per cent,
of selenium, and on some occasions as much as 1 per cent., but
no trace of this rare metal can be detected in the ore itself by
chemical tests.
Silver ore is generally converted in the upper part of lodes into
the free-milling chloride, which, below water-level, is displaced by
sulphides. Native silver, bromides, and iodide often accompany
the chloride.
The sulphides of copper lodes are converted in the upper portion
of the vein into sooty secondary sulphides, oxides and carbonates,
often of great richness. At the outcrop, the copper contents have
been oxidised and removed, leaving rusty brown caps of ironstone
more or less quartzose and porous.
Position of Valuable Contents. Sometimes the metallic
contents of a vein are evenly distributed throughout the gangue.
1 It must always be remembered that gold may be free and yet exist in
particles so fine that there is considerable mechanical difficulty in bringing the
particles in contact with the mercury so as to obtain an adequate recovery of
the precious metal in the form of amalgam.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 71
Generally, however, they occur more at one point than another,
existing in masses known as bunches, nests, chimney-shoots, pipes,
courses, patches, pockets or bonanzas.
Only in rare cases do veins carry payable values for their whole
length, or, in their full width, from wall to wall. Hence a pay-
shoot may be denned as thab portion of an ore-body which is
commercially valuable.
The majority of pay-shoots dip in the same direction as the
lodes, but generally at a flatter or steeper angle, more often the
latter. Hence the pay-shoot is not always co-extensive with the
lode, and often passes out in depth.
Narrow, vertical, or nearly vertical, payable portions of a vein
are termed chimneys, or pipes ; and flat, nearly horizontal portions,
courses or benches.
The causes which have brought about the unequal distribution
of the valuable contents of a lode in shoots, pockets, or courses,
are either not known, or but imperfectly understood. It has
however, been noted that gold-bearing veins become enriched at
the intersection of indicator beds and flinty cross-courses ; and
that veins traversing propylitised andesite become enriched or
impoverished with a slight change in the character of the andesite.
The connection of circumstances in these cases is manifest, but
the explanation is difficult.
Pay Shoots. These may be of any shape and size. They
may dip in the same direction as the lode, and yet be inclined in
linear extension.
FIG. 42. Longitudinal Section of Vein, showing succession of pay-shoots.
(a) Pay-shoots. (6) Poor ground.
Pay-shoots vary from a few yards to thousands of feet in
length, and sometimes two or more shoots occur in the course of
a vein, separated by longer or shorter stretches of poor ore, as
shown in fig. 42.
The dip and pitch of a pay-shoot should always be carefully
noted so as to obtain a clue as to the probable position of the
valuable ore at different levels.
In many veins, the payable material does not always extend

--- Page Break ---
72 MINING GEOLOGY.
i
from wall to wall. The values sometimes lie on the foot-wall, and
sometimes on the hanging-wall, or in a band of ore situated near
the centre of the vein, or in a thin streak which crosses the vein
obliquely, passing from wall to wall.
The extent of the payable ore can always be ascertained by
systematic sampling, provided a careful record is made of the
values on the mine-assay plan.
Gold Bonanzas. The rich bonanzas for which the Thames
and Coromandel goldfields are celebrated occur in the richer zones.
They are places where the quartz contains coarse daubs or masses
of gold, forming what is locally called picked or specimen stone,
which is frequently found to yield as much as six ounces of gold
to the pound of stone.
The Hauraki bonanza varied from 100 to 120 feet wide, and
extended to the 300 feet level from a point about 60 feet from
the surface. It pitched slightly to the north-east, and was cut
off by a fault about 30 feet from Bunker's boundary.
In these goldfields the pay-shoots commonly occur along the line
of intersection of a cross-vein or flinty, which is a thin indicator
vein consisting of dense flinty quartz, generally pyritic.
Wall Movements of Veins. Faulting hastaken place along
the course of most large veins. In some cases the faulting took
place before the filling of the fissure, and, in other cases, when the
veins were partially formed but not consolidated.
When the faulting took place after the consolidation of the lode-
matter, the result was the production by attrition of a layer of
pug or clay on the wall on which the movement took place. On
the side on which the pug occurs all the small veins and droppers
are thus cut off or displaced ; and it is for this reason that branch-
ing veins are only found on the side on which no movement has
taken place.
In some classes of country faulting along the course of a vein
has caused the formation of friction-breccias on one or both walls.
Such breccias seldom exceed a few feet in thickness, and mostly
form lenticular-shaped masses of varying length and depth.
In hard country, movement on the walls has often produced
slicken-sides ; and in some cases i\\Qflucan or clay partings between
the vein-matter and walls has assumed a flaky or platy character
through the stress of lateral pressure.
Influence of Country-Rock. Observation inmany countries
has shown that the valuable contents of a vein are often influenced
by the character of the country-rock traversed by the vein. It is
also recognised that certain rocks favour the occurrence of
particular ores and minerals. Thus tin has a preference for
granite rocks ; while copper is usually associated with serpentines,

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 73
diorites, chloritic schists, and slates. Limestone, more especially
when doloroitic, yields lead in many countries. In Chili and
Austrialia it yields lead and silver ; in Belgium, zinc ; and in
England, iron and lead.
A change in the rock often causes a change in the richness of
a vein.
In the Hauraki goldfields and in Transylvania, the veins are
productive in altered andesite, but barren in the breccias and
tuffs. At Cripple Creek, the veins are most productive in andesitic
breccias.
In Yorkshire, the lead-veins are good in limestone, not so good in
grit and limestone, worse in shale and limestone, and worst in shale.
Sandberger strongly urged the influence of country-rock upon
the contents of veins ; and his researches have been supplemented
and verified in later years by those of many accomplishedAmerican
geologists, whose opportunities for observation in the field have
been wide and varied.
In the Hauraki goldfields, the author found that the productive
character of the veins was strongly influenced by the containing
rocks. The results of his researches in this region during a period
of twelve years may be summarised as follows :
(a) The rock which has yielded the largest quantity of gold is
a moderately hard yellowish-gray altered andesite, the
"
kindly sandstone " of the miners.
(b) The most favourable country is not too soft, nor yet too hard,
being shooting ground, requiring two or three shots to the
shift,
(c) In very hard country-rock, the veins are generally smaller
than in soft rock ; and when a vein passes into hard
andesite, it invariably becomes smaller, and often thins
out to a mere clay-parting or "
clay-head."
(d) The veins in the hard rock have not proved so remunera-
tive as those in the miner's "kindly sandstone," and this
is due not so much to their leanness as to their smaller
size and the greater cost of working them.
(e) When a vein passes from altered andesite into a tuff or
breccia, it invariably becomes barren, or too low grade
to be payable. This is true in all parts of the Hauraki
Peninsula ; and experience has shown that the veins
which exist in tuffs or breccias are often superficial in
character, and seldom reliable as gold-producers, although
some have been found to contain small shoots of a pay-
able nature.1
1
J. Park, "The Geology and Veins of Hauraki Goldfields, N.Z.," Trans.
X.Z. List. Mining Engineers, vol. i. 1897, p. 46.

--- Page Break ---
74 MINING GEOLOGY.
Productive Zones. The mining operations of the past
thirty-five years in the Hauraki area have shown that in the
different belts of altered andesite there are certain zones which
are more productive than others. Even in the case of several
parallel veins, it has been found that all become enriched on
entering the favourable zone, thereby affording a graphic illustra-
tion of the miner's aphorism, ore-against-ore.
There are several such zones in the Moanataiari end of the
Thames field, the best-known being those at Kuranui Hill and
Point Russell. The latter affords, perhaps, the most graphic
illustration of the influence of favourable country. At that
place the Moanataiari mine is traversed by four large parallel
lodes namely, the Dauntless, Reuben Parr, Golden Age, and
Waiotahi, all pursuing a N.N.E.-S.S.W. course.
On entering the productive zone, the ore changes from ex-
cessively low grade to high grade, this character being maintained
till the zone is passed through. This zone crosses the course of
the lodes nearly at right angles.
1
The following diagram shows the general distribution of the
productive zones on this field :
i
FIG. 43. Plan of Northern Portion of Thames Goldfield, N.Z.
(art) Great Moanataiari fault. (e] No. 9 vein.
(bb) Point Russell productive zone. (/) Caledonia vein,
(cc) Kuranui productive zone of altered andesite. (g) Waiotahi vein.
(d) Shotover vein.
Mining operations disclosed the circumstance that the rich
zones were not only limited in width but also in depth. Further,
they were found to dip to the southward, that is, in the opposite
direction to the dip of the veins.
The cross-section along the line joining cc shows the relation
of the parallel veins to the Kuranui productive zone.
The shaded portion represents the Kuranui productive zone of
altered andesite.
1
J. Park, loc. cit. , p. 50.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 75
The gold occurred in the productive zone in shoots and rich
bonanzas, which in almost every case were found along the line
of intersection of a small cross-vein, locally termed a leader.
FIG. 44. Section along Northern Foreshore, Thames Goldfield.
(a) Shotover Creek. (e) No. 9 vein.
(6) Moanataiari Creek. (/) Caledonia vein.
(c) Waiotahi Creek. (g) Cambria vein.
(d) Shotover vein.
At the Kuranui end of the field, the shoots occurred near the
surface, but going southward they were found at increasing
depths. In the Queen of Beauty shaft, in the south end of the
goldfield, the productive zone was followed to a depth of nearly
1000 feet below sea-level.
Vertical Distribution of Ores in Depth. Mining opera-
tions in the United States, England, and elsewhere have shown
that while in many veins the metallic sulphides are intimately
mixed without any definite arrangement, in other veins, particu-
larly those of lead, zinc, and iron, there is an orderly distribution
in horizontal zones which succeed each other in a vertical direction
that is, there are certain horizontal zones, each of which is
characterised by a dominant sulphide.
This arrangement of the metallic contents of a vein, in more or
less horizontal zones, was noticed in Cornwall many years ago ;
and no better example could be found than that presented by the
celebrated Dolcoath mine, which commenced as a tin-mine, at a
lower depth yielded nothing but copper, and again, below that, tin.
In the great lead- and zinc-mining region of Ozark, in the
Lower Mississippi Valley, the vertical distribution of the ores,
according to Bain, is as follows :
(1) Oxidised zinc and lead ores, with galena.
(2) Blende, with a little galena.
(3) Iron sulphides predominate and increase with depth.
1
Spurr, in his report on Monte Cristo mining district, in
Washington, states that the quartz, pyrite, chalcopyrite, pyr-
1 H. F. Bain, United States Geol. Survey Twenty-Second Annual Report,
Part II. p. 161.

--- Page Break ---
76 MINING GEOLOGY.
rhotite, blende, galena, realgar, stibnite, and calcite show a marked
tendency to aggregate themselves in horizontal zones in the
order named.1
Rickard mentions the orderly distribution of ores in Colorado.2
Weed states that in the Castle Mountain district, in Montana, the
order appears to be galena on top, passing into highly zinciferous
ores below, and those into low-grade pyrite.
3
At Broken Hill lead and silver mines, in New South Wales,
the general distribution of ores in vertical depth has been as
follows :
(a) Oxidised ores of lead and silver.
(b) Galena, with blende.
(c) Blende, with galena.
Weed,
4 in a paper on " Ore Deposition and Vein Enrichment
by Ascending Hot Waters," appears to support the hypothesis
which assumes that the distribution of ores in horizontal zones is
the result of primary concentration by ascending hot solutions.
This view has much to commend it.
The eruption of igneous magmas is often succeeded by intense
solfataric action, of which notable examples are found in the
Yellowstone Park, in the United States, and in the volcanic region
of the North Island of New Zealand.
The ascending waters slowly circulating in contact with heated
rocks below become superheated, and in their upward course dis-
solve various substances, whicli they carry with them along the
line of least resistance, that is, towards the hot spring pipe or
vent
Many substances, insoluble in normal conditions, are rendered
easily soluble in the presence of heat and pressure. The under-
ground waters will, therefore, possess their greatest solvent power
where the greatest heat and pressure prevail, which will naturally
be at the greatest depth.
With loss of heat and pressure, the least soluble substances
will be precipitated that is, those substances whose dissolution
was effected under extreme heat and pressure.
As the waters ascend they will continue to lose heat and be
relieved of pressure, with the result that the dissolved minerals
will be precipitated in the inverse order of their solubility.
When the hot waters reach the surface, the only substances in
solution in most cases will be the extremely soluble alkaline
1
J. H. Spurr, loc. cit., p. 841.
2 J. A. Rickard, Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., London, vol. vi., 1899, p. 196.
3 Weed and Pirsson, Bulletin 139, U.S. OeoL Survey, 1896.
4 W. H. Weed, Trans. Amer. Inst. M.E., vol. xxxiii., 1903.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 77
sulphates, carbonates, and silicates. In support of this it may be
mentioned that hot springs commonly deposit silica and rarely
metallic sulphides at the surface.
In many lodes it is a common feature to find sulphides, or their
oxidised products, at the surface, but in such cases it is always
well to bear in mind that veins which outcrop at the surface may
have been truncated to a greater or less degree by denudation.
The obvious inference to be drawn from this process of vein-
filling is that impoverishment of the ore must take place in all
veins at great depths, due to the migration of the valuable
minerals from the zone of dissolution below to the zone of precipita-
tion above.
Secondary Enrichment of Veins. It has been noted in all
parts of the globe that rich masses of ore often occur in the
oxidised portion of the ore-body, or in that portion lying near
water-level.
Microscopic investigation has shown that these rich masses are
not of primary but of secondary origin. Their genesis is supposed
to be due to the migration of the valuable metallic contents from
the higher part of the vein to the lower part ofthe oxidised zone
by the agency of meteoric waters.
In some cases, the processes of dissolution, migration, and
redeposition may have taken place over and over again, each cycle
resulting in an increasing degree of concentration.
The veins in which secondary enrichment are most often seen
are those of gold, silver, copper, lead, and zinc.
Gold ores, in the zone of leathering, are often augmented in
value by the long-continued disintegration of the vein and the en-
closing rock, thus permitting the gold set free from its matrix to
concentrate at the outcrop.
Extensive areas of the Australian continent have been subject
to sub-aerial denudation since the close of the Palaeozoic period,
and it is doubtless due to this cause that somany notable examples
of mechanical enrichment of gold-bearing veins have been found in
Victoria and Western Australia.
The migration of gold, copper, silver, lead, and zinc from the
upper to the lower parts of the veins is affected by descending
surface waters in the zone of vadose circulation. The processes
involved in the migration are (a) chemical dissolution, and (b)
electro-chemical deposition.
Chemical processes may operate in various ways to cause
secondary enrichment, as follows :
(1) By the removal of worthless metals, thereby leaving the
valuable contents in a purer form.

--- Page Break ---
78 MINING GEOLOGY.
(2) By removal of worthless metals and their replacements by
valuable metals removed from a higher part of the vein.
(3) By deposition of valuable metals on primary sulphides, in
those portions of the vein subject to the influence of
circulating surface waters. In this case, the primary
sulphides may form the nuclei for the deposit of the
secondary sulphides.
Manifestly the first operation in the process of secondary en-
richment is the chemical weathering and oxidation of the metallic
contents of the vein in the Katamorphic zone.
The oxidation of base sulphides can be seen in operation every
day. In a mass of mixed sulphides of iron, copper, zinc, and
galena, the iron will be the first to be affected from its affinity for
oxygen.
Iron pyrites is decomposed and forms ferrous sulphate, which is
changed into Fe(OH)3, Fe2(S04)2, and H2S04
. The H.2S04 attacks
more iron sulphide and forms ferrous sulphate, liberating H2S,
which at once combines with free oxygen to form H2S04
.
The ferrous sulphate changes to the ferric sulphate, which attacks
gold and sulphides of copper, lead, zinc, and silver. The process
of dissolution must necessarily be slow, on account of the extreme
dilution of the solutions.
For many years it was believed that the only secondary enrich-
ment that could take place was the formation of rich bonanzas of
carbonate ores and chloride of silver, in the zone above water-level.
But careful investigation in later years has shown that primary
sulphides have been enriched by the deposition of secondary
sulphides even in places below present water-level.
It was proved experimentally by Skey
1 in 1870, and confirmed
by Liversidge
2 in 1893, that gold is more readily precipitated
from its solutions by metallic sulphides than by organic matter.
Furthermore, Skey showed that sulphides of the base metals were
readily precipitated from alkaline sulphide solutions in a solid
coherent form in the presence of iron pyrites, galena, blende,
stibnite, etc.
The descending acid solutions formed in the zone of oxidation
will attack the constituents of the rocks through which they per-
colate with the production of alkaline silicates and sulphides.
Gold dissolved by ferric sulphate would be also carried down
and deposited as leaf, scale, or wire gold in cracks in sulphide ore,
thereby causing local enrichment.
It is maintained by some writers that secondary sulphides have
1
W. Skey, Trans. ATcio Zealand Inst., vol. iii., 1870, p. 226.
2 Professor Liversidge, Proc. Roy. Soc. New South Wales, vol. xxvii.. 1893.
p. 287.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 79
been formed below water-level. The evidence on this question is
not quite conclusive. In some cases changes of water-level may
have taken place since the secondary sulphides were deposited.
The researches of Emmons,
1
Weed,
2 and others have thrown
much light on the secondary enrichment of vein-deposits, but much
still remains to be done before safe generalisations can be formed.
Some veins, through movement of the walls, have been shattered
to some extent and re-cemented by mineralised waters. Such
waters ascending through the crushed vein-matter would deposit
their metallic contents as sulphides through the reaction of
primary sulphides contained in the ore.
In this way, a secondary concentration of primary sulphides
may be effected by ascending waters.
The Absorption of Metals by Clays in Relation to Secondary
Enrichment. It often happens that the ore in the zone of
secondary enrichment is associated with, or contained in, a matrix
consisting of clay or other finely divided mineral matter. Of
this there are no more characteristic examples than the Kaolin
silver ores of Broken Hill and the talcose gold ores of Kalgoorlie.
Clay and clayey matter are the natural products of the altera-
tion of rocks and ores in the zone of Katamorphism. Their
presence calls for no comment ; but the frequent occurrence of
rich ores in a clayey matrix in certain lodes has led to much
speculation as to the relation existing between the clay and its
metallic contents.
It has been suggested by some writers that the association is
not accidental nor the result of paragenesis, but due to some
absorptive quality of the clay. That clay and finely divided
matter possess the property of absorbing or extracting metals
from their aqueous solutions has long been known, and with this
knowledge in mind it has been contended that the clayey matter
acting as a porous filter in the lower part of the zone of oxidation,
that is in the belt of cementation, has absorbed the metals from
the descending solutions, thereby effecting a concentration of
the valuable contents.
There is much to be said in favour of this view, but it has still
to be determined whether clayey matter and certain porous
substances are primary, or merely contributing causes in the
formation of zones of secondary enrichment.
Walter Harvey Weed,
3
early in 1905, described some experi-
1
S. F. Emmons, Trans. Am. Inst. M.E., vol. xxx., 1900.
2 W. H. Weed, Bull. Geol. Soc. Am., vol. xi., 1900, p. 179 ; and Trans.
Am. Inst. M.E., vol. xx., 1900.
3 W. H. Weed, "Absorption in Ore Deposition," The Engineering and
Mining Jour. New York, 23rd Feb. 1905.

--- Page Break ---
80 MINING GEOLOGY.
ments on the absorptive property of clays, etc., made by himself
and others in the laboratory of the United States Geological
Survey in Washington. The results confirmed the researches of
W. Skey made in 1869, and of E. Kohler l in 1903, who found
that clays and porous substances, such as gelatinous silica,
carbonaceous and colloidal matter, possess the power of extracting
metals from their dilute aqueous solutions.
In 1869, Skey
2
proved experimentally that finely pulverised
massive quartz, rock crystal, and silica possess the power of
extracting the oxide of iron from its acetate solution. He also
found that prepared silica especially manifests this property if
ignited at a low temperature, and besides takes oxides of copper
and chromium from their acetate solutions. The more finely
divided the silica the more apparent is the absorption.
In 1871, he found that when a weak ammoniacal solution of
copper containing a little caustic potash is poured upon a filter
of Swedish paper (cellulose), the liquid which passes through the
paper is quite or nearly colourless, and the filter is found to have
retained all, or nearly all, of the copper of such solution.3
In 1874, the same chemist showed that clay possesses the
property of absorbing and fixing natural petroleum in such a way
as to form a substance resembling natural oil-shale, the oil being
chemically combined with the clay.
4
Skey's discovery that gelatinous silica and porous substances
possess the property of absorbing metals from their solutions has
an important bearing upon the chemistry of ore-deposition in
veins and in secondary enrichment.
Impoverishment ofVeins in Depth. T. A. Rickard, when
discussing Professor Posepny's classic paper on "The Genesis of
Ore Deposits," states that the general non-persistence of ore in
depth is a fact capable of proof.
5 He contends that since heat
and pressure are the two great factors which increase the solubility
of mineral substances, the deep region will favour solution the
most, while the shallow zone will favour precipitation, owing to
the decrease of heat and pressure.
There is much in favour of this contention. Progressive poverty
1 E. Kohler, Zeitscliriftfur praktische Geologie, 1903, p. 49.
2 W. Skey, " On the Absorptive Properties of Silicaand its direct Hydration
in contact with Water," Trans. New Zealand Inst., Wellington, N.Z., 1869,
vol. ii. p. 151.
3 W. Skey, "Absorption of Copper from its Ammoniacal Solution by
Cellulose in presence of Caustic Potash," Trans. New Zealand Inst.. vol. iv'
p. 332, 1871.
4 W. Skey, "Notes on the Formation and Constitution of Torbanite and
similar Minerals," Trans. New Zealand Inst, vol. vii. p. 387, 1874.
5 T. A. Rickard, "Genesis of Ore Deposits," Discussion, p. 190.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 81
in depth below a certain depth must be the natural corollary of
the general law governing the orderly distribution of ores in
horizontal zones, through the agency of ascending waters.
In some cases, impoverishment in depth is determined by the
prevailing geological conditions. Ore-veins which are confined
to a single overlying formation often die out or become exhausted
on reaching the underlying rock.
A notable example of this is afforded by the hydro-thermal
veins of the Thames, Tapu, Coromandel, and Kuaotunu mining
districts, in the Hauraki mining region of New Zealand, where
the gold-bearing veins are contained in altered andesites, which
rest on a highly eroded surface of Lower Mesozoic shales, grey-
wacke, and adinole.
Mining operations have in all cases shown that when the veins
which occur near the borders of the andesite flows reach the
basement rock, they die out completely, or end in small strings,
which soon disappear in depth.
The principle of secondary enrichment precludes the continuance
of the enriched portion of the vein downward in vertical distance.
When the values of secondary enrichment are added to ore
already of a payable quality, the result is a rich shoot or bonanza ;
but when, as often happens, the secondary values are added to lean
ore, then the net result is to render the lean ore just payable.
Below the zone of enrichment, the lean ore will be unprofitable.
Thus secondary enrichment is a concentration of values in
the oxidised or Katamorphic zone due to the tranference of the
valuable contents from a higher to a lower level by the flow of
meteoric waters. Only in rare cases will primary sulphides be
enriched by this agency.
The Mining Commissioners 1 of Victoria, including the late
Professor M'Coy and Mr Alfred Selwyn, the State geologist,
reported in 1857 that experience in every country had proved
that the yield of gold decreased with the depth after a certain
small limit was reached.
The conclusion of the Commissioners l was in unison with the
opinion already expressed by Sir Roderick Murchison in the first
edition of his Siluria. This distinguished geologist,
2 as the
result of further knowledge, was induced to materially modify his
view, particularly, he tells us, as respects the colony of Victoria ;
but he still adhered to the belief that in general gold veins
diminish in value as they descend.3
1
Ifrport to Surveyor-General and Chief Secretary on tlie Mining Resource of
the Colony of Victoria, 1856-57.
2 Sir Roderick Impey Murchison, Siluria, third edition, 1859, p. 494.
s Loc. cit., p. 496.
Q

--- Page Break ---
82 MINING GEOLOGY.
The discovery of payable gold in a saddle-reef in the New
Chum Railway Mine at Bendigo, at a depth of 4156 feet, in
March 1905, proves that the limit in depth assumed by Murchison
must be extended to a depth probably not under 5000 feet.
Indicator Beds. It is now generally recognised that a
vein may become enriched or impoverished in passing from
one kind of rock to another. Thus lead veins, which are
productive in limestone, are often poor in sandstone or shale ;
and gold veins, payable in andesite,, are often barren in tuffs or
breccias.
There are some well-known cases where this influence is
exhibited in a special and notable manner. In Kongsberg, in
Norway, the prevailing rocks are gneiss and crystalline schists.
Certain bands or zones of the latter are impregnated with finely
divided sulphides of iron, copper, zinc, and occasionally ores of
lead, nickel, cobalt,, and silver.
These mineralised bands, locally known as fahlbands, conform
to the strike and dip of the enclosing gneiss and schist.
The country-rock and fahlbands are intersected by silver-bearing
veins, and it is notorious that these veins are only productive
where they traverse the fahlbands.
The indicator-beds of Ballarat, in Victoria, have exercised a
remarkable influence upon the distribution of the gold in the
veins of that area.
The country-rocks are Silurian slates and sandstones, which
are generally tilted at high angles, and often approach the
vertical position. They are interbedded with certain thin seams
of black carbonaceous shale or slate, to which the name indicators
is locally applied, from the circumstance that wherever a quartz-
vein crosses one of these shale-seams, it uniformly becomes richer
along the plane of intersection.
The most persistent of the shale-seams, known as The Indicator,
is described by E. Lidgey
1 as "a narrow bed of dark slate,
usually showing cleavage planes, and containing a large per-
centage of pyrite, distributed irregularly through it." It varies
from a mere sheet to an inch thick, and can be traced for a
distance of 7 or 8 miles. It is nearly vertical, and is
intersected by a series of nearly horizontal quartz-seams, which
are commonly enriched at, or in, the vicinity of the indicator.2
Dr Jack, in his report on Gympie goldfield, in Queensland,
states that the veins are richest in certain bands of black shale
;
1 E. Lidgey, Report on the Ballarat East Goldfield.
2 T. A. Rickard, "The Indicator Vein, Ballarat, Australia," Trans.
American Inst. M.E., vol. xxx., 1901, p. 1094. This paper contains an
interesting summary of the available data relating to the indicators,

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 83
and so well is this influence known to the miners that it has, he
says, determined the system of mining on the field. 1
The gold veins in the south end of the Thames goldfield, in
New Zealand, traverse altered andesites. They consist of gray-
coloured crystalline quartz, but experience has shown that they
are only productive where they are intersected by veins locally
termed flintiest
These flinties are thin veins of close-grained chalcedonic quartz
of a gray or brown colour. They usually contain a small
proportion of finely disseminated pyrites.
Von Cotta states that the veins near Freiberg are enclosed in
mica-schist, which contains an irregular bed of black graphitic'
schist. The veins, he says, are productive in the black schist, and
poor in the mica-schist.3
The same author also refers to the well-known copper-ores of
Mausfeld, in Prussia, which occur in bituminous shales and
bituminous limestone.4
A tree-trunk found embedded in the silver sandstones of Utah
assayed at the rate of 5000 oz. of silver to the ton in the
carbonised sapwood and bark. The hard silicified heartwood
showed an assay value of only from 8 to 10 oz. of silver to the
ton.5 Tree-trunks in these sandstones are often covered and
impregnated with horn silver.
Similar occurrences of copper-ores replacing the wood of trees
and encrusting the leaves and stems of fossil plants have been
discovered in the Triassic sandstones G of New Mexico, and in the
Permian sandstones of Russia.7
The association of productive ores with carbon in one form or
another, with carbonaceous and fetid limestones, and with base
metallic sulphides, has been demonstrated in almost all parts of
the globe.
Organic matter and sulphides, either singly or together, are
powerful reducers of gold and base metals from their alkaline
solutions.
1
R. L. Jack, Annual Report of the Depart, of Mines, Queensland, 1885,
p. 58.
2 J. Park, "The Geology and Veins of the Hauraki Goldfields," Trail*.
New Zealand In*t. Min. Eng., vol. i., 1897, p. 52.
3 Von Cotta, Treatise on Ore Deposits, p. 46.
4 Loc. tit., p. 164.
5 W. P. Jenney, "The Chemistry of Ore Deposition," Trans. Amcr.
inst. Min. Eng., vol. xxxiii. p. 445, 1903; and C. M. Rolker, "The
Silver Sandstone District of Utah," Trans. Amer. Inst. M.E., vol. ix.
p. 21.
6 F. M. F. Cazin, " The Origin of Copper and Silver Ores in Triassic
Sandrock," Eng. and Min. Jour., vol. xxx. p. 381.
7 Persifor Frazer, Trans. Amtr. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. ix. p. 33.

--- Page Break ---
84 MINING GEOLOGY.
Paragenesis.
It has been shown by mining operations everywhere that
certain minerals and ores are more frequently associated with
each other than with other minerals. The genetic processes
which caused the formation or deposition of a certain mineral
often operated so as to cause the deposition of another mineral,
or minerals, at the same time and in the same place.
This parallel, or synchronous, genesis of ores and minerals,
which has brought about a common association in the matrix, is
known as paragenesis, and is probably governed by the laws of
chemical solution and precipitation. Substances soluble at the
same temperature and pressure will pass out of solution together
in the zone of decreased pressure or temperature. The causes
which led to the constant association of certain minerals, such, for
example, as gold and quartz, tin and wolfram, are still very
obscure.
The following table, on the basis of that compiled by Von Cotta,
affords a clear view of the ores and mineral commonly associated
in metalliferous deposits
:
ASSOCIATED ORES AND MINERAL.
In a general way, experience has shown that tin, tungsten ores,
and gold have a preference for siliceous rocks ; and iron, chro-
mium, platinum, nickel, and copper for basic rocks.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 85
Rock Temperatures in Deep Mining. Until recent years
it was believed by physicists that the increase of temperature,
namely, 1* Fahr. for every 60 feet, observed in the driving of the
Saint Gothard tunnel, was the normal rate in all parts of the
crust of the earth. This belief is now known to be erroneous.
Observations taken in deep mines and bore-holes in different parts
of Europe, America, and Australia, during the past decade, have
proved that :
(a) The temperature of the crust increases with the distance
from the surface.
(b) That the ratio of increase of temperature to depth, i.e., the
temperature-gradient, is not the same in all places.
(c) That the temperature-gradient is not uniform for all depths
even in the same place ; that is, isogeotherms are not
parallel in the upper part of the crust.1
(d) That the temperature-gradient increases with the depth.
In the Comstock lode, which is enclosed in andesites of middle
Tertiary date, the temperature was found to rise 1 Fahr. for
every 30 feet in depth.
2 This increase is exceptional and
apparently caused by a strong upward flow
r
of heated waters in
the vein-fissures. The geologic conditions suggest the waning
phases of solfataric action as the source of the heated waters.
At the Ohaeawai quicksilver mines in New Zealand, the rock-
temperature increased so rapidly that boiling water was met with
at a depth of 200 feet from the surface. Here again we are
manifestly dealing with expiring volcanic heat. The basalt cap
of quite late Tertiary date, the hot springs, and sinters, sulphur,
and cinnabar deposits leave little room for doubt in this instance.
Volcanoes, whether recent or Tertiary, are situated in ab-
normally hot parts of the crust. Some parts, however, are
abnormally cool. For instance, Professor Agassiz found in the
Calumet and Hecla mine at Lake Superior, a rise of only 1
Fahr. for every 223 feet in depth.
3
In four gold-mining centres in Victoria,
4 the increase of
temperate was found to be as follows :
South Maldon Mine, Maldon
1 Fahr. for every 81 feet in depth down to 1700 feet.
Professor Redmayne, "Underground Temperatures," South Sta/ordshire
and East Worcestershire Inst. Min. Eng., 1904.
2 G. F. Becker, "The Geology of the Comstock Lode," Monograph III.,
p, 263, 1882, U.S. Geol. Survey, Washington.
3 Professor Agassiz, American Journal ofScience," vol. i., 1895, p. 503.
4 H. C. Jenkins, "Rock Temperatures in Victoria," Proc. Aust. Assoc.
Adv. Sc., vol. ix. p. 309, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
86 MINING GEOLOGY.
South Garden Gully, Bendigo
-
1 Fahr. for every 77 feet in depth down to 3000 feet.
Band and Albion Mine, Ballarat
1 Fahr. for every 80 feet in depth down to 2080 feet.
New Chum Railway, Bendigo
1 Fahr. for every 77'5 feet in depth down to 3645 feet.
The country-rock in each case is Silurian slate and sandstone.
The following tables of rock-temperatures prepared by Professor
Everett,
1 are of much interest in connection with this question.
TABLE I. OBSERVATIONS OF TEMPERATURE AT MINES
AND VERTICAL BORINGS.
TABLE II. DEPTHS AT WHICH 100 FAHR. WAS FOUND.
Feet.
Sperenberg, ...... 2400
Pamschowitz, ...... 3200
Schladebach, ...... 3400
Pendleton, ...... 3480
Wheeling, ...... 3875
TABLE III. CALCULATED DEPTHS AT
WOULD BE FOUND.
Rosebridge,
Scarle,
Kingswood,
Dukinfield,
Wheeling,
WHICH 100 FAHR.
Feet.
. 2769
. 3449
. 3469
. 3672
3722
Ashton Moss, 4192
1 Professor J. D. Everett, Evidence before the Royal Commission on
Coal Supplies, London, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 87
From these figures it will be seen that the calculation of
average temperature-gradients has no meaning except for com-
parative purposes among mines in the same place and in the same
class of country-rock.
In the Wheeling oil-well, both when dry and full of water, the
increase of temperature was 1 Fahr. for every 80 to 90 feet in the
upper portion, and 1 for every 60 feet in the lower part.
The greatest depth reached by man is only equal to one-tenth
of the vertical height of the irregularities of the surface. Hence
it is almost certain that in such shallow depths the rise of
temperature will be influenced by the thermal conductivity of
the rocks to a greater degree than at depths of several miles,
where the temperatures due to pressure or gravitational stress
will be more uniform.
The thermal conductivity of rocks is subject to great variation,
but, generally speaking, that of basic rocks is higher than that of
acid rocks, and of dense rocks than of porous rocks, but to what
extent these conditions tend to modify rock-temperatures has not
yet been ascertained. Concerning the thermal conductivity of
rocks under pressure practically nothing is known.
The rise of temperature due to' gravitational stress is an
important factor, and in seeking for the source of the earth's
internal heat it must not be overlooked. At present some
physicists incline to the belief that the internal heat is due to the
presence of radio-active minerals.
Assuming the average density of the crust to be 3, the pressure
at a depth of 10 miles would amount to 30 6 tons per square
inch. At a depth of 100 miles, it would be 306 tons per square
inch, a pressure which brings us almost to the point of viscosity
of the hardest steel. The heat equivalent to this pressure, even
at this comparatively shallow depth one-fortieth of the semi-
diameter of the earth would be sufficient to liquefy all known
rocks. But the pressure will prevent liquefaction, with the result
that the rock-material must exist in a condition of great tension,
far above the point of viscosity, ever ready to penetrate and
ramify every crack and plane of weakness presented to it.
The pressure
- heat will radiate upwards, warming the higher
portion of the crust, imparting to it a temperature above that
normal to the pressure at any given depth. The internal heat of
the earth must be largely due to the gravitational stress of its
own mass ; and volcanic eruptions may be merely the local
effusions of rock-material that has been suddenly relieved from a
pressure above its point of viscosity.
Recording Rock Temperatures. When we remember
how dependent the problem of deep-mining is upon rock-tempera-

--- Page Break ---
88 MINING GEOLOGY.
tare, it is remarkable how little trustworthy information has been
recorded in regard to progressive underground temperatures, even
in places where mining has been carried on for generations. The
time is approaching when the recording of rock-temperatures
must be systematically undertaken in all deep mines.
Temperatures should be noted with reasonable skill and pre-
cision at regular intervals both when sinking and driving in new
ground ; and at all places where there is a change of rock.
Observations taken in a careless or haphazard manner are of no
value, and in some cases may even be worse than useless, as they
may lead to the formation of erroneous conclusions.
The precautions to be observed in taking underground tem-
peratures have been succinctly summarised by H. C. Jenkins
3
as
follows :
(1) Temperatures should be taken in new ground, that is, in the
face or heading freshly broken, where the work is being
rapidly pushed ahead. The rock-walls soon become
cooled by ventilating currents.
(2) Where possible the rock should be free from sulphides
easily oxidised, since chemical reactions attending oxida-
tion are exothermic. When sulphides are present the
temperature should be taken at once.
(3) Very wet ground must be avoided, as it will generally give
a lower reading than the true one, since the \vater will
in most cases be descending surface-water. On the
other hand, ascending deep-seated water will tend to
exaggerate the temperature.
(4) After drilling, sufficient time must be given to permit the
abnormal heat of drilling to dissipate itself before taking
a rock-temperature. A few minutes will generally suffice
for this.
(5) The drill-hole must be deep enough to avoid the tempera-
ture of the face of rock. Agassiz used holes 10 feet deep.
In the majority of cases 6 feet holes are sufficient.
(6) The bore-holes should be horizontal by preference.
(7) The temperatures should be taken \vith a high-class clinical
thermometer,, graduated from, say, 80 to 115 Fahr. and
reading to O05 Fahr., and corrected against a standard
thermometer. When inserted in the hole, thethermometer
should be wrapped round \vith three layers of flannel.
Limits of Deep Mining". Mining at great depths will be
limited by the underground temperature and economic considera-
1 H. C. Jenkins, " Rock Temperatures in Victoria," Proc. Aust. Assoc. Adv.
Sc., vol. ix. p. 309, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 89
tions. By the adoption of secondary ventilation and methods of
refrigeration mining could doubtless be carried on at depths
ranging up to 6500 feet according to the local increment of
temperature.
Metasomatic Replacement Until lately it was commonly
believed that ore-deposits merely filled pre-existing fissures and
cavities in country-rock. In recent years writers on ore-formation
have been inclined to place more or less stress on what has been
termed metasomatic replacement.
According to this, it is surmised that, in many cases at least, no
previous cavities existed, but that the waters percolating through
the rocks dissolved certain tracks or zones which they replaced
with ore-matter and gangue.
This process of replacement is well known to petrologists to
have taken place among the constituents of many rock-masses, no
matter how dense, including all metamorphic rocks, and all older
igneous and eruptive masses.
It is known as metasomatism (meaning change of body), and is
due to internal chemical reactions, which seem to take place as
readily in rocks as do the metabolic changes in living organisms.
In many cases minerals are replaced molecule by molecule,
giving rise to what is termed mineral pseudomorphism. But in
the processes which affect changes in rock-masses, reactions are
set up between the different constituent minerals, thereby form-
ing new minerals capable of segregating themselves into masses of
all sizes.
Gneiss and mica-schist are familiar examples of the work of
segregation and molecular rearrangement of the dominant con-
stituents of altered sedimentary rocks. Such alteration is termed
anamorphism and always takes place in the anamorphic zone.
The internal changes that affect eruptives are known to every
petrologist. Besides these changes, which are chiefly molecular,
rock-masses, and especially eruptive rocks, may be so altered by
the action of circulating waters as to bear no resemblance to the
original rock.
Thus in many cases andesites have been changed to propylite
by the removal of certain essential constituents and the substi-
tution of others. Rock replacement is doubtless preceded by
alteration.
Metasomatic replacement, as defined byVan Hise a and Emmons,
2
does not necessarily imply a mere substitution of matter, mole-
cule for molecule, as happens in the process of pseudomorphism,
which involves the preservation of the original form of the sub-
1 Van Hise, 16th Annual Report U.S. Geol Survey, Part I., p. 689.
2 S. F. Emmons, U.S. Geol. Survey, Monograph XII., p. 565.

--- Page Break ---
90 MINING GEOLOGY.
stance replaced, but an interchange of substance, the dissolved
rock being replaced by grains or crystalline aggregates of one or
more minerals.
That substitution did, however, take place in some kinds of
deposits is well known. In the tin-impregnations in granite,
in New South Wales, pseudomorphs of tin-oxide, in the form of
orthoclase, are not uncommon ; and many other examples could be
quoted, having reference principally to the replacement of isolated
crystals, in crystalline and eruptive rocks.
Slow replacement of substance by a progressive movement of
the solutions in a definite direction must be assumed to have
taken place in the formation of ore-deposits composed of massive
aggregates. In most cases the direction of movement would be
determined by a rock fracture or line of fault.
In the case of deposits formed by deep-circulating solutions, it
is manifest that circulation could not be rapid, as the face or breast
where metasomatic processes were active would form a blind end
or cul-de-sac. Whatever circulation existed would be due to con-
vection currents, which in deep-seated cavities could only be
feeble.
This now raises the question as to the transference and supply
of dissolved matter to the continually advancing faces of meta-
somatic action.
The energy which caused, or at any rate accelerated this trans-
ference, was probably osmotic pressure, which has been shown by
van 't Hoff to be a force of great intensity.
It has been proved that when a portion of dissolved substance
is deposited from a solution at any point, the osmotic balance is
disturbed ; and immediately more dissolved matter travels to that
point in accordance with the well-established laws of osmotic
diffusion, thereby providing new matter to augment the growing
mass of ore.
Arrhenius and Gillette have urged the claims of osmotic
pressure to be considered a factor in ore-formation.1
Osmotic pressure is the chemical principle which compels
solutions to maintain an equal state of concentration throughout
their whole mass, and since it is always called into being when
deposition commences, its operation as an agency in vein-filling
must have been assumed by writers on this subject, although
seldom specifically mentioned.
Metasomatism is a process of lode-formation by replacement,
and does not concern itself with the source or origin of the
dissolved matter contained in the solutions.
1
Gillette,
" Osmosis as a Factor in Ore Formation," Trans, Am. Inst. M. E.,
1903.

--- Page Break ---
ORE VEINS. 91
It is almost certain that metasomatic processes, to a greater or
less degree, were active agencies in the formation of many under-
ground ore-deposits and rock masses. For this reason the phrase
Replacement lode, so often applied to large pyritic ore-bodies and
to mineralised zones of country, is somewhat ambiguous, and
possesses no definite genetic significance.
Veins in which the mineral contents are arranged in symmetrical
bands or layers can only be satisfactorily explained by supposing
that the vein-matter was deposited in open channels, beginning
with a layer on each wall, followed by subsequent layers until the
channel became closed or the solutions exhausted.
It is not assumed that the vein-fissure remained open its full
width during the whole period of deposition of the vein-matter.
It is more reasonable to suppose that the fissure gradually opened
as the process of deposition proceeded, the newly formed matter
affording the necessary support to the walls. The forces which
initiated the fracture, if still in existence, would doubtless tend to
reopen and widen the fissure from time to time.
"Waldemar Lindgren's classic paper on "Metasomatic Processes
in Fissure Veins" 1
represents a great advance in the scientific
investigation of vein-formation. Theauthor has followed Stelzner's
methods of microscopic chemical research with conspicuous success,
in a field hitherto much neglected.
His work further shows that a clear understanding of the
genesis of a vein can only be obtained by a minute study of the
rocks contiguous to the ore-body.
The metasomatism he describes is clearly not correlative with
the metasomatic replacement defined by Emmons, but merely
mineral pseudomorphism on a large scale. He defines his stand-
point by repeating and adopting Becker's statement 2 that " the
theory of the substitution of ore for rock is to be accepted only
when there is definite evidence of pseudomorphic molecular
replacement."
He mentions that quartz is found replacing calcite, or even
orthoclase, and that rutile and anatase are common as secondary
products after ilmenite, biotite, etc.
Upon these and other mineralogical replacements, which he
enumerates, he apparently assumes that vein-filling was the
result of replacement molecule by molecule.
This somewhat narrow view of metasomatic replacement is
manifestly insufficient to explain the genesis of the banded chalce-
donic veins of the Hauraki region of Xew Zealand.
Lindgren thinks this genetic theory may be fully sufficient
1
Lindgren, Trans. Am. Inst. M.E., vol. xxx. p. 578, 1900.
2
Becker, Discussion, Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 204.

--- Page Break ---
92 MINING GEOLOGY.
for many veins, but admits that for many others perhaps the
majority of fissure-veins there seems to be something lacking in
this explanation.
Vogt classifies the metasomatic processes caused by the circula-
tion of ore-solutions l as follows :
(a) Alteration forming greisen, cassiterite rock, etc.
(b) Scapolitisation.
(c) Propylitisation.
(d) Kaolinisation.
(e) Sericitisation.
(/) Carbonatisation (with dolomitisation).
(g) Silicification.
(h) Zeolitisation.
(*) Intense contact metamorphism.
He agrees with Emmons, Becker, Lindgren and others that
metasomatic replacement plays an important part in the forma-
tion of mineral-veins and ore-bodies.
Information with regard to vein-structure, character, and in-
fluence of wall-rock should be placed on record on all possible
occasions. A petrographical examination of the vein-matter and
wall-rock for some distance on each side of the ore-body will
often throw much light on the genesis of the ore ; but care must
be taken in forming generalisations on microscopic evidence alone.
1 Professor Vogt, "Problems in the Geology of Ore Deposits," loc. cit.,
p. 660.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER IV.
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS.
CONTENTS -.Definition of Faults Faults parallel with Bed Dip Faults
Step Faults Trough Faults Rules for Inclined Lodes Zinimerniann's
Graphic Method.
Definition of Faults. Mineral beds and veins may be bent
or fractured, elevated or depressed, by the slow secular move-
ments which build up continental areas ; or tilted and dislocated
by the sharper movements propagated by the intrusion of an
igneous magma ; that is, the disturbing agents may be erogenic
or hypogenic.
Dislocations without movement of the rock on either wall are
simple fractures ; but in the majority of cases there has not only
been fracture but also displacement. In other words, the rents
have become faults.
A fault may be denned as a fracture on one side of which
movement has taken place whereby the rocks on one side have
been displaced relatively to those on the other side.
Faults are caused by crust stresses. They run in all directions,
but the major faults of a region often run in the same general
direction.
A fault may run parallel with the course, or strike, of a bed
or vein ; or cross the course at right angles, or at any other angle.
Faults are not often vertical, but incline to one side or the
other. A fault is said to hade when it inclines from the vertical
plane. The hade of a fault is, therefore, the angle which the
fault makes with the vertical plane.
The hade-line of a fault is the oblique resultant of two
principal component forces, namely gravitational stress acting
vertically or radially towards the centre of the earth, and lateral
thrust mainly due to subsidence.
Faults are of two kinds, namely
:
(a) Normal faults.
(b) Reversed or overlap faults.
93

--- Page Break ---
94 MINING GEOLOGY.
Iii normal faults the downthrow is towards the side to which
the fault hades.
FIG. 45. Normal Fault.
In Fig. 45 the hade of the fault and downthrow of the beds are
towards the w
r
est.
In reversed or overlap faults the downthrow is on the foot-wall
side of the fracture.
FIG. 46. Reversed or Overlap Fault.
In the above figure, the hade is to the west, and the down-
throw on the foot-wall side.
FIG. 47. Reversed or Overlap Fault.
FIG. 48. Sharp Folding without Fracture.
Reversed faults are intimately connected with sharp anticlinal
and synclinal folding. The stresses introduced by the bending
of beds are often relieved by faulting and shearing.

--- Page Break ---
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS. 95
Faults parallel with Bed or Vein. Faults produce
different effects according to the direction of their strike and dip,
relatively to the strike and dip of the veins or beds which they
intersect.
A fault which runs parallel with the strike of a bed is termed
a strike-fault. It may dip with the bed or against it. In figs.
50 and 51, the faults dip in the same direction as the beds. In
figs. 49 and 52, the beds and faults dip in opposite directions.
FIG. 49. Strike Fault dipping West and Seam dipping East.
w
FIG. 50. Strike Fault dipping in the same Direction as the Seam, at a
Flatter Angle.
FIG. 51. Strike Fault dipping in the same Direction as the Seam, at a
Steeper Angle.
It should be noted that the faults shown in the last three
figures are normal faults.
A strike-fault causes vertical and horizontal displacements of
the seam or vein intersected.

--- Page Break ---
96 MINING GEOLOGY.
The vertical line ab shows the vertical displacement called by
miners downthrow or upthrow, according as the fault is approached
from the east or west.
W
FIG. 52. Showing Displacements by Strike Fault.
The line cb shows the amount of horizontal displacement or
disseverment which is sometimes erroneously termed heave.
A
B
FIG. 53. Tipper part, Plan of Beds traversed by Strike Fault. Lower part.
Cross-section of Beds along line AB, showing repetition of dislocated beds.

--- Page Break ---
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS. 97
When a fault displaces stratified rocks, the lines of bedding
afford a measure of the vertical displacement ; but in the absence
of bedding-planes or some rock marked by a distinctive peculiarity
of colour or composition, there is no certain means of measurement.
A strike-fault causes no lateral displacement of the beds, which
it intersects ; but when the beds are inclined, it may produce a
repetition of the dislocated beds, as shown in fig. 53.
In regions which have been subject to long-continued denuda-
tion, one side of a faulted seam may be entirely removed, as
shown in fig. 54. This is not uncommon in the case of young
Secondary and Tertiary coal-measures hanging on the flanks of
mountain chains.
FIG. 54. Section of Normal Fault, showing one side of seam removed
by denudation.
The seam may be partly removed by denudation on one or
both sides of the fault, as indicated in figs. 55 and 56.
FIG 55 Section showing Seam partly removed on One Side along line
of Fault.
When a fault possesses the same dip and strike as a seam or
mineral-vein, that is, when it conforms to the bedding-planes, it
causes no apparent disturbance in the relation of the rocks on
each side.
7

--- Page Break ---
98 MINING GEOLOGY.
The only evidence of the existence of such a fault is the
smooth, polished, and slicken-sided surfaces on the line of move-
FIG. 56. Section showing Seam partly removed on Both Sides along line
of Fault.
ment. In the case of a mineral vein, the faulting may result in
the production of a layer of friction breccia on the side on which
the movement took place.
FIG. 57. Section of Parallel Thrust Plane.
Such a fault is merely a thrust-plane, more often the result of
shearing thrust than vertical or tangential stress.
Dip Faults. A fault which runs in the same general direction
as the dip of a bed or vein, is termed a dip-fault.
The distinction beween strike-faults and dip-faults is not always
well marked. A fault may pursue any course between the strike
and dip of a bed. When its course is midway between the dip
and strike of the bed, the fault may be termed either a dip-fault
or a strike-fault.
Dip-faults produce an apparent lateral displacement of the bed
or vein, which they cross.
When faulting takes place, the principal movement is a vertical
one. Consequently, when the faulted vein is vertical there is no
lateral displacement or heave, as the dissevered ends merely slide
upon each other.
Evidences of lateral thrust and shearing are often observed
among Palaeozoic schists and gneiss, but are sometimes seen in fault-

--- Page Break ---
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS. 99
planes. Thus in some cases the dissevered ends of a vein are
sharply bent towards each other, where theyabut against the fault.
On the slicken-sided faces of great faults, the striae caused by
the rubbing of one rock-surface upon the other generally follow a
vertical plane.
Fault.
FIG. 58. Upper part, Plan of Faulted Vein at, say, 100 feet level. Lower
part, Cross-section along ac, showing heave and vertical displacement.
The apparent heave or lateral displacement is produced by the
dip of the vein carrying the vein to the right or left ; and mani-
festly the natter the dip, the greater will be the apparent dis-
placement. When the vein is vertical, there can be no heave
at all.
In fig. 58 the distance ab represents the amount of vertical

--- Page Break ---
100 MINING GEOLOGY.
displacement or downthrow ; and the cross-cut ac the amount of
lateral displacement or heave.
When the drive da in fig. 58, reached the fault, the vein was
lost. The lost vein was found at point c by cross-cutting towards
the east ; but obviously the part of the vein struck at c was not
the part corresponding to that driven on along da (fig. 58).
In this example, the fault dips to the north ; therefore, the
downthrow is on the north side of the fault. Hence, the crosscut
will strike a higher part of the vein than that driven upon along da.
The downthrow is the distance ab, and at b will be found the
continuation of the portion of the vein driven on at a.
Sometimes two or more faults run parallel with each other, or
cross each other at an angle. In other cases, it happens that one
group of faults is intersected by another group of a later date.
When faulted veins or seams are again faulted, many complicated
problems become involved in the recovery of the lost portions.
Step Faults. A seam or bed is sometimes crossed by a
number of faults, running more or less parallel to each other, and
FIG. 59. Cross-section showing Group of Step Faults.
dipping in the same direction ; or by some dipping one way and
some another.
Such faults are often small, and their effects best seen when
they dislocate a seam of coal.
FIG. 60. Cross-section ofTrough Fault in Dudley Port Mine, Staffordshire,
(a) Seam of coal. (b) Basalt.

--- Page Break ---
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS. 101
Trough Faults. When two parallel faults dip towards each
other, permitting a portion of strata to be thrown down between
them, they form what is spoken of as a trough-fault. A well-
known example is the trough-fault of Dudley Port Mine, in
Staffordshire, which has thrown down the great 10-yard seam a
distance of 450 feet, as shown below.
RECOVERY OF LOST LODES.
Rules for Inclined Lodes. Four cases may occur when
driving on a vein dislocated by a fault. The vein may dip to the
right or left hand, and the fault towards you or away from you.
I. When the vein dips to the left, and is cut off by a fault
dipping towards you, the lost vein will be found by driv-
ing to the left.
II. When the vein dips to the left, and is cut off by a fault
dipping away from you, the lost vein will be foundby driv-
ing to the right.
III. When the vein dips to the right and is cut off by a fault
dipping towards you, the lost vein will be found by driv-
ing to the right.
IV. When the vein dips to the right, and is cut off by a fault
dipping away from you, the lost vein will be foundby driv-
ing to the left.
The fault may cross the face of the drive squarely, or it may
cross obliquely. The angle at which the fault intersects the vein
does not affect the application of the rules.
V. When a horizontal seam is cut off by a fault dipping towards
you, its continuation will be found at a higher level ; but
when the fault dips away from you, the lost seam will
be found underfoot.
These rules are always true, except in the case of reversed
faults and strike-faults which run parallel with the strike of the
vein or seam.
Zimmerman's Graphic Method. Zimmerman's graphic
method for finding the lost or faulted portion of a lode is as
follows :
1. Lay down upon paper the line of strike of the lode and fault,
producing the lines till they intersect.
2. Determine by construction the point of intersection at any
imaginary lower level.
3. Draw a line joining the points of intersection of the lode and
fault at the two levels.

--- Page Break ---
102 MINING GEOLOGY.
4. Produce the line of intersection through the fault at upper
level.
5. Draw a line perpendicular to the fault at the point where
the line of intersection emerges from the fault.
Rule. On whatever side of the line of intersection produced
the perpendicular falls, on that side will the lost lode be found.
Zimmerman's law is always true, except in the case of reversed
faults and strike-faults.
Unless beds can be recognised on each side of the fault, the
extent of the throw cannot be determined.
Application of Rule. Example 1. Suppose that in driving
north on a lode a fault is met with which displaces the lode. The
fault dips south at an angle of 45, and the lode dips west at
an angle of 60. In which direction should the lost portions
of the lode be found ?
a
FIG. 61. Sketch Plan to illustrate Example 1.
Procure a sheet of paper and plot the approximate position of
the lodeand fault, showing the direction of dip ofeach with an arrow.
Let the lode and fault be shown by a firm, black line, as shown
in fig. 61.
Plot the position the lode and fault would occupy at a lower
depth, say, at 100 feet, representing them by a thin line. Produce
the lines till they meet. The approximate positions at a lower
level can be plotted by inspection, for it is evident that if the lode
dipping at 60 deg. travels out, say \ inch in 100 feet, the lode
dipping at the natter angle of 45 deg. will dip much faster, and
hence travel relatively further out.
The exact departure or distance the lode and fault will travel
out in 100 feet can be found by multiplying the cotangent of the
angle of dip by 100.
Draw a line through the points of intersection, and erect a per-

--- Page Break ---
r THF
UNIVERSITY
.
THE DYNAMICS OF LODES AND BEDS.
pendicular to the fault. It will be seen that the perpendicular
falls on the left side of the intersector ; hence the lode will be
found by driving to the left.
It will be seen that the line of intersection, before the per-
pendicular is erected, crosses the fault so as to make an acute and
an obtuse angle. In all cases, the heaved portion of vein will be
found 011 the side of the greater angle. Hence the drawing of the
perpendicular is unnecessary to the solution of the problem.
Example 2. Suppose the fault in the last example dipped to
the north instead of south at the same angle, the lode would be
thrown to the right, as shown by fig. 62.
FIG. 62. To illustrate Example 2.
Example 3. Suppose a lode were running N.-S., and dipping
east at an angle of 55, and were intersected by an E.-W. fault
FIG. 63. To illustrate Example 3.
dipping south at an angle of 60, where would the lost lode be
found?
Example -4. Suppose, in Example 3, the faults were dipping

--- Page Break ---
104 MINING GEOLOGY.
north instead of south, at the same angle, the diagram would be
as shown below.
Example 5. Suppose in driving north-west on a lode dipping
FIG. 64. To illustrate Example 4. FIG. 65. To illustrate Example 5.
south-west at an angle of 60, a fault were met with running
E. and W., and dipping north at an angle of 75, on which side
would the lost lode be found 1
FIG. 66. To illustrate Example 6.
Example 6. Suppose in driving east on a lode dipping south
at an angle of 35, a fault were met with running N.E.-S.W.,
and dipping S.E. at an angle of 60, where should the lost
portion of the lode be found ?

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER V.
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED.
CONTENTS -.Genetic' Classification Magraatic Segregation Chromite in
Peridotite Nickel lion Native Copper Platinum Metals Ores
formed by Eruptive After-actions Solfataric Action of Ascending
Alkaline Waters Fumarolic Contact Metamorphic Deposits Regional
Metamorphic Deposits Meteoric Waters Organic.
ORE-DEPOSITS are of diverse form and composition. They are
found as true veins, as detached masses, and as members of a
sedimentary formation. It is now known that their mode of
occurrence, and, to some extent, their composition and form, were
determined by the geological conditions prevailing at the time of
their formation.
In the past decade, a vast mass of facts has been added to the
literature of the subject, particularly in America, where the
magnitude of the operations connected with mining has afforded
great facilities for observation and research.
The genesis of ore-deposits presents many difficult problems,
and naturally the literature of the subject is rich in theoretical
deductions.
The introduction of petrographical methods of investigation,
and the demonstration of the principles of metasoinatic replace-
ment and secondary enrichment, have marked a new point of
departure, and led to a truer conception of the formation of ore-
deposits than formerly existed.
In this investigation we must remember that existing conditions
are but a reflection of the past. The agencies that built up the
crust of the earth in its present form are still in operation, and
still governed by the same natural laws.
We are living on the edge of a geologic epoch, and if we would
rightly understand the past, we must study the present. The
occurrence of ore-deposits is merely a geologic happening an
incident in the tectonic arrangement of the materials forming the
outer shell of the globe.
Recent petrographical investigation has shown that ore-deposits
105

--- Page Break ---
106 MINING GEOLOGY.
are always more or less intimately connected with igneous rocks.
This constant association naturally leads to the broad generalisa-
tion That ore-deposits are genetically connected with the eruption
of igneous magmas.
Genetic Classification.
The genetic classification which seems to most nearly satisfy our
present knowledge relating to mineral deposits is as follows :
I. Magmatic segregation.
II. Eruptive after-actions
(a) Solfataric.
(b) Fumarolic.
(c) Contact melamorphic.
(d) Regional metamorphic.
III. Meteoric waters
(a) Chemical.
(b) Mechanical.
IV. Organic.
I. MAGMATIC SEGREGATION.
It has been shown by Professor Sandberger and others, that
igneous rocks contain all the constituents of mineral veins.
Professor Vogt, of Christiania, maintains that a deep-seated
inaccessible repository of the heavy metals can no longer be
sustained. 1 Modern geologists, he points out, have abandoned
the old conception of the earth's interior condition, which supposed
that the interior was an enormously compressed liquid molten
mass of high specific gravity charged with heavy metals.
The composition of the molten magmas that have issued at the
surface in successive geological ages, does not favour any hypo-
thesis which assumes the existence of a greater proportion of the
heavy metals in the barysphere than in the upper crust or litho-
sphere.
Referring to the distribution of the elements in the earth's
crust, Vogt states that of the entire crust, including the rocks, sea
and atmosphere, oxygen constitutes by weight about one-half, and
silicon above one-quarter.
2
1
Professor J. H. L. Vogt, "Problems in the Origin of Ore Deposits,"
Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 637.
2 Loc. cit., p. 639.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 107
The proportions of the other elements are, he says, as follows :
Per cent.
Aluminium, iron, calcium, magnesium,
sodium, and potassium,
. . 10 to 1
Hydrogen, titanium, carbon, and chlorine, 1 to O'l
Phosphorus, manganese, sulphur, barium,
fluorine, nitrogen, zirconium, and
strontium, . . . . O'l to 0*01
Nickel, lithium, vanadium, bromine, and
perhaps beryllium and boron, . O'Ol to O'OOl
Cobalt, argon, iodine, rubidium, tin,
cerium, yttrium, possibly arsenic and
others, . . . . O'OOl to O'OOOl
In igneous magmas deficient in acid-forming constituents, the
heavy metals will segregate as oxides during the process of cooling,
assuming the form of individual crystals, grains, or irregular
aggregates in small and great masses.
The petrographical researches of Vogt and Brogger disclosed in
basic dykes a tendency of the heavy minerals to segregate near
the borders. The occurrence of massive mineral-aggregates near
their borders is a marked characteristic of peridotites and
serpentines in all parts of the globe.
For physico-chemical reasons, mineral segregations are more
common in basic and ultra-basic rocks than in acid rocks.
The most typical examples of magmatic border-segregation are
found in peridotite and its serpentinised forms. At present the
laws governing magmatic differentiation are but imperfectly
understood. By some, segregation is ascribed to molecular flow
due to differences of temperature in the magma ; by Becker and
Spurr to convection currents which they believe would tend to
carry the first crop of minerals, such as magnetite, olivine, etc., to
the borders of the igneous magmas.
The writer l believes that border segregation may be accelerated
due to unequal osmotic pressure in the cooling magma. The
temperature at the borders of the igneous mass would be less
than in the central portion, thereby causing a corresponding
difference of osmotic pressure. And since osmotic pressure
holds good for the laws of thermodynamics, there would be a
transference of osmotic stress from the central portion to the
borders.
The ores that occur as primary constituents of intrusive rocks,
1
J. Park, "The Cause of Border Segregation in Some Igneous Magmas,"
Trans. N.Z. List., vol. xxxviii., 1905.

--- Page Break ---
108 MINING GEOLOGY.
resulting from direct differentiation in the cooling magma, are as
follows :
(a) Chromite in peridotite and serpentine.
(b) Copper and nickel-iron in serpentine.
(c) Platinum metals in highly basic eruptives.
(d) Magnetite and titanite in basic and semi-basic eruptives.
Chromite in Peridotite. In the South Island of New
Zealand, there are two mountain masses of peridotite, in which
the magmatic segregation of chromite is exhibited on a large
scale.
A few miles from the city of Nelson, Dun Mountain rises to a
height of over 4000 feet above sea-level. It covers an area of
about 4 square miles, and is composed of massive olivine, in which
chromite of iron is uniformly disseminated in the form of fine
grains, but occasionally occurs in large masses. 1
The adjacent rocks are slaty shales and limestones of probably
Jurassic age, the limestone occurring at the base of sedimentary
formation. Between the limestone and the olivine, to which
Hochstetter 2
gave the distinctive name dunite, there is a belt of
serpentine half a mile wide.
The serpentine contains lenticular-shaped masses of chromite,
native copper, and copper ores, principally chalcopyrite, with the
usual products of oxidation. It also contains thin irregular veins
of diallage, bronzite, enstatite, scapolite, wollastonite, and chryso-
tile.
The larger masses of chromite in the olivine and serpentine
occur along the margin or boundary of these rocks.
The second great mass of peridotite forms Red Mountain,
situated 20 miles north of Milford Sound, in Otago.
3 It is over
6000 feet high, and covers an area of about 10 square miles.
The mountain is composed of olivine and chromite. The latter
occurs in much greater proportion than at Dun Mountain.
The peridotite is flanked on two sides by belts of serpentine,
which separate it from the adjacent slates and sandstones of
supposed Palaeozoic age.
The olivine, near the contact with the sedimentary rocks, is
often so highly charged with chromite as to form massive bodies
of ore. No deposits of chromite are known in the serpentine, but
1
S. H. Cox, "Chrome Deposits of Nelson," New Zealand Geol. Reports
and Explorations, 1881, p. 8.
2 Dr F. Von Hochstetter, Zeitschrift der deutsclien geol. Gesells., xvi. p. 341,
1864.
3 J. Park, New Zealand Geological Reports and Explorations, 1886-87,
p. 121.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 109
they may possibly exist, as the country is still practically un-
explored.
Nickel Iron. The sands in the streams which drain the Red
Mountain serpentine area yield small quantities of the rare nickel-
iron alloy, Awaruite, discovered by \V. Skey in 1885.
1 It has
been found, in situ, in the serpentine.
2
A nickel-iron alloy, the same as or related to Awaruite, has been
found in gold-bearing sands at the River Biella, Piedmont,
associated with chroinite separated from peridotite ;
3 in serpen-
tine in Josephine County, Oregon ;
4 in sandstone, associated with
chromite, in Fraser River, British Columbia ;
5 and in Smith
River, Del Xorte County, California.
Native Copper. The association of copper and chromite in
the serpentines at Dun Mountain has already been mentioned.
Native copper is found in serpentine in Cornwall, New South
Wales, and many other parts of the world.
Large masses of native copper, associated with silver, are found
in amygdaloidal diabase at Lake Superior.
In 1879, Prof. S. H. Cox discovered, in the Manukau district, a
number of dykes of andesite, which, near their borders, were
found to contain small grains of native copper, finely disseminated
throughout the igneous matrix.6 The dykes are intruded in
volcanic breccias of probably later Miocene age.
Platinum Metals. Platinum has only been found in a few
cases in the matrix in situ, and in most cases in basic or ultra-
basic rocks. In the Ural Mountains, it occurs as grains in
peridotite and serpentine.
The bed-rock of the Vyzaj and Kaiva rivers, on the western
flanks of the Urals, consists of olivine-gabbro, containing dis-
seminated grains of platinum, but not apparently in payable
quantities.
An olivine rock was discovered in 1893, at Goroblage-datsk,
on the western side of the Urals, containing chromite and
platinum, the latter at the rate of 14 dwt. 9 gr. to the ton of rock.
Carmichael,
7 in 1902, reported the occurrence of platinum in a
fine-grained dark basaltic rock.
1 W. Skey, Trans. N.Z. Inst., vol. xxiii., p. 401, 1885.
2 G. H. Ulrich,
' '
On the Discovery, Mode of Occurrence, and Distribution
of the Xickel-iron Alloy Awaruite on the West Coast of the South Island of
New Zealand," Quart. Jour. Geo. Soe. London.
3
Comptes Eondus, cxii. p. 171.
4 Am. Journ. Sc. [4], xix. p. 319, 1905.
5 Loc. cit., p. 319.
6 S. H. Cox, " Geology of Cape Rodney," N.Z. Geol. Reports and Explora-
tions, 1879-80, p. 27.
7
Eng. and Min. Jour., New York, Feb. 12, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
110 MINING GEOLOGY.
I. A. Pond, in 1886, discovered native platinum in serpentine at
Wade, near Auckland, and in a great vein traversing propylitised
andesite at the Thames goldfield.
Since the discovery of platinum in the nickel-copper sulphide
ore at Sudbury, in Canada, careful analysis has disclosed the
presence of the metal in minute quantity in many sulphide ores
throughout the world. But in this, and all cases, where platinum
occurs in sulphide beds or in veins, its occurrence is probably not
the result of direct magmatic segregation.
II. ORES FORMED BY ERUPTIVE AFTER-ACTIONS.
It is manifest that the whole series of eruptive after-actions will
commence at the movement of intrusion of the magma, and con-
tinue until the rocks have become completely cooled.
Igneous magmas are now admitted by petrologists to contain
more or less water together with many constituents of a hydrous
or gaseous character.
Hence the fusion of magmas is not believed to be pyrogenetic,
that is, the result of dry heat alone, but hydato-pyrogenetic, that
is, fusion by heat, in the presence of water. According to
Arrhenius,
1 water renders the magma more liquid.
It has been shown by experiment that magmas which require a
temperature of 3000 F. to produce dry fusion, can be fused
in the presence of water at 500 F. Further, it has been
shown that the presence of water aids in giving a magma fluidity.
Barus 2 was able to fuse glass at 200 C. in the presence of water.
According to Arrhenius, water, in a magma, acts the part of an
acid, liberating free silicic acid and free bases.
The activity of water at high temperature is very great.
Barus 3 has shown that water, heated above 185 deg. C., attacks
the silicates composing soft glass with remarkable rapidity ; and
Lemberg has proved, experimentally, that water, at a temperature
of 210 C., slowly dissolves anhydrous powdered silicates.
It is probable that, at great depths, the pressure will be
sufficient to hold the water in the form of a liquid, in a super-
heated condition.4 At high temperatures, both water and steam
possess a great capacity for dissolving mineral substances.
1 Svante Arrhenius, "Zur Physik des Vulkanismus," Geol. Foren. Fork.
Stockholm, 1900.
2 C. Barus, Am. Jour. Sci., vi. p. 270, 1898.
3 C. Barus, " HotWater and Soft Glass in their Thermodynamic Relations."
Am. Jour. Sci. IV., vol. ix., 1900, p. 161.
4 C. R. Van Hise, " Some Principles controlling the Deposition of Ores,"
Trans. Ainerican Institute ofMining Engineers, vol. xxx. p. 27.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. Ill
Contrary to the common belief, Oetling
1 found that when a
magma is once molten the pressure of 200 or 300 atmospheres
tends to keep it molten longer than in ordinary conditions.
(a) Solfataric (i.e. formed by thermal solutions, aided by
steam and gases). It is well known that, during and after vol-
canic eruptions, there are emitted enormous volumes of steam,
also hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide, carbon dioxide, as well as
compounds of chlorine, fluorine, and boron.
These gaseous and aqueous emanations come from the same
source as the igneous magma, accompany the magma in its
ascent, and may possibly be one of the contributing causes of the
eruption.
Volcanic phenomena can be studied in many parts of the
world, but perhaps nowhere with more advantage than in New
Zealand. In the volcanic region of the North Island, there are
thousands of square miles in which volcanic activity can be seen
in every stage and phase.
There are active, intermittent, and extinct volcanoes, besides
innumerable geysers, fumaroles, and hot springs active, decadent,
and dead.
The active and intermittent volcanoes discharge their lavas and
fragmentary matter from single pipes, or from lateral vents
apparently connected with the main pipe ; and from fissure-
rents.
The volcanic eruption, at Rotomahana, in 1886, was from a
fissure-rent, over 6 miles in length, extending from the summit
of Mount Wahanga southward into the basin of Lake Rotomahana,
and thence across the rhyolite plateau to Lake Okaro.2
The whole length of the rent was the scene of great activity for
some weeks after the first great outburst.
In New Zealand, the geysers, hot springs, and fumaroles
occur in isolated groups, or along a line of fissure, which often
runs along the floor of a valley, or lower flanks of a range of
hills.
The geysers and hot springs deposit siliceous and calcareous
sinters, mostly the former; and the fumaroles, native sulphur.
Everywhere the air is pervaded with the smell of sulphur
dioxide (Frontispiece).
The solfataric action is active, waning, or dead. With the
latter, the vents are closed up by siliceous encrustations.
1
Tscher, Mm. u. Petrog. Mitth., xvii. p. 33, 1897.
2 Sir James Hector, "On the Recent Volcanic Eruptions at Tarawera,"
N.Z. Reports of Geol. Explorations, 1886-87, p. 243. Professor F. W. Hutton,
Report on the Tarawera Volcanic District; Wellington, 1887. S. Percy
Smith, TheEruptionofTaraicera ; Wellington, 1886. ProfessorA. P. Thomas,
Report on the Eruption of Tarawera ; Wellington, 1888.

--- Page Break ---
112 MINING GEOLOGY.
Where the hot springs overflow on the surface, they form
thick mushroom-shaped mounds of silica. The silica is some-
times softand porous, and often dense, hard, and chalcedonic.
In all cases, the hot springs and geysers are grouped around
the volcanic vents, and along fissures in lavas near the point of
emission.
In the Hauraki gold-mining area, which adjoins the northern
end of this volcanic region, the country-rocks consist of a vast
pile of andesitic lavas, tuffs, and breccias of Miocene age, resting
on slaty shales and greywacke of probably Triassic age.
The gold-bearing veins traverse both the andesites and tuffs,
but are only productive in the former. They are fissure-veins ;
but, strictly speaking, they do not conform to the usually accepted
definition of a true fissure-vein, since they are generally confined
to the igneous rock-formation.
Near the borders of the andesites, the veins are small and un-
important, and generally die out when they reach the underlying
basement rock. On the other hand, the larger and more pro-
ductive veins are grouped around the old vents, and have been
found to descend as deep as mining operations have followed them.
There seems to be no reason why they should not descend to
great depths.
The country-rock, on the walls of the veins, is propylitised to a
moderately hard gray rock. When two or more veins run parallel
with each other, as they do in all the Hauraki mining centres,
the country-rock between the veins is often entirely altered, or
propylitised.
In the Thames district, the distance between the numerous
parallel veins which traverse the goldfield seldom exceeds 200
yards, and in almost every instance the veins are separated from
each other by a narrow belt of hard unaltered andesite. These
hard bands or bars, as the miners term them, possess the same
general strike and dip as the veins, and in cross-section present
the appearance of lenticular and hourglass-shaped masses. They
vary from a few feet to 30 yards in width.
The country-rock has been found to be propylitised down to a
depth of nearly 1000 feet below sea-level, which is the greatest
depth reached by mining operations up to the present time.
The propylitisation of the andesites is not widespread, but
confined to small areas grouped around the old volcanic vents.
Away from the eruptive centres, the andesites have suffered
surface decomposition, but are not propylitised.
The propylitisation was apparently effected by hot mineral
waters circulating in fissures which are now filled with vein-
matter. From these fissures the mineralised waters acted on the

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 113
rock on each wall ; and where the fissures were near each other,
the metasomatic agencies, operating from one fissure, met those
coming from the other. Where the processes of alteration did
not meet, narrow, irregular, sheet-like masses of unaltered rock
the bars of the miners were left between the vein-fissures.
At Waihi, and surrounding districts, the veins are principally
composed of chalcedonic quartz, possessing all the characteristics
of solfataric origin. Some of the larger lodes can be traced on
the surface for a distance of 16,000 feet, but the length of the
majority is under 5000 feet.
Besides the veins having linear extension, there are many huge
mushroom-shaped masses of chalcedonic quartz, closely resembling
in form the siliceous deposits now forming in the volcanic regions
around Rotorua and Lake Taupo.
At Kuaotunu and Great Barrier Island there are many of these
mushroom-shaped deposits, in some cases covering hundreds, in
others, thousands of acres. At Kuaotunu they are more or less
circular in shape, and seldom exceed 20 feet in thickness.
At Great Barrier Island, the largest deposit is of an unusual
character.1 It is nearly 2 miles long, half a mile wide, and
from 50 to 700 feet thick.
The pipe is completely filled with mineral matter. It has been
intersected in four mines, in a distance of a mile, and opened up
by levels for many hundreds of yards. It varies from 12 to 40
feet in width, and is filled with very dense banded chalcedonic
quartz, in which iron and silver sulphides are sparingly dis-
tributed.
The evidence furnished by the mine workings implies that the
overlying mushroom or umbrella of quartz was deposited on the
surface from thermal waters issuing from a fissure in the andesite.
The molybdenite deposits, at Jeffs Camp, in the Hodgkinson
goldfield, in Queensland, are described by W. E. Cameron 2 as
roughly circular, or oval-shaped outcrops of quartz, or blows,
carrying wolfram and native bismuth.
The blows, when followed down, develop into irregular pipe-
shaped masses, surrounded on all sides by granite, which is the
country-rock. When the quartz is extracted, there remain only*
empty pipes or vents.
These pipe-like ore-bodies possess a peculiar interest from a
genetic standpoint. They appear to closely resemble the siliceous
pipes formed in rhyolite by the hot springs in the Rotorua
1
J. Park, "The Geology and Veins of Hauraki Goldfields," Trans.
N.Z. Institute Mining Engineers, vol. i. p. 137. 1897.
>J
Walter E. Cameron, " Wolfram and Molybdenite Mining in Queens-
land," Queensland GeoL Survey Report, No. 1?8, p. 7, Brisbane, 1904.
8-

--- Page Break ---
114 MINING GEOLOGY.
volcanic region, and the mushroom-shaped quartz-blows at
Kuaotunu.
Several of the massive deposits of chalcedonic quartz at Waihi
are stated by Frank Rutley to be replacements of the andesite
country-rock.
1
A similar replacement of andesite by silica is described by
Spurr as occurring at Monte Cristo district, in Washington.
2
He mentions that the silicification has proceeded until most of the
rock is made up of quartz, which, he says, varies from coarsely to
very finely crystalline in structure, and contains sulphides, chiefly
blende, pyrites, and chalcopyrite in lenses of ore concentrated
along joint-planes, bedding-planes, and contacts.
Spurr continues, "Thus we have a complete and gradual transi-
tion from andesite to a sulphide ore, with a quartz gangue, by the
progressive replacement of the original materials by silica and
metallic sulphides."
In 1894 and 1896, the author made an exhaustive examination
of the Hauraki andesites for gold and silver.
The samples, subjected to examination, were selected in situ.
The analyses were conducted by the cyanide test, on samples
ranging from two to five pounds in weight. The pulverised
material was leached with a 0'3 per cent, aqueous solution of pure
potassium cyanide for seventy-two hours.
The cyanide solutions and washings were evaporated, fluxed
with pure litharge, and the resulting button of lead cupelled.
Simultaneous tests were made on pure substances, so as to check
the results.
All the andesites were found to contain gold at the rate of 1 gr.
per ton, and silver varying from 3 gr. to 30 gr. per ton of rock.
The augite-andesite, at 3000 feet from the mouth of the
Moanataiari tunnel, contained 1J gr. of gold and 3 gr. of silver to
the ton ; and the hypersthene-augite-andesite, from the waterfall,
in Waiotahi Creek, near the Fame and Fortune mine, contained
1J gr. of gold, and 30 gr. of silver.3
A petrological examination of the rocks showed that the felspars
were often kaolinised, and the pyroxenes generally much altered.4
The samples were selected from the least altered rocks obtained,
and in no case did they contain visible pyrites.
1 J. Park and F. Rutley,
" Notes on Rhyolites of the Hauraki Goldfields,"
Quart. Journal Geol. Soc., London, lv., 1899.
2 J. E. Spurr, U.S. Geol. Survey Twenty-Second Annual Report" 1900-1 ;
Part II. " Ore Deposits," p. 833.
3 J. Park, "The Geology and Veins of Hauraki Goldfields,
" Trans. New
Zealand Inst. M.E., 1897, p. 52.
4 J. Park, ''Some Andesites from the Thames Goldfields," Trans. New
Zealand Institute, vol. xxxiv., p. 435.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 115
The evidence is not conclusive that the gold and silver are
primary constituents. Whatever the source of the gold may be
the author is inclined to agree with Percy Morgan
1 that the
quantity of gold and silver in the veins is too great to be
accounted for by the traces existing in the country-rock.
At Te Aroha, near the boundary of the great Central Volcanic
Region, there are. in the andesites, hot springs ; 20 miles distant,
soda-water springs; and at the Thames, 10 miles further north,
gas-springs, which discharge enormous volumes of carbon dioxide.
In the mines in the north end of the field, the C02 issues with
great force from cracks and fissures in the rocks.
The mine-shafts are situated near the foreshore, and descend to
depths varying from 500 feet to 900 feet below sea-level. In close,
muggy weather in summer, with a low barometer, the gas rises
in the mines, and flooding all the workings, drives the miners
before it. Sometimes the gas rises up to the collar of the shafts,
and overflows at the surface.
Notwithstanding the special precautions employed to effect
ventilation, and to warn the men of danger, several fatal accidents
have taken place in the past thirty years.
In the Big Pump Shaft, the C02 escapes with such force as to
cause violent boiling all over the surface of the water in the well.
The depth of the shaft is 640 feet, but the workings are flooded
up to the 500 feet level, in consequence of which the gas escapes
against a head of 150 feet, equal to a pressure of 65 Ib. per square
inch.
The pump has been raising water from this shaft for over a
quarter of a century, at the rate of 750 gallons per minute.
The water is so highly charged with gas as to often cause trouble
in working the pumps. The commotion at the surface of the
water at the 500 feet level is caused by the escape of the gas
which is not dissolved by the water.
The Hauraki veins are manifestly of solfataric origin.
At Waihi, Kuaotunu, and Great Barrier Island, there are huge
veins of quartz, mostly chalcedonic, many of which are still capped
with wide, mushroom-shaped "quartz blows." In many cases the
mushrooms of quartz have been partly or entirely removed by
denudation.
The presence of timber in mineral veins seems to point to a time
when the vein-fissure was an open channel communicating at some
point of its course with the surface, as hot springs do at the
present day.
Posepny mentions the remarkable occurrence of tree-stems
1
Percy Morgan, "Notes on the Geology, Quartz Reef, and Minerals of
Waihi Goldfield," Trans. Austral. List. M.E., vol. viii. p. 164, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
116 MINING GEOLOGY.
charged to galena from the Vesuvian mine, Freihung, in Bavaria.
In these the fibre and annular rings could be easily recognised,
being extremely plain on polished surfaces.1
Mr R. D'Audremont (Bull, de la Soc. Geol. Belgique) states that
in a pitchblende mine at Joachimsthal, in Bohemia, a piece of
carbonised wood, from a deciduous plant, was found in a fissure
filled with volcanic tuff at a depth of 915 feet.
In the tuffs associated with the Hauraki gold-bearing andesites,
masses of wood, partly or wholly silicified and spangled with nests
and veins of iron pyrites, are of common occurrence.
The Martha lode, and its numerous ramifying branches, and
the Silverton, Union, and Amaranth lodes, at Waihi, are all con-
tained in an area of about a square mile. The huge lodes, wide
zones of silicified andesite and extensive propylitisation of the
andesite, prove that Waihi was an area of intense hydrothermal
activity some time prior to the eruption of the later rhyolite
flows, which now form the plains, and wrap around the Martha
and Silverton veins.
The propylitisation has already been shown by the Waihi mine
workings to extend to a depth of nearly 800 feet below present
water-level, that is, some 400 feet below sea-level. Obviously, the
alteration of the andesite was due to the action of ascending and
laterally moving thermal waters.
At Thames and Coromandel some of the most productive veins
do not reach the surface of the enclosing rock ; and the mine
workings at Waihi have disclosed a similar feature in connection
with a few valuable veins in the Waihi Company's property.
2
In 1898, Captain F. W. Hutton, F.R.S., as the result of a
petrographical examination of the Thames mining district, con-
cluded that the veins were of hydrothermal origin.
3
T. A. Rickard, a well-known American geologist, who examined
the same goldfield in 1891, when discussing Professor Posepny's
paper on " The Genesis of Ore Deposits/' describes the character-
istic features of the district, with the view of adducing additional
evidence of the association of thermal springs and later eruptive
rocks.4 He states that his examination of the ore-occurrences and
vein-structure, though incomplete, led him to conclude that the
1 Professor Franz Posepny, " The Genesis of Ore Deposits" p. 129, 1901.
2 P. C. Morgan, "Notes on the Geology, Quartz Keefs, and Minerals of
the Waihi Goldfield," Trans. Austr. Institute of Mining Engineers, vol.
viii. p. 168, 1902.
3 F. W. Hutton, "On the Rocks of the Hauraki Goldfield," Trans.
Ausl. Assoc. Adv. Sc., vol. viii. p. 245, 1888; and "Source of Gold at the
Thames," N.Z. Journal of Science, vol. i. p. 146.
4 T. A. Rickard, The Genesis of Ore Deposits Discussion, New York,
1901, p. 222.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 117
deposition of the gold and its associated minerals had followed
certain lines of altered country-rock, which had been exposed to
the effects of dying but lingering solfataric agencies.
The Ohaeawai Hot Springs quicksilver deposits, north of the
Hauraki peninsula, are of great importance, on account of the
evidence which they furnish in connection with the genesis of
solfataric ore-deposits.
The basement rocks consist of lower Mesozoic shales and
sandstones overlain by greensands of lower Tertiary or upper
Cretaceous age, which are covered with flows of basalt and beds
of scorise. It is agreed by all geologists that the basalt constitutes
the youngest rock-formation in the district.
The surrounding country is studded with old craters ; and there
is everywhere evidence of former intense volcanic activity.
The hot springs, around which the quicksilver deposits are
clustered, are situated about two miles south-east of Lake
Omapere, which itself occupies the site of an old crater.
They occur along the edge of a flow of basalt, which is over-
lain at this point by deposits of calcareous and siliceous sinter
and solidified siliceous and carbonaceous muds, through which
sulphur and cinnabar are finely disseminated.
There are also deposits of pyrites with or without cinnabar, in
some cases containing traces of both gold and silver. 1 The
sinters also contain gold and silver.
The ground around the springs is generally very hot ; and all
attempts to develop the quicksilver deposits have been frustrated
by the large volumes of hot water encountered at shallow depths
below the surface.
The district has been examined at different times by Captain
Hutton, Sir James Hector, A. M'Kay, and the author ; but the
best description is that of Andre P. Griffiths, who conducted
extensive prospecting and mining operations there in 1895 and
1898.
The mining operations and borings disclosed many important
details, which could not be gathered from a surface examina-
tion.
The iron pyrites occurs in masses near the basalt, and also fill-
ing cracks and fissures in that rock. The thickness of the masses
varies from 3 inches to 3 feet, but their other dimensions are
extremely irregular.
Close to the pyritic masses there is a hard, white siliceous
sinter, from 8 to 10 inches thick, which Griffiths found to
contain gold and silver in places. One assay of the sinter gave a
1 Andre P. Griffiths, "The Ohaeawai Quicksilver Deposits," Trans. New
Zealand Institute Mining Eng., vol. ii. p. 48.

--- Page Break ---
118 MINING GEOLOGY.
value of .3 per ton, but unfortunately the proportions of the
gold and silver are not given.
1
The cinnabar generally occurs lining small cavities and cracks
in the solidified muds and sinters surrounding the original fissures
in the basalt. It also occurs impregnating the sinter in an ex-
tremely finely divided form.
Sulphur occurs throughout the sinter in larger proportion than
either the cinnabar or pyrites.
The hot springs give off large quantities of H2S, and occasion-
ally a little steam. The gas escaping through the water of the
pools and small streams is partially oxidised liberating sulphur,
which imparts a milky white colour to the pools, locally known
as white lakes.
The beaches of the so-called white lakes consist of sulphur,
mixed with magnetic ironsand, and a small proportion of alum.
Sulphur is also being sublimed, at the vents or openings in the
rocks, from which H2S and S02 gases escape.
The prospecting work conducted by Griffiths disclosed some
interesting features.
A deposit of cinnabar and pyrites crops out at the foot of the
hills, to the south-west of the main deposits. A shaft was sunk
near it, and cut the lode at a depth of 35 feet. The ore was 2
feet thick, and consisted of small crystals of pyrites cemented by
cinnabar. At this depth there was a strong evolution of H2S,
and the heat of the rocks increased so rapidly with the depth
that mining was extremely difficult.
It is noteworthy, as showing the recent formation of the cin-
nabar, that near the outcrop of this lode was found the charred
trunk of a tree, partially embedded in hard siliceous mud. The
trunk and roots of the tree were coated with a thin film of cin-
nabar, as also were some pieces of fossil kauri gum found near
the roots.
In a small trench sunk over a fumarole, the temperature of the
rock at a depth of 10 feet was found to be 185 Fahr.
No. 1 bore-hole, cased with 3-inch piping, was put down to a
depth of 104 feet, where it encountered the edge of the basalt.
At the same time it struck a fissure, from which hot mud was
projected a height of 60 feet above the surface for about forty-
eight hours.
The mud was succeeded by boiling water, charged with H2S
gas, which was found to issue at a pressure of 30 Ib. per square
inch.
Griffiths further mentions that the richest deposits of cinnabar
were found in close proximity to the hottest fumaroles, and that
1 Andre P. Griffiths, loc. cit., p. 50.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 119
at very shallow depths a temperature was soon reached which
precluded mining operations being carried on.
The Ohaeawai Hot Springs cinnabar deposits, although never
likely to be turned to economic account, are of great scientific im-
portance from the light which they throw upon the processes of
ore-formation by volcanic after-actions.
The deposits are still in process of formation, and metallic
sulphides have been, and are still being, deposited in underground
fissures, and at the surface, together with the sinters, which form
the matrix.
The hot springs and fumaroles owe their existence to the
eruption of the basalt, but the basalt is manifestly not the source
of the metals. The source may not be deep seated, but that it
exists at some distance below the flow of basalt is almost certain.
The waters of the Ohaeawai Springs were found by Captain
Mutton, in 1870, to contain zinc, manganese, silica, free sulphur,
and hydrochloric acids, but no traces of mercury.
1
A sample of the water analysed by W. Skey, in 1896, gave the
following results :
Grains per gallon.
Protoxide of iron, . . . 2'23
Lime, .... 5'97
Magnesia,
. . . . 1*15
Silica, .... 3-10
Sulphuric acid,
. . . 13'60
Hydrochloric acid, . . . 66*91
Sulphuretted hydrogen,
. . traces
Alkalies, . . . . 41-66
Ammonia,.... traces
Organic matter, . . . traces
Abundant evidence of the hydrothermal origin of veins travers-
ing eruptive rocks is also obtainable in Europe and America.
In several of the mines in the Comstock lode, ascending thermal
waters were encountered in the deep workings, and seriously im-
peded mining operations.
2
The water, which flooded the Gold Hill mines, issued from a
bore-hole in the Yellow Jacket shaft, at a depth of 3080 feet. It
had a temperature of 170 F., and was heavily charged with
hydrogen sulphide.
3
1
F. W. Button, "On the Occurrence of Native Mercury near Pakaraka,
Bay of Islands," Trans. New Zealand Institute, vol. iii. p. 251, 1871.
2 Clarence King, U.S. Geological Expl&mtimi of 40th Parallel, 1879,
p. 87.
3
George F. Becker, "Geology of the Comstock Lode," U.S. Geol. Survey,
1882, p. 230.

--- Page Break ---
120 MINING GEOLOGY.
Baron von Richthofen,
1 who examined the Comstock lode, at
a time when no abnormal temperature was noticeable, ascribed the
origin of the lode to earlier solfataric action.
The quicksilver mines at Sulphur Bank, in California, furnish
important evidence in relation to the genesis of ore-deposits.
At this place the basement rocks are slate and sandstones,
overlain by a freshwater formation, which in turn is capped by
a flow of basalt. The geologic features are almost identical with
those existing at Ohaeawai.
The sandstones and slates are broken and fissured in such a
way as to form a breccia. The interspaces are filled partly with
a still soft or already indurated siliceous paste, containing finely
disseminated metallic sulphides, and partly with cinnabar, for the
most part in coherent crusts.2
In the same mine the basalt is reduced to a porous mass,
and traversed by irregular fissures, filled with sulphur and
cinnabar.3
Hot mineral water and gases, carrying H2S, force their way
through the interstices of the deposit in the fissured sandstones
and slates.
The silica deposits are found in all stages of consolidation, from
a gelatinous mass to chalcedony, and alternate with layers of
metallic sulphides, consisting of cinnabar and pyrites.
Unfortunately no information is obtainable as to the nature of
the freshwater formation lying between the Cretaceous sandstone
and basalt.
According to Becker, the hot water is rich in chlorides, borax,
and sodium carbonate. The gases liberated from the water con-
sisted of 893 parts of C02, 2 parts of H2S, 79 parts of marsh gas
(CH4), and 25 parts of nitrogen in 1000 parts.
According to Dr Melville, the marcasite, associated with the
cinnabar, contained traces of gold and copper; and in the
efflorescence from the mine workings, Becker detected traces of
cobalt and nickel.
In the upper zone only sulphur was found ; lower down sulphur
and cinnabar ; and in depth, cinnabar and pyrites occurring upon
or within deposits of silica.
The Steamboat Springs, in Nevada, furnish equally important
1 F. von Kichthofen, The Comstock Lode : Its Character and Probable Mode
of Continuance in Depth, San Francisco, 1866, p. 54.
2 J. Le Conte, "On Mineral Veins now in progress at Steamboat Springs
compared with the same at Sulphur Bank," Am. Jour, of Science, vol. xxv.
p. 404.
3 Professor F. Posepny, "The Genesis of Ore Deposits," Trans. American
last. Mining Eng., vol. xxiii. p. 197.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 121
evidence of vein-filling by hot-spring action. They have been
fully described by Le Conte,
1
Becker,
2 and other writers.
In a valley surrounded with eruptive rocks and underlain by
altered sediuientaries, believed to be of archsean age, thermal
springs issue from several points from north and south fissures.
The floor of the valley is covered, in places, with a sheet of
calcareous sinter, in which there are many fissures, here and there
still open, but mostly closed by the deposit of silica on their walls.
From some of the springs hot vapours and gases, chiefly C02
and H2S, still issue.
Becker found, in the mineral water, small amounts of mercury
sulphide and sodium sulphide.
About a mile to the west of the main group there are similar
fissures yielding steam and CO.,. In the sinters of these occur
several metallic sulphides.
Becker analysed the filling of several fissures, and found,
besides hydrated ferric oxide, lead, copper and mercury sulphides,
gold and silver, and traces of zinc, manganese, cobalt, and nickel.
The occurrence of metallic sulphides in the sinters at Sulphur
Bank, Steamboat Springs, and Ohaeawai Hot Springs ; the
mushroom-capped lodes at Waihi and Great Barrier Island ; the
tree-stems replaced by sulphides, found in veins at great depths
below the present surface, afford conclusive evidence of the filling
of veins by hot ascending waters and gases in areas occupied by
late eruptive rocks.
It is a notorious circumstance that ore-deposits are most
common in the neighbourhood of extended zones of igneous rocks,
as in Hungary, Transylvania, Nevada, Colorado, and New Zealand,
where the vein-bearing rocks are principally andesite, phonolite,
and trachyte. In other rocks veins are fewer and more scattered.
For veins in the altered later eruptives Lindgren suggests the
name propylite-veins, but it is doubtful whether the genetic
difference between them and true fissure-veins is sufficiently
marked to justify the distinction. Moreover, the roots of propylite-
veins would be difficult to distinguish from fissure-veins connected
with a plutonic intrusion.
Professor Suess,
3
speaking of the importance of the role
played by the waning phases of volcanic phenomena in the
formation of mineral-veins, says,
"Hot springs may be taken as
1 J. Le Conte, "On Mineral Veins now in Progress at Steamboat Springs
compared with the same at Sulphur Bank," Am. Jour, of Science, vol. xxv.
p. 424.
-G. F. Becker, "Geology of the Quicksilver Deposits of the Pacific
Slope," U.S. Geol. Survey, Washington, 1888, p. 331.
3 Professor Edward Suess, Lectures, The Geographical Journal, vol. xx.,
Nov. 1902, p. 520.

--- Page Break ---
122 MINING GEOLOGY.
the latest phases of a whole series which led up to the present
deposits of ore."
Action of ascending Alkaline Waters. The waters which rise to
the surface in the region aboutLake Rotorua are alkaline, neutral, or
acid. Shafts and bore-holes put down in the pumiceand rhyolites,
which constitute the great bulk of the rocks in this area, have shown
that the alkaline waters come from a deep-seated source, while the
acid waters have quite a superficial origin. This has led to the
erroneous conclusion that all the waters have not a common origin.
Lake Rotorua is an old crater-lake, the southern shores of which
are crusted over with deposits of sinter formed by the existing hot
springs. Below the sinter there is a thick deposit of purnice, and
below the pumice flows of rhyolite generally pumiceous or pisolitic.
In the pumice there are many deposits of finely disseminated
marcasite which were apparently formed by solfataric action at
some earlier date, in the way that the deposits of pyrites and
cinnabar are now being formed at Ohaeawai Hot Springs, north
of Auckland. The hot ascending alkaline chlorinated waters
become partially or wholly oxidised into sulphates by contact with
the decomposing iron sulphide with formation of free sulphuric
and hydrochloric acids, and liberation of sulphuretted hydrogen
and sulphurous acids. In this way the ascending alkaline waters
that happen to come in contact with masses of pyrites become
oxidised in the superficial layers of the pumice, and rise to the
surface as neutral or acid springs according to the degree of oxida-
tion they have undergone.
Thus, within a small area we have the singular phenomenon of
waters that reach the surface in all conditions ranging from the
highly alkaline to the extremely acid according to the degree of
oxidation of the contained salts.
The composition
J of the salts in the alkaline waters of Rachel
Spring in grains per gallon is as follows :
Sodium chloride,
. . . 69*43
Potassium chloride,
. . . 3*41
Lithium chloride,
. . . traces
Sodium sulphate,
. . . 11 '80
Silica, .... 5-87
Sodium silicate,
. . . 18-21
Calcium silicate,
. , . 4'24
Magnesium silicate, . . . 1'09
Oxides of iron and alumina,
. 2'41
Total,
. . 11^46
1 The Mineral Waters and Health Resorts of New Zealand, DrWohlmann,
Part I., 1904, p. 39.

--- Page Break ---
PLATE II. [Toface page 122.
Phut<), Dr Wohlmann.]
GEYSER-CRATER AT WHAKAKEWAREWA, XEW ZEALAND, SHOWING
SILICEOUS CRUSTIFICATION.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 123
Also sulphuretted hydrogen and carbon dioxide not estimated.
In the majority of cases, the alkaline springs deposit layers of
silica on the walls of the vent and at the surface, the latter often
forming large mushroom-shaped masses.
The composition of the waters of the Priest hot spring, which
may be taken as typical of the acid waters, is as follows :
Grains ]>er gallon.
Sulphate of soda,
. . . 19 "4
,, potash,
. . . traces
lime, . . . 7-41
,, magnesia,
. . 3'03
,, alumina, . . 21 '67
,, iron, . . . 1*24
Sulphuric acid (free),
. . 22'12
Hydrochloric acid (free),
. . 3 '65
Silica, . 18-41
Total,
. . 96-77
The temperature of the alkaline waters, as their deep-seated
origin would suggest, is very high, varying from 180 to 212*
Fahr. ; while that of the acid waters is low, commonly ranging
from 98 to 110 Fahr.
The sinters are found of all degrees of hardness. They are
soft, spongy, and vesicular, or hard and compact. The sinter
encrusting the walls of the fissures and pipes from which the
waters escape at the surface is generally hard and chalcedonic
and arranged in layers which often present a fine ribbon-structure
(Plate II. ). Hand specimens of the harder sinters cannot be
distinguished from much of the ore found at the outcrop of the
Martha lode at Waihi. In places the sinters contain finely dis-
seminated marcasite and a trace of gold and silver.
Around Rotorua we can see ore-deposits of the solfataric class
still in process of formation on a scale of considerable magnitude.
Of the genesis of the ascending alkaline waters nothing is known
at present.
(b) Fumarolic. In this class are grouped deposits of sulphur,
ferric chloride, cupric oxide, and boron salts, formed by the escape
of steam and gaseous emanations in volcanic regions. Of these,
sulphur and boric acid alone are of economic value.
Boron salts are common in many volcanic regions. The entire
production of boric acid from Italy is obtained from the steam
fumaroles in the provinces of Pisa and Grosseto.
Sulphur is sublimed from fumaroles and craters by the mutual
reaction of hydrogen sulphide and sulphur dioxide. It is found

--- Page Break ---
124 MINING GEOLOGY.
impregnating vesicular lavas, tuffs, and siliceous sinters, and mixed
with volcanic muds and gypsum deposits.
The most important known deposits of sulphur occur in Italy,
Spain, Hungary, Chili, Mexico, Japan, United States, and New
Zealand.
The sulphur-deposits of Italy occur in veins or lenticular
masses, in rocks of Miocene age, chiefly in the provinces of
Caltanisetta and Girgenti.
In Nevada, the sulphur-bearing rock occurs in beds lying
between limestone and magnesian rocks.
In Utah, the sulphur occurs associated with gypsum, near an
old crater.
At Tikitere, in New Zealand, there are extensive deposits of
sulphur in an old crater. A large proportion of the sulphur is
the black amorphous variety. The heat of the fumaroles and hot
springs is too great to permit the excavation of the sulphur to a
greater depth than 6 or 8 feet.
At White Island, the deposits of sulphur occur in and around
the crater-lake, mixed with gypsum. The crater-water is hot,
and highly charged with free hydrochloric and sulphuric acids.
The gypsum is deposited in crystalline incrustations, on the sides
and floor of the crater-lake. The source of the lime has not yet
been determined \ but the supply must be constant, as gypsum is
being deposited continuously.
The sulphur is deposited in the water from gas-springs, which
are seen bubbling everywhere in the floor of the lake ; and also
from fumaroles around the margin of the crater.
(c) Contact Metamorphic Deposits- A molten magma
tends to effect changes in the rocks with which it comes in
contact. In the case of overflow magmas, the thermal changes
are generally trifling, and in many cases hardly appreciable.
Even magmas that have cooled in rents in sedimentaries at
shallow depths, have not always caused great changes in the
enclosing rock.
The greatest alteration will, naturally, take place in the case of
magmas that do not reach the surface, but cool slowly under
great pressure.
The greater the mass of the intrusive magma, the slower will
be the rate of cooling; and the slower the rate of cooling, the
longer will the adjacent rocks be heated.
The rate of cooling will be mainly dependent upon the mass
of the intrusion, the distance from the surface, and the relative
thermal conductivity of the adjacent rocks.
The changes effected in the country-rock by the intrusion of an
igneous magma will be mechanical and thermal.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 125
The intruded sedinientaries will be compressed, bent, and more
or less shattered and fissured along the line of intrusion.
The magma will part with its heat by slow radiation into the
adjacent rocks.
The occluded steam and gases in the magma, together with the
steam generated from the water contained in the sedimentaries,
will pass into and permeate the latter, and cause a molecular
rearrangement of the constituent minerals, resulting in what is
termed contact-metamorphisni.
As the igneous magma and the heated sedimentaries cool, they
will contract in area, and when the temperature normal to the
depth has been reached, the contraction will tend to cause the two
rocks to shrink from each other, resulting in the formation of
cavities along the line of contact.
The contraction or decrease in volume of a molten magma in
solidifying, according to the experiments of Barus,
1
Forbes,
2
Delesse,
3 and Cossa,
4 amounts to 4 or 6 per cent, of the original
volume.
Above a temperature of 365 C., and a pressure of 200 atmo-
spheres, water, and all more or less volatile compounds, will exist
as gas.
Aqueous vapours above the critical temperature and under
great pressure, will react as strongly upon the cooling magma as
upon the adjacent rocks. They will possess a solvent power,
which will be greatest at the depth where the highest temperature
and pressure are reached. The pressure will cause the heated
steam and gaseous emanations carrying the heavy metals to
permeate the bedding planes of the sedimentaries, and fill all
accessible cracks and fissures. In this way bed-impregnation may
be effected, and even ore-bodies formed at points some distance
from the genetic eruptive magma.
A decrease in the temperature and pressure will cause the
least soluble substances to be deposited ; and as the tempera-
ture and pressure continue to diminish, the dissolved substances
will be thrown out of solution in the inverse order of their
solubility.
It is manifest that the later phase of the eruptive after-actions
will represent, in a modified form, the waning effects of solfataric
action. The deep-seated conditions will also favour the action of
metasomatic processes in the zone of anamorphism, and veins will
be formed, some of which may rise to the surface.
1
Barus, Phil. Mag. [5
?
, xxxv. p. 173, 1893.
2
Forbes, Chem. Ncws,'Qct. 23, 1868.
3
Delesse, Bull. Soc. Gtol. Francs [2], iv. p. 1380, 1847.
4
Zirkel, Lehrbufh d. Petrographie, i. p. 681, 1893.

--- Page Break ---
126 MINING GEOLOGY.
It is probable that the circulation of the heated mineralised
solutions, in the later phases, will tend to effect a redistribution of
the ores and minerals deposited in the earlier stages. Insome cases,
the ascending waters and gases may reach the zone of surface
circulation, and mix with the meteoric waters, which may then
reappear as hot springs, forming ore-bodies and veins not directly
in contact with the eruptive magma.
Weed and some other writers have made an attempt to
subdivide contact-metamorphic deposits into groups, depending
mainly upon the mode of occurrence. But the form and mode of
distribution may be due to accidents of density or porosity,
composition and hydrous condition of the rocks affected, rather
than differences in genetic formation.
Moreover, the mass of the magma, the weight of superincum-
bent rocks, the amount of heat and subsequent contraction, and
phase of the after-action, are all doubtless contributing factors in
connection with the form and distribution of the heavy metals.
Masses of ore, occurring as contact-deposits, fissure-veins, and
bed-impregnations, in the zone of metamorphism, may all be traced
to the same genetic causes.
Professor L. de Launay, of Paris, supports the views of the school
of De Beaumont and Daubree in respect of the primary influence of
volatile mineralisers emanating from eruptivemagmas. The emana-
tions, he contends, must have prepared the way, by introducing into
the enclosing rocks, or simply by depositing in the vein-fissures,
constituents such as sulphides, fluorides, chlorides, etc., which, subse-
quently dissolved anew by the circulation of superficial waters, have
rendered the latter essential aid in the processes of alteration. 1
The extent of contact-metamorphism effected by the granite
intrusions of Albany, in New Hampshire, was fully investigated by
Hawes.2 His analyses showed a progressive series of changes in
the schists as they approach the granite. The rocks are de-
hydrated, boric and silicic acids have been added to them, and
there appears to have been an infusion of alkali at the time of
contact. He regarded the schists as having been impregnated by
hot vapours and solutions emanating from the granite.
Contact-deposits frequently lie at the boundary between the
eruptive and the country-rock ; also at variable distances from
the eruptive, but never outside the zone of metamorphism.
More particularly, contact-ores occur in limestones, marly and
clay-slates, and are accompanied by the usual contact-minerals,
garnet, vesuvianite, scapolite, wollastonite, augite, mica, horn-
blende, etc., and in clay-slate by chiastolite, etc.
1
L. de Launay, The Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, Discussion, p. 616.
- G. W. Hawes, Amer. Journ. Sci., xxi., 1881, p. 21.

--- Page Break ---
ORE DEPOSITS GENETICALLY CONSIDERED. 127
Contact-ores are principally magnetite and specular iron, but
sulphides of copper, lead, and zinc often occur.
Pyritic contact-deposits are typically represented by those of
Vegsnas, in Norway, Rio Tinto, Tharsis, and San Domingo, in
Spain.
The pyritic ore-mass in Mount Lyell Mine, in Tasmania, is
generally described as a replacement contact-deposit, although its
geologic occurrence does not strictly conform to the common defi-
nition of such a body. Professor Gregory describes it as a boat-
shaped mass, lying between talcose schist and conglomerates.
1
The mine-workings have shown that it gradually tapers down-
wards from the outcrop, being cut off with a rounded base by a
great thrust-plane (loc. cit.).
There are no eruptives in actual contact with the ore-body,
but dykes of diabase and other igneous rocks occur in the district,
at no great distance. The presence of these dykes, and of bands
of schist, impregnated with sulphides, forming fahlbands, would
lead to the belief that at one time there existed channels of com-
munication leading from the eruptive magmas to the vein-cavities.
In all probability the Mount Lyell sulphide ore-bodies and bed-
impregnations were formed in the later, or solfataric stages, of
eruptive after-actions.
(d) Regional Metamorphic Deposits. To this group
belong the deposits of iron-ore which occur in altered sedi-
mentary rocks, generally of older Palaeozoic age.
The iron probably existed originally as sedimentary deposits,
and became concentrated and rearranged under the influence of
the heat, pressure, and solutions, which caused the metamorphisni
of the enclosing rocks.
Examples of deposits of ore due to regional metamorphism, in
which metasomatic processes doubtless took an active part, are
found among the valuable magnetic deposits of Sweden and the
vast specular iron and magnetite masses of Michigan.
Massive aggregates of magnetite are common in chlorite-schist
and mica-schist in all parts of the globe.
Metamorphic rocks also enclose beds of iron pyrites and pyr-
rhotite, the origin of w
r
hich is still obscure.
III. METEORIC WATERS.
(a) Chemical. In this group are included deposits of salt,
borax, nitre, bog-iron ore, and some deposits of gypsum and
manganese.
1
Professor J. W. Gregory, "The Mount Lyell Milling Field," Trans. Aust.
Inst. Min. Eng., vol. i. Part IV., July 1904, p. 281.

--- Page Break ---
128 MINING GEOLOGY.
(b) Mechanical. This group includes all sedimentary rocks
formed by the agency of water in lakes and seas ; also alluvial
drifts, whether loose or compact, of river or lake origin, contain-
ing gold, tin, platinum, and gems ; and ore-bearing sea-beaches
deposits.
IV. ORGANIC.
(a) Vegetable. This group embraces all varieties of mineral
fuel, ranging from peat to anthracite, also graphite, oil-shale,
mineral-oil, and natural gas.
(b) Animal. The minerals included in this subdivision are
limestones, including chalk and mineral phosphates.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VI.
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION.
CONTENTS :
Eruptive Processes Theory of Lateral Secretion Ascension
of Solutions Summary.
THE theories which now receive the most acceptance are as
follows :
I. Eruptive processes
:
(a) Magmatic segregation.
(b) Eruptive after-actions.
II. Lateral secretion.
III. Ascension of solutions.
Eruptive Processes. The importance of the role played by
igneous rocks in the formation of ore-deposits has been specially
urged in late years by Professor Vogt
1 of Christiania, Professor
Kemp
2 of New York, Professor Suess 3 of Vienna, and more
recently by Waldeniar Lindgren
4 and W. H. Weed 5 of the
United States Geological Staff.
Vogt directs renewed attention to the close relationship exist-
ing between ore-deposits and eruptive processes. Ore-deposits
connected with eruptive magmas are grouped by him into two
principal classes as under :
(1) Ore-deposits formed by magmatic segregation.
(2) Ore-deposits formed by eruptive after-actions.
1 Professor J. H. L. Vogt, "Problems in the Origin of Ore Deposits," The
Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 636.
2 J. F. Kemp, "The Role of the Igneous Rocks in the Formation of Veins,"
loc. tit., p. 681 ; also Trans. Ainer. Inst. M.E., vol. xxxii., 1902, p. 681.
3 Professor Edward Suess, Lecture, The Geographical Journal, vol. xx.,
1902, p. 520.
4 WaldemarLindgren, "Character and Genesis of Certain Contact Deposits,"
Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 716.
5 W. H. Weed, " Ore Deposits near Igneous Contacts," Trans. Amcr.
Inst. M.E., vol. xxxiii., 1903.
129 9

--- Page Break ---
130 MINING GEOLOGY.
Ore-deposits belonging to the first group are infrequent, and
therefore economically subordinate in importance to those of the
second group. They include, according to Vogt
:
(a) The occurrences of titanic iron ores in basic and semi-basic
eruptives.
(b) Chromite in peridotite.
(c) Sulphide deposits, including the nickeliferous pyrrhotite of
Sudbury, in Canada.
(d) Platinum-metals in highly basic eruptive rocks.
(e) Copper and metallic nickel iron in serpentinised peridotite.
That sulphides can be segregated from eruptive magmas in the
first concentration has yet to be proved ; and it is still doubtful
how far Vpgt's conclusions respecting the occurrence of sulphide
ore, as a product of primary segregation from a molten magma,
are admissible.
In all cases metasomatic processes are said to have played an
important part in the formation of these valuable deposits.
In the eruptive after-action group, Vogt includes cassiterite
and apatite veins and "
ore-deposits of contact-metamorphic zone."
Cassiterite deposits are everywhere connected with acid erup-
tives, principally granite, and occasionally quartz-porphyry and
rhyolite. Partly for this reason, and partly because of the
characteristic paragenesis of fluoride, borate, and phosphate
minerals, he supports the common view that tin-deposits are
genetically connected with granitic eruptions, and that various
volatile fluorides took part in their formation.
Cassiterite veins were formed, he thinks, by pneumatolytic
processes,
1 that is, by the action of gases and water at high
temperature and pressure.
He further urges that they were formed immediately after the
eruption, and before the complete cooling of the granite, one
proof of which, he thinks, is the occurrence of tin-vein minerals in
veins of pegmatite in the granite.
Cassiterite veins are admittedly independent of the immediately
adjacent country-rock, and for this reason seem to be more nearly
related to deposits of magmatic segregation than to contact-meta-
morphic deposits.
It is probable that the magmatic segregation of chromite in
peridotite was in some cases effected by pneumatolytic agencies
before the complete cooling of the magma. It is not uncommon
to find chromite in vein-like masses that have the appearance of
having been segregated in cavities of contraction in the pasty
1
Pneumatolysis is a term first used by Bunsen to describe the combined
action of gases and water.

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 131
magma. As the agency of underground water cannot have been
active in this class of ore-deposit, the aggregation must have been
effected by metal-bearing steam and gases occluded in the igneous
magma.
Pegmatite veins, while generally connected with granitic
eruptions, seem to be of later formation than the cassiterite veins.
They often pass into quartz and frequently possess sharp, well-
defined walls which suggest their formation in shrinkage cracks
by pneumatohydato-genetic agencies in the waning phases of the
after-actions, developed by the progressive cooling of the eruptive
magma. Teall has suggested that micropegmatite is an eutectic
which crystallises at the lowest possible temperature, and re-
presents in certain rocks the final mother-liquor from which the
other minerals have crystallised out.
The different phases of after-action must necessarily merge into
each other, and hence we may expect to find, as we do, tin-vein
minerals and even cassiterite in veins of pegmatite.
Among ore-deposits of contact-metamorphic origin, Vogt in-
cludes the ore-bodies which occur within the metamorphosed
contact-zone of deep eruptives, especially granite.
He distinguishes several types of contact-deposit. The
Christiania type includes iron-ore deposits that appear to have
been formed before the solidification of the granitic magma.
These ores are never found in the granite, but always in the
adjacent rocks. If they had been introduced after the cooling of
the magma, they would also have been deposited in the granite.
The eruptive magma is believed to be the source of the
metal which is expelled in the heated steam into the surround-
ing rocks.
In 1902, Weed 1
proposed the following provisional genetic
classification based on that of Vogt
:
I. Igneous (magmatic segregation)
(a) Siliceous.
(b) Basic.
II. Igneous (emanation deposits)
(a) Contact-metamorphic deposits.
(b) Veins (related to magmatic veins and division IV.).
III. Fumarolic.
IV. Gas-aqueous (pneumatohydato-genetic) deposits
(a) Filling deposits.
(b) Replacement deposits.
1 W. H. Weed, "Ore Deposits near Igneous Contacts," Trans. Amer.
Inst. M.E., vol. xxxiii., 1903, p. 715.

--- Page Break ---
132 MINING GEOLOGY.
V. Meteoric waters
(a) Underground.
(b) Superficial.
In this classification the major subdivisions are based upon
magmatic segregation at one end and cold aqueous deposition at
the other, with intermediate groups characteristic of the different
phases of eruptive after-actions.
Weed divides magmatic segregations into two groups, namely,
Siliceous and Basic. The latter embraces deposits of iron, copper,
etc., found at igneous borders and as dykes ; and the former, the
ore-bearing pegmatites, with quartz-veins as extreme examples.
1
This is a distinct departure from Vogt's conception of magmatic
segregation. It is almost certain that the segregation of ores
from basic magmas, and the formation of cassiterite and pegmatite
veins, are genetically connected with the after-actions of deep-
seated eruptions, and as such must, in some degree, be related and
merge into each other. But this genetic connection, while it
increases the difficulty of formulating a satisfactory classification,
hardly justifies the subdivision proposed by Weed.
The synthetic experiments of Daubree seem to support the
views of Vogt, Beck, and other observers who maintain that
cassiterite and pegmatite veins are formed by gaseous and aque-
ous emanations, and not by direct segregation.
Gold is commonly associated with acid rocks, but it does not
occur in such a manner as to suggest direct segregation. In
Queensland, New South Wales, and New Zealand it is found in
quartz-veins in granite and quartz-porphyry, but in these cases the
veins manifestly fill contraction-cracks.
Weed strongly dissents from the view expressed by Van Hise,
that meteoric waters are an important creative factor in the for-
mation of ore-veins. He thinks, however, that primary hot ore-
bearing solutions and hot vapours may rise into the zone of
circulating meteoric waters, heating the latter and charging them
Avith metallic salts and such active mineral solvents as fluorine,
chlorine, and boron. He summarises his views relating to the
formation of contact-deposits as follows :
"Contact metamorphic ore-deposits occur about the margin
of intrusive masses of granular igneous rock, either at the actual
contact or in the zone of metamorphosed sedimentaries. The
deposits of economic value occur only where strata or blocks of
impure limestone have been crystallised as garnetiferous or
actinolite-calcite rocks, with consequent porosity. The ore-
minerals are intimately associated with these aluminous silicates,
1
Weed, loc. cit., p. 717.

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 133
and may be either intergrown, or inetasomatic replacements, or
the result of interstitial filling with partial replacement. The
conversion to garnet-epidote-calcite, etc., rock was complete
before the consolidation of the igneous rock. The ore-minerals
were introduced in gases and vapours solfataric emanations
from the eruptive masses, of which they constitute pneumatolytic
after-actions, or by hot circulating waters given off by the cooling
igneous mass. This theory of the genesis being true, the
deposits should extend downward in depth to the granular rock."
Professor Kemp, of New York, in a valuable paper on "The
Role of Igneous Rocks in the Formation of Veins,"
l maintains that
the circulation of ground-water is insufficient to account for the
majority of the ore-deposits in the United States. He supports
the petrological view, that igneous rocks must have furnished not-
only the metallic contents, but a large proportion of the waters
which brought the metals into their present position.
His conception of ore-formation is as follows :
(1) Igneous rocks contain the metals and elements of the
gangue minerals more abundantly than do sedimentary
rocks.
(2) Igneous rocks are richly provided with vapours, which come
up with them from great depths. Igneous rocks are
enormous reservoirs of energy.
(3) Igneous districts, or districts of combined igneous and
sedimentary rocks, are almost always the geological for-
mation in which the veins occur.
(4) The vapours and solutions from intruded igneous rocks are
pre-eminently favourable chemical reagents.
(5) Observations in deep mines, and the data from very deep
wells, indicate the general absence of free water in the
rocks below moderate depths, except in regions of ex-
piring vulcanism. This is a grave objection to the con-
ception of universal ground-water.
(6) Capillary attraction is largely an ascensive force, and of
problematic existence with increasing pressure. Artesian
reservoirs of themselves are unfavourable to extended
circulation. There is a strange absence of the original
content of water in deep-seated sediments. Standing
water in abandoned shafts is strong evidence of the im-
penetrability of rocks.
(7) Hot springs are necessarily connected with an abnormal
rise of the isogeotherms, and this can only be explained
by intruded igneous rocks, or by faults or shattering.
1
J. F. Kemp, Trans. Amer. Inst. M.K, vol. xxxii., 1902, p. 681.

--- Page Break ---
134 MINING GEOLOGY.
The latter do not compare with the former as an efficient
cause.
Theory of Lateral Secretion. According to this theory, it
is assumed that meteoric waters percolating through the country-
rock, by the aid of carbon dioxide and alkalies, dissolve out
certain constituents which are afterwards deposited in fissures,
thereby forming mineral-veins.
The origin of the theory is unknown, but it is certain that
Delius in 1770, Gerharde in 1781, and Lasius in 1789, were
supporters of it, the latter basing his conceptions upon a careful
examination of the veins of the Hartz mountains. 1
In 1847, Professor Bischof, of Bonn, a distinguished geologist
and chemist, in his fascinating Text-book of Chemical and Physical
Geology, discusses the chemical processes which take place when
meteoric waters and different kinds of aqueous solutions come in
contact with rocks. His work created a new scientific basis of
research in this branch of economic geology. He contended that
ores were obtained by leaching from the rocks traversed by the
veins, and suggested the possibility of the vein-constituents
being found in the adjacent rocks.
In 1855, Forchhammer, the famous chemist of Copenhagen,
found traces of lead, copper, and zinc in the roofing slates of
North Wales, a discovery which was held to afford conclusive
proof of the origin of ore-veins by processes of lateral secretion.
In 1873, Professor F. Sandberger, of Wurzburg, dissatisfied with
the meagre results obtained from the examination of sedimentary
rocks, directed his attention to a systematic chemical investigation
of the rocks traversed by ore-veins in different mining centres in
the Black Forest, and of the vein-stuff itself.
In clay-slate he discovered copper, zinc, lead, arsenic, antimony,
tin, cobalt, and nickel ; in sandstone, lead and copper ; while
titanic and phosphoric acids were found to be present everywhere
in small quantity.
Sandberger's results showed that a close relationship existed
between vein-contents and the country-rock ; but he was by no
means satisfied as to the origin of the heavy metals. He accord-
ingly extended his investigation to an examination of the con-
stituents of igneous rocks.
He crushed large samples of rock and separated the constituent
minerals by solutions of different densities. Samples of the
individual crystallised silicates thus isolated were subjected to
careful analysis, and by this means were found all the usual
elements present in metalliferous veins.
1
George "Lasius, "Observations on the Hartz Mountains," Ores and
Minerals, vol. ii., Hanover, 1789.

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 135
Thus in olivine he found iron, nickel, copper, and cobalt; in
augite, copper, cobalt, iron, nickel, lead, tin, and zinc ; and in the
micas many base metals. Gold, mercury, and tellurium were not
sought for.
In 1880, Sandberger announced his belief that the mineral
contents of veins were derived, not from some unknown depth,
but from the immediate wall-rock.
Gold-bearing veins are common in slates and sandstones of
marine origin ; and as sea-water, according to the announcement
of Sonstadt in 1872, and of Professor Liversedge in 1893, contains,
according to the latter, amounts ranging from 0'54 to 1 grain to
the ton, it is held by the exponents of lateral secretion that the
sea is, therefore, the source of the gold in veins traversing marine
sedimentaries.
It is maintained that when sediments are formed on the floor
of the sea they must necessarily entangle a certain proportion of
sea-water, and that when these sediments become consolidated
the gold must remain in them.
The theory of lateral secretion received a new impulse from the
researches of Sandberger. It seemed competent to explain the
origin of many ore-veins, and although strongly opposed by
Professor Stelzner, of Freiberg, and Professor Posepny, of Przi-
bram, it found much support in America, in a more or less
modified form.
Thus Emmons,
1
discussing the manner in which he considers
the Leadville ore-deposits were produced, summarises his views
on ore-formation in general as follows :
(1) Ore-deposits have been deposited from solution, rarely in
open cavities, most frequently by metasoniatic interchange.
(2) Solutions do not necessarily come directly upwards, but
simply follow the easiest channels of approach.
(3) The material was derived from sources within limited and
conceivable distance, very often the older intrusive rocks.
Emmons, while supporting the principle of lateral secretion,
disclaims the narrow views of Sandberger, who limited the source
of the vein-contents to the wall-rock in immediate contact with
the vein.2
In the critical discussion which followed the publication of
Professor Posepny's paper on "The Genesis of Ore Deposits," in
1893, Blake and Winslow reaffirmed their belief that the zinc- and
lead-ores of Wisconsin were formed by lateral secretion.3
1
S. F. Emmons, "The Genesis of Certain Ore Deposits," Trans. Am.
List. M.E., vol. xxx. p. 125.
2 The Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 199.
3 Loc. tit., p. 188.

--- Page Break ---
136 MINING GEOLOGY.
Becker, while strongly dissenting from Posepny's view that
metasomatic replacement was incapable of producing such pro-
nounced ore-bodies as those at Leadville, makes a clear statement
of the supposed operation of metasomatic processes. He says,"
Replacement, like solution, must occur along fissures or channels,
and metasomatic ore-bodies will present analogies in form to the
open spaces of caves of solution "
(loc. cit., p. 206).
Rickard discusses the problem of ore-formation from a wide
standpoint, and is not a dogmatic supporter of the extreme doc-
trines of either ascension or lateral secretion.1 He affirms that
there is no ground for the belief in the existence of a reservoir of
water at great depth, and maintains that all ascending water
must at one time have been descending water.
This last can only be true in regard to meteoric waters. So far
as the existence of deep-seated water is concerned, his view is not
in accord with the hydro-fusion theory of modern petrologists.
Rickard, possessing a personal knowledge of the goldfields of
Australia and New Zealand, discusses the probable origin of the
veins of the Thames goldfield in the latter country ; and in the
main agrees with Captain Hutton that they were formed by pro-
cesses of lateral secretion by thermal waters.
Professor J. Le Conte, in a carefully prepared thesis, combats
the extreme views of both Posepny and Sandberger (loc. cit., p.
270). He makes an earnest attempt to combine what is true in
each, and reconcile their differences. It is manifest, however,
that he leans favourably to the side of lateral secretion processes,
although not defined as such.
He considers both sides partly right and both partly wrong.
Ascensionists, he thinks, are right, in deriving metals mainly
by ascending solutions from great depths, but wrong in imagin-
ing these depths to be an exceptionally metalliferous barysphere ;
and wrong in not allowing subordinate contributions by lateral
currents from the wall-rock higher up.
The lateral-secretionists, on the other hand, are right, he thinks,
in deriving metals by leaching from the wall-rock, but wrong in
not making the thermosphere the main source.
Le Conte succinctly summarises his views in the following
terms :
(1) Ore-deposits, using the term in its widest sense, may take
place from many kinds of waters, but especially from
alkaline solutions; for these are the natural solvents of
metallic sulphides, and metallic sulphides are usually the
original form of such deposits.
1
Loc. cit., pp. 190 and 211.

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 137
(2) They may take place from waters at any temperature and
pressure, but mainly from those at high temperature and
under heavy pressure, because, on account of their great
solvent power, such waters are heavily freighted with
metals.
(3) The depositing waters may be moving in any direction up-
coming, horizontally moving, or even sometimes down-
going, but mainly up-coming, because by losing heat and
pressure at every step, such waters are sure to deposit
their contents abundantly.
(4) Deposits may take place in any kind of waterway in open
fissures, in incipient fissures, joints, cracks, and even in
porous sandstones, but especially in great open fissures,
because these are the main highways of ascending waters
from the greatest depths.
(5) Deposits may be found in many regions, and in many kinds
of rocks, but mainly in mountain regions, and in meta-
morphic and igneous rocks, because the thermosphere is
nearer the surface, and ready access thereto through
great fissures is found mostly in these regions and in these
rocks.
Professor C. R. Van Hise, in a classic paper on "Some Principles
controlling Deposition of Ores,"
l defines his views in the follow-
ing sentences :
(1) That the greater number of ore-deposits is the result of the
work of underground water.
(2) That the material for ore-deposits is derived from rocks
within the zone of fracture.
(3) That by far the major part of the water depositing ores is
meteoric.
(4) That the flowage of water underground is caused chiefly by
gravitative stress.
(5) That the waters which perform the first work in the genesis
of ore-deposits are descending waters.
(6) Lateral secretion is an essential step in the first concentra-
tion of ore-deposits. Many ores in their first concentration
are precipitated by ascending waters.
(7) That sulphide ores are generally deposited by ascending
waters in trunk channels. It is believed that the down-
ward transportation of metals is the most important of
the causes explaining the character of the upper portions
of lodes; but whether this be so or not, their peculiar
1
Loc. cit., p. 282 j also Trans. Amer. Inst. M.E., vol. xxx., 1900, p. 27.

--- Page Break ---
138 MINING GEOLOGY.
characters are certainly due to the effect of descending-
waters.
(8) That the majority of ore-deposits, if not all, are partly
deposited in pre-existing openings, and are partly replace-
ments of wall-rocks.
From the above he seems to attach too little importance to the
genetic connection existing between ore-deposits and eruptive
processes ; and places much dependence upon the formative power
of meteoric waters.
Professor Kemp
l contends that mining operations in America
show conclusively that mines become drier with increasing depth ;
and deep mining in South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand
adds confirmation to this view. The dryness of mines in depth
seems to destroy the foundations of Van Hise's main contention
respecting the underground circulation of meteoric water.
Van Hise admits that there are ore-deposits which have a direct
igneous origin, but thinks they are of limited extent. In his
rejoinder to Kemp he seems to somewhat modify his former con-
ception with respect to the role of meteoric waters in vein-forma-
tion, and admits that the role of igneous intrusions may be very
considerable.2
It has been suggested by the opponents of lateral secretion
that the metals contained in the silicate minerals of eruptive rocks
are not primary, but secondary, constituents. According to their
view, lateral secretion is only a process of concentration.
Ascension Of Solutions. According to this theory, it is
assumed that the material which fills a lode has been brought in
solution from great depths, and not from the rocks in the immediate
vicinity of the lode.
In his classic memoir on The Genesis of Ore Deposits, the
late Professor Posepny, an ardent supporter of the ascension hypo-
thesis, laid great stress upon the occurrence of sulphur and
cinnabar at Sulphur Bank impregnating a decomposed basalt, and
still mildly in process of formation from gaseous emanations and
hot mineral waters.
Similar conditions exist at Steamboat Springs in Western
Nevada, where we have an example of a mineral vein in process
of formation. The matrix is banded siliceous vein-stone contain-
ing iron and copper sulphides, sulphur, and metallic gold.
Sandberger, who was an equally strenuous supporter of lateral
secretion, objected to this view, on the ground that he knew of no
F. Kemp, "The R&le of Aqueous Rocks in the Formation of Veins,'
. 681.
Ore Deposits, 1901, Discussion, p. 763.
The Genesis of Ore Deposits, 1901, p. 681.
2 C. R. Van Hise, The Genesis of
i

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 139
spring which deposited mineral incrustations on the walls of their
channels. He regarded the Sulphur Bank and Steamboat Springs
phenomena as exceptional.
Becker, who made a special examination of the deposits at
Sulphur Bank and Steamboat Springs, strongly opposed the views
of the extreme ascensionists. And with regard to the origin of
the deposits, he expressed the following views :
"The evidence
is overwhelming that the cinnabar, pyrite, and gold of the quick-
silver mines of the Pacific slope reached their present positions
in hot solutions of double sulphides, which were leached out from
masses underlying the granite and the granite itself." l Further
on he says
: "I regard many of the gold veins of California as
having an origin entirely similar to that of the quicksilver
deposits."
Becker's views postulate a new hypothesis, which lies midway
between the ascension and lateral-secretion theories, and expresses
our present knowledge of ore-formation more nearly than the
extreme views of Posepny and Sandberger.
According to the definition of lateral secretion by the latter,
the descending waters became charged with mineral matter by
leaching the rocks in the region of vadose circulation. On the
other hand, Posepny assumed that the ascending waters became
charged at great depths by coming in contact with a deep-seated
but hypothetical repository of metalliferous matter.
The modification suggested by Becker favours the ascension
theory, and differs only from the lateral-secretion hypothesis in
assuming a deeper source for the mineral contents of the vein-
matter.
Summary. From the data recorded in the preceding pages,
we may deduce the following conclusions respecting the genesis of
ore-deposits
:
(1) That the majority of ore-deposits are genetically connected
with igneous intrusions which may be plutonic or volcanic.
(2) That circulating underground waters and gases are the
principal agents concerned in the dissolution, primary
concentration, and deposition of vein-matter.
(3) That ore-deposits do not necessarily occupy pre-existing
fissures and cavities.
(4) That vein-filling was in many cases effected by metasomatic
replacement.
(5) That vein-filling waters are ascending waters, but not
necessarily deep-seated.
1 G. F. Becker, "The Geology of the Quicksilver Deposits of the Pacific
Slope," United States Geol. Survey, Monograph xxiii., 1888, p. 449.

--- Page Break ---
140 MINING GEOLOGY.
(6) That the mineral contents are derived from rocks contiguous
to the zone of fracture or zone of metamorphism.
(7) That the accessory agents of dissolution are heat and
pressure, aided by dissolved alkaline minerals.
(8) That precipitation from the ascending waters takes place
in more or less orderly horizontal zones in accordance
with the laws governing solution and precipitation.
(9) That secondary enrichment is, in the majority of cases, due
to the migration of mineral contents from a higher to a
lower level, through the agency of descending meteoric
waters.
The theories of lateral secretion and ascension of solutions are
based on the fundamental assumption that the mineral matter
filling cavities was deposited from circulating waters. Their
differences lie principally in the different conceptions as to the
direction and operation of the circulating liquids.
(1) The lateral-secretion theory supposes
:
(a) That the filling of cavities was the work of descending
meteoric waters.
(b) That the filling matter was principally obtained from
the adjacent rocks by a process of leaching.
(2) The ascension theory assumes :
(a) That the filling of veins was effected by deep circulat-
ing waters, ascending through open, or partially
open fissures.
(b) That the mineral and metallic contents were derived
from a deep-seated mineralised zone.
Many writers assume that ascending and descending waters are
merely units in what may be termed a hydraulic circuit, the
interchange being caused by gravitation, assisted by capillary action
and the difference of temperature of the ascending and descending
waters.
Much of the movement, it is claimed, is necessarily lateral, and
towards channels filled with ascending waters.
It was maintained by Professor Posepny and Dr Raymond
that descending waters were merely oxidising and incapable of
depositing sulphides. This contention has, however, been success-
fully disproved by Emmons, Becker, Van Hise, and other American
geologists, who have shown the existence of secondary sulphides
both above and below water-level, or in what may be termed the
zone of vadose circulation.

--- Page Break ---
THEORIES OF VEIN FORMATION. 141
Professor Daubree always maintained that metallic sulphides
could not be deposited without the agency of organic matter.
But Skey, as far back as 1870, proved experimentally that "from
its solution of carbonate of soda, potash, and ammonia, gold is
reduced by sulphides, but not from its solutions in alkaline
sulphides."
l He found that one grain of iron pyrites was able to
reduce 8-5 grains of gold.
1
Skey, Trans. New Zealand Inst., vol. iii. p. 226, 1870.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VII.
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED
ECONOMICALLY.
CONTENTS : Alum Aluminium Antimony Arsenic Asbestos
Asphaltum Barytes Bismuth Borax Cement Chromium Coal
Cobalt Copper Cryolite Diamond Fireclay Fluorite Gold-
Graphite Gypsum Iron Lead Magnesite Manganese Mica
Molybdenum Nickel Oil Shale Petroleum Phosphate Rock
Platinum Quicksilver Silver Slate Sulphur Talc Tin-
Tungsten Zinc.
EVERY mining student should possess a general knowledge of
the conditions under which the commonly useful ores and minerals
occur in Nature ; and of the market condition, quality, and value
of the minerals intended for metallurgical and manufacturing
purposes.
The market values are subject to continual fluctuations, and
the quotations given must be regarded more as a guide than a
standard of selling-prices. The minerals and ores are dealt with
in alphabetic order.
ALUM.
The principal sources of alum are alunite, alum shales, bauxite,
and cryolite.
Alunite occurs in veins and masses in eruptive rocks, and for
the most part in acid lavas of later date, in which it has probably
been formed by metasomatic replacement attending waning
solfataric action.
At Tolfa, near Civita Vecchia, in the neighbourhood of Rome, it
occurs as thin, irregular veins, which are supposed to have been
formed in contraction-cracks by the action of hot waters and
sulphurous gases upon the felspars of the containing trachyte.
An important deposit of alunite occurs at Bullahdelah
Mountain, in New South Wales. It consists of minerals ranging
from pure alunite to an impure form containing 40 per cent, of
silica. The deposit is over a mile long, nearly three-quarters of a
142

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 143
mile wide, and the thickest baud of stone varies from 60 to 70
yards wide. It is genetically connected with felsitic dykes, which
traverse Carboniferous slates. The average composition of the
mineral is as follows :
Per cent.
Water, . . . . 7'80
Alumina, .... 3470
Iron oxide, . . . .1-00
Potash, .... 6-10
Sulphuric acid, . . . 32'30
Silica, .... 18-10
100-00
Alum is obtained by calcining and washing alunite ; and
evaporating the liquors.
Natural alum is obtained in considerable quantities in England
and Scotland from the coal-shales and alum-clays.
Bauxite is an important source of alum and aluminium sulphate
(concentrated alum) in America, France, and Germany. It .is an
aluminium-iron hydrate an aluminous form of limonite contain-
ing generally from 50 to 60 per cent, of alumina (A12 3).
Of American bauxite, from 65 to 70 per cent, is produced
in the State of Georgia, and the balance in Arkansas and
Alabama.
The bauxite deposits in the Department of Var, in France, are
mostly massive oolitic, and cemented by carbonate of lime. They
occur in old lake basins, extending westward from Cannet du Luc.
The origin of the mineral is still doubtful ; but by some writers it
is supposed to have been genetically connected with solfataric
action in and around the ancient lakes.
At Baux, near Aries, the bauxite occurs oolitic, and as grains in
a compact limestone.
Only the varieties of bauxite free from iron oxide can be utilised
in the manufacture of alum. The purer grades are used for the
preparation ofaluminium hydrate, from which the metalaluminium
is manufactured.
Cryolite, another important source of alum, still continues to be
derived from the mines at Ivigtut, in Greenland.
The alunite of New South Wales is valued at about =3 per ton.
The American domestic bauxite ranges in value from 14s. to
18s. per ton. French bauxite is delivered at American seaports
at a somewhat lower rate than the domestic mineral on account of
the railroad-freight charges.

--- Page Break ---
144 MINING GEOLOGY.
ALUMINIUM.
This metal is largely manufactured in Germany, America, and
France from bauxite principally produced in the Department of
Var, in Southern France. (For Bauxite, see "
Alum.")
ANTIMONY.
The only commercial ore of antimony is the sulphide, antimonite ;
the oxides are secondary products, found near the outcrop. The
sulphide generally occurs in veins in schist, slate, and sandstone ;
and also associated to a small extent with ores of lead, bismuth,
and copper.
The principal producers of antimonite are France, Algeria, Italy,
Mexico, Turkey, Hungary, China, and Canada. Considerable
deposits occur in New South Wales and New Zealand, but the ore
is generally of too low a grade to be payable.
The ore must be very pure to be worth handling. When under
25 per cent, in the mine it is practically impossible to separate the
ore from its gangue.
Antimony-ores are bought by smelters on a basis of 45 per cent,
of metal, each unit above that being paid for at schedule rates.
Under 45 per cent, there is a discount until the limit is reached,
below which the ore has no commercial value. English smelters
do not care to touch ores containing under 40 per cent, of metal.
In America, an ore to be marketable must contain not less than
50 per cent, of antimony.
Ores intended for the English market must be free from lead,
arsenic, copper, and zinc. One per cent, of lead will render the
ore unsaleable.
The size of the ore also affects the market value of the dressed
material, which should not be broken in pieces smaller than a
hazel-nut.
An allowance is made for gold and silver when present in
sufficient quantity to pay for extraction. The smelters' payments
are based on the dry weight. The percentage of metal should be
determined by the wet assay, the fire assay not being sufficiently
reliable.
Antimony is mostly used for the manufacture of type-metal.
Its value fluctuates considerably
ARSENIC.
The arsenious oxide of commerce is manufactured from arsenical
pyrites, which is generally mined in association with ores of gold,

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 145
copper, or tin. Mispickel is largelyproduced in Germany, France,
Canada, and England.
ASBESTOS.
This mineral is found as veins in serpentine. Over 90 per cent,
of the world's supply comes from Canada, and the balance from
Russia, United States, Italy, and Cape Colony.
The largest Canadian quarries are situated in the Province of
Quebec. The serpentine there is intersected with numerous veins
of chrysolite, varying from a mere streak to 6 inches in width. The
common width is 1 inch to 2 inches, and the veins cross and
recross each other at every angle.
Asbestos is classed in three grades Nos. 1, 2, and 3. No. 1
the longest and finest fibre, from f inches upwards is used for
spinning purposes. No. 2 is inferior to No. 1, being harsh and
less flexible, or discoloured and short, but unbroken from about J
inch upwards. It is used principally for engine-packing. No. 3
contains still shorter fibre, mixed with serpentine and iron oxides.
When cleaned, it is used in the manufacture of cardboard,
fire-proof paper, etc. The relative value of the three qualities is
4:2:1.
The cost of production depends on the number of tons of rock
to be broken to obtain a ton of asbestos. According to Klein, few
Canadian mines contain ground as rich as 50 tons of rock to the
ton of asbestos ; while the poorer mines yield only a ton for every
150 tons or more of rock.
Asbestic and fossil-meal are manufactured from the refuse
low-grade and short-fibre asbestos. They are used for covering
steam-pipes and boilers and as fire-proof plaster.
The value of the raw material varies according to the quality,
from 2, 10s. to ,20.
ASPHALTUM.
Asphalt or bitumen occurs in a soft, viscous state, as a solid, or
impregnating earths, sands, sandstones, and bituminous limestones
of no particular age.
The chief sources of supply are Trinidad, Italy, France, Switzer-
land, United States, Germany, Venezuela, Russia, Spain, Turkey,
and Hungary.
The PitchLake of Trinidad occupiesan area of 99 acres,and varies
from 20 feet to 30 feet deep. The removal of nearly 2,000,000
tons of asphalt has made little apparent impression on the deposit,
the surface of which forms a sheet broken by pools and channels
10

--- Page Break ---
146 MINING GEOLOGY.
of rain-water. The lake contains no liquid asphalt. Nearly
everywhere the deposit is firm enough to walk upon.
According to Malo,
1 the average composition of the crude
asphalt is as follows :
Per cent.
Bitumen,
. . . .34
Water,
. . . .30
Clay, .... 36
100
The greater part of the United States production is obtained
from bituminous sandstones in California and Kentucky. The
bituminous sandstone of California occurs in large quantities at
various points between San Francisco and Los Angeles.
2 It
contains from 12 to 18 per cent, of bitumen, the remainder being
quartz-sand.
The asphalt deposits of Kentucky occur in nearly horizontal
fine-grained sandstone belonging to the lower Carboniferous
period.
Bituminous limestones are the most important source of asphalt
in France, Switzerland, Cuba, and the States of Utah, Texas, and
Indian Territory in the United States.
The Val de Travers mine, at Neuchatel, in Switzerland, and
the Seyssel mines, in France, yield an asphalt from bituminous
limestone extensively used for paving purposes. At Seyssel
there are seven beds of bituminous limestone, varying from 10 feet
to 20 feet in thickness, and containing from 4 to 10 per cent, of
bitumen.
The Turkish supply is mainly derived from Albania and
Palestine. The deposits in the Dead Sea region have long been
notable. The bitumen-springs at Nebi Musa contain from 30 to
40 per cent, of asphaltum.
The ozokerite deposits at Boryslaw, in Galicia, Austria, supply
practically the world's annual output.
BARYTES.
This mineral is found as irregular masses in schists and lime-
stone. It is often associated with lead-ores.
The world's production is principally obtained from Germany,
Great Britain, United States, and Belgium. One of the largest
1 Leon Malo, L'Asphalte, p. 20, Paris, 1888.
2 F. V. Greene, "Asphalt and its Uses/' Trans. Am. Inst. M.E., vol. xvii.
p. 355, 1888.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 147
known deposits occurs at Silver Island, near the north end of
Lake Superior.
Barytes is now largely employed in the manufacture of paints.
The price of the raw material varies from 12s. to 21s. per ton.
BAUXITE. (See "Alum.")
BISMUTH.
Metallic bismuth generally occurs in veins in gneiss, schist, and
clay-slate accompanying ores of silver, cobalt, lead, wolfram, zinc,
and gold. It is chiefly derived from the silver and cobalt mines
in Saxony and Bohemia.
The principal ores of commercial value are the sulphide,
telluride, and carbonate, which are found associated with molyb-
denite, fluorite, pyrites, chalcopyrite, and apatite.
The world's supply of bismuth comes principally from the State
mines in Saxony. Small quantities come from Colorado, New
South Wales, and Queensland.
The supply is greater than the demand, and ores containing less
than 5 per cent, of the metal leave no margin of profit. The
price is about 6s. per pound.
BORAX.
This mineral occurs as incrustations in old lake basins in rain-
less regions, and mixed with clay in marshes and shallow lagoons.
Colernanite, which is a calcium borate, is found in California in
bedded deposits as large masses, more or less connected by
stringers and bands. Near Daggett, the colemanite deposits vary
from 5 feet to 30 feet in thickness.1
The world's supply is derived from the United States, Chili,
Peru, Italy, and Turkey. The production of the United States
is chiefly derived from the colemanite deposits in California.
Boric acid, which is largely used in the manufacture of borax,
is obtained from the gaseous emanations of steam fumaroles in
volcanic regions. The entire yield of it from Italy is derived from
the fumaroles in the Provinces of Pisa and Grosseto.
CEMENT.
Chemically considered, cement is an intimate admixture of lime
and clay. There are two kinds of cement in the market namely,
artificial and natural.
1
Marius R. Campbell, "Reconnaissance of the Borax Deposits of Death
Valley and Mojave Desert," Bulletin of the U.S. Geol. Survey, No. 200,
Washington, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
148 MINING GEOLOGY.
Artificial cements are made in almost all civilised countries.
Natural cements are produced direct from rock containing
more or less the requisite proportions of lime and clay. France,
United States, and New Zealand produce considerable quantities
of natural cement from argillaceous limestone deposits of great
extent.
The hydraulic limestone at Grenoble, in France, from which
the finest natural cement in the world is produced, occurs in a
bed 15 feet thick, interbedded in a compact limestone. Its com-
position is as follows :
Per cent.
Silica,.... 13-40 to 17-37
Alumina,
. . .
.
6'20 12'38
Iron oxides, . . . 3'50 4-00
Calcium carbonate,
. . 66'50 60-75
Magnesium carbonate,
. . 6-00 traces
Water, loss, etc.,
. . 4'40 5'50
100-00 100-00
The hydraulic limestones in New Zealand are of Upper
Cretaceous age. They vary from 20 feet to 140 feet in thickness.
Cement manufactured from the rock at Mahurangi showed the
following composition
:
Per cent.
Silica, .... 25-44
Alumina,
. . . . ) , >.7fi
Iron oxides,
. . . .
}
L
Lime carbonate,
. . . 55-06
Magnesia carbonate,
. . 2-05
Alkalies and loss,
. . . 1'69
100-00
The iron seldom exceeds 3 per cent. It mostly occurs as
grains of glauconite.
Natural cements are often equal to the best artificial Portland
cements, but, generally speaking, they lack the uniformity in
composition of the artificial product.
CHROMIUM.
Chromite of iron occurs in irregular masses in peridotite and
serpentine. The world's supply is principally produced by
Turkey, New Caledonia, Greece, New South Wales, Canada, and

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 149
United States. At present Turkey furnishes about 60 per cent,
and New Caledonia 26 per cent, of the total output.
Chromite is used in the manufacture of steel, and in the pro-
duction of chromates of the alkalies, which are extensively used as
pigments and for tanning pin-poses.
Forthemanufacture ofchrome-steel the ore shouldcontain not less
than 50 per cent, of the sesquioxide, and must be free from copper.
The price varies from 2 to .3, 12s., according to the percentage
of the sesquioxide.
COAL.
The mode of occurrence, origin, and distribution of coal have
already been discussed in Chapter II. The chief coal-producing
countries are as follows :
Tons.
United States annual production exceeds .
350,000,000
United Kingdom , , . 250,000,000
Germany
France
Belgium
Russia
Japan
170,000,000
30,000,000
20,000,000
20,000,000
10,000,000
The world's yearly production of coal is about 1,000,000,000
tons and the value exceeds that of all other mineral productions,
including gold, silver, copper, iron, tin, diamonds, etc., more than
twofold.
Of the American output in 1904, the chief producing States
were as follows :
Short tons.
Pennsylvania,
. . .
98,000,000
Illinois, .... 37,000,000
West Virginia,
. . .
30,500,000
Ohio, .... 25,000,000
Alabama, .... 12,250,000
The great bulk of the coal won in Germany is obtained in the
great coal regions of Westphalia.
COBALT.
This metal has not been found in the metallic state. It
commonly occurs combined with arsenic and sulphur. The
principal ores are smaltite, the arsenide of cobalt ; and cobaltine,
the sulphide and arsenide. The earthy oxide is a considerable
source of cobalt. It is a gossan product, and essentially a

--- Page Break ---
150 MINING GEOLOGY.
hydrous oxide of manganese mixed with a variable percentage of
cobalt.
The ores of cobalt are generally found accompanying those of
nickel and silver, and sometimes those of copper and manganese.
The cobaltiferous bands at Skutterud, in Norway, consist of
alternating thin beds of mica-schist and quartz-schist, the latter
impregnated with pyrites, cobalt glance, cobaltiferous mispickel, and
a little chalcopyrite. So far they have not proved of much value.
The hydrated oxide of cobalt of New Caledonia is largely
exported to Europe and America. It occurs intimately associated
with hydrated oxide of manganese, which is found in irregular
pockets of red clay in serpentine. This cobaltiferous wad contains
from 21 to 5 per cent, of cobalt, and at present is the principal
source of the world's supply.
Up till the end of 1901 a considerable portion of the domestic
supply of the United States was obtained as a by-product in the
treatment of the lead-ores from Mine La Motte, in the State of
Missouri.
COPPER.
The chief sources of copper are the sulphides principally the
yellow sulphide and native copper. When the ore occurs in
large masses capable of being cheaply mined, 1 to 3 per cent, of
the metal is payable. The great bulk of the copper annually
placed in the market is produced from very low-grade ores,
associated with iron pyrites, and often containing a little gold and
silver.
The most important copper-mines of the world at the present
time are those of Mansfeld, in Germany ; Rio Tinto and Tharsis,
in Spain; San Domingo, in Portugal; Lake Superior, Montana,
and Arizona, in the United States ; and Mount Lyell, in
Tasmania.
The world's production of copper amounts to over 580,000 tons,
of which the United States produces over 55 per cent.
UNITED STATES. At Lake Superior, in Michigan, the copper is
found in beds of conglomerate and sandstone, interstratified with
flows of amygdaloidal diabase, forming what is known as the
Keweenawan series, and which is probably of pre-Cambrian age.
The conglomerates are the most productive. In them the copper
occurs as the cementing material ; it has evidently been deposited
from an aqueous solution. The diabase flows are amygdaloidal in
their upper layers, and occasionally the lower side also may be
vesicular.1
They contain rich patches of native copper associated
with native silver.
1
T. A. Rickard, The Copper Mines ofLake Superior, p. 25,1905, New York.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 151
Copper is also found in fissure-veins crossing the Keweenawan
series of the northern end of the peninsula. The veins vary from
10 feet to 30 feet in width. They are richest in the diabase,
in which the copper occurs in the native state, being generally
found in masses, the largest mass weighing nearly 600 tons.
The most productive mines in this region are the " Calumet
and Hecla," "Osceola," "Tamarack," and "
Quincy." The two
former have shafts reaching the great depth of nearly 5000
feet.
It should be noted that extremely low-grade ore, containing as
little as 1 '5 per cent of copper, are made to yield large profits in
the Lake Superior district. To achieve this result enormous
quantities of ore are mined and stamped.
The distinguishing features of the Michigan copper-mines are
the enormous tonnage of low-grade ore stamped, the low cost of
production, and the great depth of the mines.
The production of the copper-mines in Butte district, in
Montana, is even greater than that of the Lake Superior mines.
The most productive mines are the Anaconda, Parrot, Butte and
Boston, Boston and Montana, and Colorado.
The copper is found in east and west lodes in granite. The
main lode, which runs through the Anaconda and Parrot mines,
has proved productive for a distance of 3 miles along the strike.
The average width of the lodes is 10 feet. The copper occurs
principally as sulphides, which are silver-bearing, the proportion
of silver varying from J oz. to 2 oz. per unit of copper.
The Arizona copper-mines produce large quantities of oxides
and carbonates, which occur in or near a Carboniferous limestone,
often near the point of contact with granite, or with sandstones.
SPAIN AND PORTUGAL. The copper-deposits at Rio Tinto,
Tharsis, and San Domingo are of great extent. They consist
of compact pyrites containing from 1 to 2J per cent, of copper-
pyrites disseminated throughout the whole mass.
Next to the Calumet and Hecla, the Rio Tinto is the greatest
copper-mine in the globe.
GERMANY. The Mansfeld copper-mines in Saxony have been
worked since the twelfth century. The ore is found in a flat-
lying bed of cupriferous shale of Upper Permian age, and, not-
withstanding its thinness and comparatively low grade in metal,
it can be worked with profit. It occurs in finely disseminated
particles throughout the shale. A golden-yellow colour indicates
chalcopyrites ; a bluish and reddish variegated colour indicates
bornite ; a steel-gray, copper-glance ; a grayish-yellow, iron-
pyrites ; and a leaden-gray, galena.
The whole bed contains copper, but only the bottom 3 inch or

--- Page Break ---
152 MINING GEOLOGY.
4 inch are rich, and on an average contain 2 to 3 per cent, of
copper and 163 oz. of silver to the ton of copper.
AUSTRALASIA. Mount Lyell Mine, on the west coast of Tas-
mania, is one of the principal copper-producers in the Common-
wealth of Australia.
At the surface the lode was a huge gossan, consisting of dense
dark haematite and friable linionite containing gold and silver.
Below the oxidised zone the ore passed into massive pyrites lying
between talcose schists on one side and conglomerates on the other.
In New South Wales there is a copper-bearing area variously
estimated at from 5000 to 6500 square miles. It is situated in
the great arid plain lying between the Darling, Bogan, and
Lachlan rivers. The country-rock is Silurian slate, which is
traversed by fissure-veins. None of the mines have been worked
continuously.
CRYOLITE.
This is a fluoride of sodium and aluminium, containing
about 51 per cent, of sodium fluoride when pure. Practically
the whole of the world's supply is obtained from the Danish
cryolite-mines at Ivigtut, on the west coast of Greenland.
The white cryolite occurs in great snow-white masses, which
are partially transparent. It constitutes a large bed or mass in
a granitic dyke which traverses a gray gneiss.
Associated with the cryolite are quartz, siderite, galena, pyrites,
chalcopyrite, wolframite ; also fluorite, mispickel, and cassiterite.
The ore is confined to the granite, but there is no clear line of
demarcation between it and the surrounding rock into which it
passes. The mineral is mined by open cuts about 200 feet wide
and 100 feet or more deep.
1
The Greenland mines produce nearly 8000 tons of cryolite a
year, valued at about 3 per ton at the mines. The bulk of the
output is exported to the United States for the manufacture of
aluminium, for making sodium and aluminium salts, and for the
manufacture of sodium fluoride, which is used to prevent incrusta-
tions forming in steam-boilers.
Cryolite is also used to a limited extent in the manufacture of
an opalescent glass which resembles French porcelain.
DIAMOND.
Until the discovery of the mines at Jagersfontein and Kirnberley,
in the years 1870 and 1871, there is no record that diamonds had
been found except in alluvial deposits or conglomerates.
1
Mineral Resources of United States, 1901, Washington, p. 883.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 153
Kimberley Diamond Mines. The diamonds on this field
occur in a breccia filling the pipes or craters of what are believed to
be old volcanoes. The breccia is mainly composed of serpentinised
peridotite with fragments of black shale, granite, and diorite
which do not commonly exceed an inch in diameter.1
There are five necks in close proximity, that is, within a radius
of a few miles. They occur on a gently undulating plateau at an
elevation of about 4000 feet above the sea ; and do not project
above the level of the surrounding country in the manner so
characteristic of breccias or agglomerates which have consolidated
in the pipes of old volcanoes.
The smallest pipe, known as the De Beers Mine, has a surface
area of 22 acres ; and the largest, an area of 45 acres.
The succession of rocks which the pipe penetrates in the
Kimberley Mine is as follows 2
:
Feet.
Surface soil and debris, ... 30
Basalt, ..... 51
Shale, ..... 250
Conglomerate (glacial?),... 10
Melaphyre (olivine diabase),
. . 394
Quartzite,
. . . . .401
Shale, ..... 260
Quartz-porphyry,.... 1072
Shale (ascertained thickness),
. . 89
Total,
. 1557
The bedding-planes of the various strata are horizontal, but it
is noteworthy that the edges of the shales at the sides of the pipes
are bent upwards at an angle of about 40 for a distance of about
3 feet back. The faces of the harder rocks, the melaphyre and
quartzites, are not bent, but polished and striated in various
directions, mostly at an angle of 45 to the vertical. Heneage
3
says that some of the scratches have apparently been made by
descending bodies. The wall-rocks show no signs of fusion.
From the surface down nearly to the bottom of the inelaphyre-
bed, for adepth varyingfrom 45 feet to 60 feet, the material filling
the vent was oxidised into a soft, yellowish-coloured clay. At a
depth of 100 feet it became darker and harder, acquiring a slate-
1 Professor T. G. Bonney, F.R.S., Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol. Ixv.
p. 223, 1899.
2 Gardner F. Williams, "The Genesis of the Diamond," Trans. Am. Inst.
M.E., Pamphlet, Sept. 1904.
3 E. F. Heneage, "The Phenomena of the Diamondiferous Deposits of
South Africa," Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. xii. p. 115, 11

--- Page Break ---
154 MINING GEOLOGY.
blue or dark-green colour in places, resembling some varieties of
serpentine.
Four-fifths of the material forming the blue ground is a dark-
green dense serpentine, which contains glistening plates of brown
mica, small dark-red garnets (mostly pyrope), large dark-green
crystals and grains of olivine, besides enstatite, smaragdite,
chrome-diopside, chromite, magnetite, and ilmenite. Small frag-
ments of altered black shale are often so abundant as to give the
rock a brecciated appearance.
CL,
~~ t
~~
t~~ l I 1 I I I
CL CL,
FIG. 67. Section ofKimberley Diamond Pipe.
a, Yellow ground, aa, Blue ground, b, Basalt sheet, c, Shales, d, Mela-
phyre. f, Quartzite. g, Slates.
The blue ground is greasy to the touch. When exposed to
the weather for a time it soon disintegrates, and is then easily
crushed, the diamonds being afterwards extracted by washing and
hand-picking.
The late Professor H. C. Lewis l described the blue ground as a
porphyritic volcanic peridotite of basaltic structure for which he
proposed the name " Kimberlite."
It has been noted by several writers that while the composition
of the material filling the pipes appears to be the same in all, each
mine has its own particular kind of diamond which is so distinctive
1 Professor H. C. Lewis, "The Matrix of the Diamond/' Manchester
Meeting, British Association, Aug. and Sept. 1887.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 155
that an expert buyer can usually say from which mine any
particular stone is derived.
A certain proportion of the diamonds are broken crystals, and
seldom, or perhaps never, have the corresponding pieces been
found.
Many of the diamonds are in a state of stress, and some fly to
pieces or splinter when removed from their matrix and when
being cut.
Professor Bonney
1 believes that the diamond is a primary
constituent of the igneous rock as much as the garnet, mica, and
other minerals with which it is associated. He believes that the
diamond was formed neither by the action of molten rock on
carbonaceous matter nor by the action of steam or hot water in
a subsequent solfataric stage of the volcano, but was segregrated
by the usual processes of differentiation, in some deep-seated
magma which was afterwards forced up from below into the
pipes.
Gardner F. Williams'2
agrees with Professor Bonney that the
blue ground must be designated a breccia which has been
forced up from below by some igneous agency, possibly in the
nature of a mud volcano. Among the facts which led him to
this belief he mentions the frequent occurrence of brokendiamonds
embedded in the hard Kimberlite, as well as pebbles and boulders
with polished surfaces as if water-worn.
Professor Lewis advanced the theory that the diamonds were
formed from hydrocarbons derived from the fragments of
carbonaceous shale enclosed in the blue ground, which he
regarded as a true lava. This view is contested by Mr
Williams, who states that all the pipes containing Kimberlite
do not contain diamonds, while diamonds exist in some mines,
such as those in the Pretoria district, where no carbonaceous
shales are to be found.
Parent Rock of Diamond. Mr Williams, while agreeing
with Professor Bonney that the diamonds are a primary con-
stituent of some deep-seated igneous rock, denies that eclogite
is the parent rock of the gems at Kimberley.
Professor Bonney,
3 in 1899, reported the discovery of diamonds
in specimens of a coarsely crystalline garnetiferous rock, related to
eclogite, obtained from the Newlands mines, situated about 40
miles from Kimberley. Commenting on this discovery, he
1 Professor T. G. Bonney, Proceedings of tlie Royal Society, vol. Ixv.
p. 223, 1899.
2 Gardner F. Williams, "The Genesis of the Diamond," Trans. Am. Inst.
M.K, Pamphlet, Sept. 1904.
3 Professor Bonney, Proceedings of the Royal Society, vol. Ixv. p. 225, 1899.

--- Page Break ---
156 MINING GEOLOGY.
concluded that eclogite was the parent-rock of the diamond in
South Africa, a view which has generally been accepted by
English geologists since that date.
The statement that eclogite was the original matrix of the
diamond caused Mr Williams, for many years General Manager of
the Kimberley mines, to carefully examine the eclogite which
occurs in tons in all the pipes, where it is treated as waste rock.
Twenty tons of this rock were collected and tested by crushing
and jigging in a test-plant, but not a single diamond was found
in the material. Mr Williams further states that he had also
examined hundreds of pieces of eclogite, but never found a
diamond, nor had he ever heard of a diamond having been
found in this rock during all the years the mines had been
worked.
The occurrence of diamonds in the eclogite from Newlands Mine
must be regarded as sporadic and not general. That a peridotite
or some ultra-basic igneous rock was the parent-rock of South
African diamonds may be inferred from the laws of magmatic
paragenesis.
Genesis ofDiamond. Assuming thediamond to be a primary
constituent of an igneous rock, the original condition of the
carbon is still a matter for conjecture. Did the gem crystallise
from carbonaceous matter, from a hydrocarbon, carbon dioxide,
or a carbide'? Of the source of the carbon nothing definite is
known, or of the processes which prevented its oxidation along
with the iron with which it is always associated. It is important
to remember that the diamond-bearing pipes in the Transvaal
penetrate carbonaceous shales.
Williams mentions that large diamonds have been found enclos-
ing small ones, while twins are not rare, from which it may be
inferred that the formation or growth of the diamond followed
the ordinary laws of crystallisation in a magmatic solution of rock-
material.
Moissan, in his diamond-making experiments, fused iron rich in
carbon, and allowed it to cool in such a way that the separation
of the excess of carbon took place under pressure. In this way
microscopic diamonds were formed. Microscopic diamonds have
been found in ordinary cast-iron ; hence it is inferred that
abnormal pressure is not necessary to ensure success in the
experiment.
The experiments of Dr Friedlander have a closer bearing upon
the natural formation of diamonds. Friedlander l fused a small
piece of olivine, a centimetre in diameter, by means of a gas blow-
1 E. F. Heneage, "The Phenomena of the Diamondiferous Deposits in South
Africa," Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. xii. p. 125.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 157
pipe, kept the upper portion in the molten state for some time by
playing upon it with the flame, and stirred it with a little rod of
graphite. After solidification the silicate was found to contain a
vast number of microscopic crystals, but only in the part which
had been in contact with the carbon. The crystals are octahedral
or tetrahedral in form, are unattacked by hydrofluoric and sul-
phuric acids, have a high refractive index, sink slowly in methy-
lene-iodide, burn away when heated in a current of oxygen, and
are unaltered if heated in a current of carbonic acid. The stony
matter containing them scratches corundum. Hence Friedlander
infers that they are diamonds, and that the South African dia-
monds may have been actually formed, as already suggested, by
the action of a molten silicate, such as olivine, on graphite.
Carbonaceous shales are intruded by the diamond-bearing rock,
and numerousfragments of the Triassic Karoo shale, much altered,
are found enclosed in the blue ground itself.
Diamond in Dolerite. The discovery of a diamond in the
original matrix was reported in July 1904, at Oakey Creek, in New
South Wales, and has since been confirmed by the Government
geologist.
The rock in which the diamond was found is a dolerite, there-
fore entirely distinct from the volcanic breccia in the Kimberley
pipes. The diamond is firmly embedded to the extent of about
two-thirds of its bulk in the rock. It is an irregularly shaped
white crystal, weighing perhaps one-third of a carat.
The discovery is interesting, inasmuch as it presents features
which are altogethernew as far as the occurrence of diamonds is
concerned, and a careful investigation of the surrounding geologic
conditions may throw much valuable light on the genesis of the
diamond.
Diamond Placers. Diamonds are found in loose alluvial
deposits and conglomerates in India, Brazil, Vaal River, New
South Wales, Borneo and British Guiana.
The Deccan mines in India are of great antiquity, and cele-
brated more for the size and purity of the gems than the quantity
produced. The diamonds are found in a layer of broken sand-
stone, quartz, jasper, flint, and granite interspersed with masses
of calcareous conglomerate.
1 The layer is about 20 feet thick
and covered with a few feet of black "cotton soil."
The diamond placers in the province of Minas Geraes, in
Brazil, consist of clay, quartz, pebbles, and sand charged with iron
oxide,
2 in many places covered by 30 feet or more of alluvial
detritus. These deposits have been traced along the rivers and
1
Tavernier, Voyages en Turquie, en Perse et aux Indes, Paris, 1676-79.
- "The Diamond Fields of Brazil," Report of U.S. Minister Bryan, 1899.

--- Page Break ---
158 MINING GEOLOGY.
ravines to the conglomerate beds which provided the material
contained in them. The conglomerates are chiefly composed of a
micaceous sandstone which is manifestly not the original matrix
of the diamonds. The gems were probably derived from some
rock-surface subjected to denudation at the time the sandstone
was being formed.
The greatest diamonds of which there is any record prior to
1905 are the Koh-i-nor, 793 carats, the Great Mogul, 787*5 carats,
and the Regent, 410 carats, all found in the great mines of Gani-
Coulour and Gani-Parteal, in India. A stone of over 400 carats
was found at Kimberley in 1884, and one of 972 carats, named
the "Excelsior," at Jagersfontein. The great Cullinan diamond
found early in 1905 in the Premier Mine, 31 miles from Pretoria,
is reported to weigh 3024*75 carats, its size being 2J inches by 2
inches by 4 inches. This is the largest stone in the world. It
is said to be perfect in colour and free from flaws.
The great bulk of the world's supply of diamonds at present
comes from the Kimberley mines, which in 1903 are reported to
have produced stones to the value of nearly four millions sterling.
FIRECLAY.
This material occurs in stratified layers or beds generally in
association with seams of coal. As a rule it lies under the coal,
and is the soil on which the coal vegetation grew.
Fireclays are found in all coal-bearing regions, but all coal-seams
are not underlain by material suitable for use as a fireclay. Good
fireclays should contain from 52 to 62 per cent, of silica, 22 to 32
per cent, of alumina, and 10 to 14 per cent, of water. The presence
of 1 per cent, of lime, magnesia, potash, or soda renders a clay
too fusible to be useful for fireclay purposes. Iron oxides are
also injurious, and when over 3 per cent, of the protoxide is
present the clay should be discarded. Stourbridge fireclay con-
tains about 2 per cent.
China-clay or kaolin is found in veins and irregular deposits in
places where granite has been altered probably by the emanation
of steam and gases from cracks and fissures.
Investigation has shown that the kaolinisation of granite and
other highly acidic rocks is not the result of mere atmospheric
weathering. That decomposition of the felspars in the zone of
katamorphism does take place is well known, but the deep-seated
kaolinisation which has been noted in Cornwall, Devon, New
South Wales, Queensland, and New Zealand must be ascribed to
fumarolic agencies.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 159
FLUORITE.
This mineral, often called "fluorspar," is generally found in
veins in limestone, gneiss, sandstones, and clay-slate. It also
occurs as the gangue of metallic ores, especially of lead.
Fluorite is chiefly used as a flux for iron-ores. A small quantity
is employed in the manufacture of opalescent glass, and for the
production of hydrofluoric acid.
The world's output amounts to over 60,000 tons a year, of
which the United States produces about one-third and Prussia
about one-quarter. The value varies from 16s. to 1, 2s. per ton.
GOLD.
This metal is found in veins in nearly all kinds of rock, without
regard to age, composition, or situation. The most productive
veins are those traversing Palaeozoic sedimentaries, ancient
granites, and older Tertiary erliptives, especially those of a semi-
basic type.
The denudation of gold-bearing rocks has liberated large
quantities of gold, which have become more or less concentrated
in alluvial gravels or placers. These placers are found of all ages,
extending from Middle Tertiary to recent times.
The gold found in veins traversing rocks of Palaeozoic or older
Secondary age is generally of high value, while that derived from
veins in andesite and other older Tertiary eruptives is commonly
of low value, being largely alloyed with silver.
The gold of Australia, mainly or entirely derived from rocks of
Palaeozoic age, is of high value ; as also is that of the Transvaal.
The gold found in the Palaeozoic mica-schists and slates in the
South Island of New Zealand is almost pure ; while that derived
from the Tertiary andesites in Auckland is of low value, being
alloyed with one-third in weight of silver.
The same feature characterises the gold produced in the
Northern Hemisphere. Russian gold is of high value, while that
derived from the andesites of Transylvania is of low value.
The vein and placer gold of California is commonly very pure ;
but that of Nevada and Colorado, mostly derived from veins
traversing later eruptives, is of low grade, being generally alloyed
with a large proportion of silver.
This peculiar phenomenon is too general to be accidental. It is
a happening of which no adequate explanation can at present be
offered.
A considerable quantity of gold is derived from silver, copper,

--- Page Break ---
160 MINING GEOLOGY.
and lead ores ; and a smaller amount from ores of antimony,
arsenic, manganese, and tungsten.
The value of the world's production of gold for 1904 was
estimated at 75,000,000.
The gold produced by the five great producing regions in 1904
and 1905, according to Mr F. Hobart, was as follows :
1904. 1905.
Transvaal,
. .
. 15,624,548 20,259,192
United States, . 16,144,640 17,267,540
Australasia, . .
17,420,170 17,104,425
Russia,
. . .
5,015,071 4,800,000
Canada, .
3,280,000 2,883,625
The most productive goldfield centres in the globe are the Rand,
Kalgoorlie, and Cripple Creek.
In the Commonwealth of Australia and United States, which
are of continental dimensions, the gold-bearing deposits occur
under many varying geological conditions.
VICTORIA. In this State the gold is derived from three principal
sources namely, from quartz-veins, from Tertiary deep-leads, and
from recent gravel drifts.
The deep-leads consist of placer gravels of Miocene and Pliocene
age. The latter have proved the most productive, and are in many
places, as, for example, near Ballarat, protected by a thick sheet
of basalt, the lava having flowed down the ancient valley and
covered up the river gravels and sands.
The quartz-veins occur mainly in Silurian slates. The gold-
bearing veins at Bendigo belong to the interesting class of ore-
deposits termed saddle-reefs, which occur in the crown of anticlinal
arches, and send down tapering prolongations or legs, running
more or less parallel with bedding-planes of the country-rock.
The distinctive feature of the veins in the Ballarat Goldfield is
the presence of the famous indicator beds. These are thin beds
of black carbonaceous pyritic slate, which occur in the Silurian
slates, and consequently constitute a distinct member or horizon
of the country-rock. The slates stand in a nearly vertical
position, while the contained gold-bearing veins lie nearly hori-
zontal. Along the plane of intersection of the quartz-veins and
indicators there generally occurs rich ore.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA. In this State the crystalline schists
which form the basement rocks of the country are traversed by
wide belts of ancient eruptives. These eruptives are dioritic or
hornbleridic in different places, and are often so much altered that
their original character is not always easily determined. At
Kalgoorlie the hornblendic belts have been altered and silicified,

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 161
probably by solfataric action, and generally exhibit a schistose
structure. These mineralised belts form the gold-bearing ore-
bodies.
In other parts of Western Australia the schists are traversed
by wide belts of diorite and diabase, nearly always much altered,
and often schistose in structure. These greenstone-schists, as
they are locally termed, contain gold-bearing bodies of quartz ; or
they are traversed by dykes of granite, which are intersected by
gold-bearing veins.
NEW SOUTH WALES. In this old colony payable gold occurs in
veins intersecting slates and sandstone of Silurian and Carboni-
ferous age. According to Pittman, bedded veins are of common
occurrence ; and saddle-reefs have been worked at the Hargraves
Goldfield, between Hill End and Mudgee. In the Lucknow dis-
trict the gold-bearing ore occurs in irregular veins in augite-
andesite near the contact of a serpentine belt.
The conglomerates forming the lowest beds of the coal-measures
are gold-bearing, but not apparently in payable quantity.
In the Timbarra field the gold occurs in veins in granite, and
also in pyrites disseminated throughout the granite itself. G. W.
Card 1 has reported the occurrence of gold in unaltered granite
and eurite.
Many of the deep-leads in this State are covered by flows of
basalt.
QUEENSLAND. The gold obtained in Queensland is derived from
shallow alluvial placers and from quartz-veins. Slates and sand-
stones of Devonian age are gold-bearing in many parts of the
State, particularly where the strata have been intruded by dykes
of diorite, diabase, or porphyrite.
Many of the most productive veins at Charters Towers are
enclosed in granite, but some occur in porphyry.
At Gympie Goldfield the gold occurs in veins traversing a belt
of diorite.
The celebrated gold-deposit at Mount Morgan is a siliceous
haematite, apparently the gossan of a huge pyritic contact occur-
ring near the boundary of altered sedimentaries of Permo-carbon-
iferous age and a dyke of hornblendic granite. The strata are
also intruded by later dykes of porphyritic dolerite. The eruption
of these dykes is believed to have originated the solfataric action
to which the alteration of the upper part of the pyritic body is
ascribed.
TASMANIA. In this small State gold is found in recent placers
and in quartz-veins. The latter generally traverse strata of
1
G. W. Card,
' '
On Some Rock Specimens from Auriferous Granite at
Timbarra," Records, Geol. Survey of N.S. W., ]>. 154, 1895.

--- Page Break ---
162 MINING GEOLOGY.
Silurian age. In the Lisle and Golconda Goldfields gold occurs
in veins intersecting a belt of granite.
NEW ZEALAND. In this colony gold is found in recent and
Tertiary placers, and in quartz-veins. In Otago the gold-bearing
veins occur in Silurian mica-schist ; in Reefton district, in clay-
stones and sandstones of supposed Carboniferous age ; and in the
Hauraki Peninsula, in altered andesites of Middle Tertiary age.
The quartz conglomerates and cements at the base of the
Middle Tertiary coal-measures contain water-worn gold, but
seldom in payable quantities. It is noteworthy, however, that
many of the richest placers in Otago and Westland are a rewash
of these ancient gravels.
UNITED STATES. The gold of this country is obtained from
veins, or from placers resulting from the erosion of gold-bearing
country and the concentration of the valuable contents.
In the State of California, the vein-system known as the
" Mother Lode "
is contained in slates and altered igneous rocks
of Carboniferous and Jurassic age. In Tuolumne and Calaveras
counties, and more particularly at Nevada City and Grass Valley,
1
the veins occur in and near intrusive masses of granodiorite. The
placers along this gold belt are among the richest in North
America. The age of this remarkable stretch of gold-bearing
veins is believed to be Cretaceous. The contained gold is of
high quality.
A second gold belt of great importance lies in Eastern Cali-
fornia, within the watershed of the Colorado River. In this belt
the veins occur in andesites, phonolites, and trachyte of probably
Middle Tertiary age. The gold is alloyed with silver, and associ-
ated with silver-ores, pyrites, etc.
The larger part of the gold-production of California is obtained
from the Cretaceous belt.
The gold produced in the State of Colorado is mainly derived
from veins traversing Archaean granite, or the overlying andesitic
tuffs and breccias, which are typically developed in the Cripple
Creek district. These igneous rocks, which consist of heavy flows
as well as fragmentary matter, are believed by American geolo-
gists to be of post-Miocene age.
A considerable quantity of gold is also derived as a by-product
from the silver-lead ores of Leadville and other mining centres,
which occur in veins in altered sedimentaries and eruptives of
Mesozoic age. Colorado is the largest gold-producing State in
America. The placer-deposits are not of great extent.
The bulk of the gold of Montana is derived from lead-silver
1
Waldemar Lindgren, "The Geological Features of the Gold Production
of North America," Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xxxiii. p. 817, 1903.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 163
veins in Archaean rocks, or from veins of copper-ore occurring in
intrusive granites of supposed Upper Cretaceous or Lower Tertiary
age, principally developed near Butte.
In the State of Nevada, the basement rocks are sedimentaries
of Palaeozoic and Mesozoic age, intruded by many dykes of por-
phyry, and smothered by Tertiary rhyolites, andesites, and
basalts. The Comstock Lode, long celebrated for its dry gold-
silver ores, is contained in andesite. The silver-lead ores of
Eureka l occur in limestones near eruptives, and carry one-third
of their value in gold. The gold-silver mine De Lamar, in
Southern Nevada, occurs in Palaeozoic quartzites.
The gold-bearing deposits of Black Hills, in South Dakota,
belong to two groups. In one group, the most important, there
are the massive lodes of the Homestake district, which consist of
a belt of Archaean schists, closely intersected in great areas by
thin strings and veins of quartz carrying free gold and gold-
bearing pyrites. This deposit, locally known as The Belt, is 6000
feet long and 2000 feet wide. 2 The ore is very low grade, and is
only rendered profitable by the magnitude of the operations.
The gold output of British Columbia is derived from placers
and veins intersecting older Mesozoic and Palaeozoic rocks. In
the Kootenay district the gold occurs principally in copper-bear-
ing veins, which intersect rocks of Lower Mesozoic age.
ALASKA. The gold of the celebrated Treadwell Mines, on
Douglas Island, in Alaska, is derived from a mineralised albite-
diorite, which, according to Professor Becker, has been altered
and silicified by solfataric or hydrothermal action. The diorite
occurs as intrusive dykes in black slates, the bedding-planes of
which they closely follow.
A. C. Spencer
3 states that the ore-bearing dykes belong to a
series of intrusions which appear interruptedly along the strike
for a distance of about 3 miles, in a zone approximately 3000 feet
wide. In the greater part of the intruded area exposures are
few, and only small dykes outcrop on the side toward the centre
of the island. On this side the zone seems to be irregularly
limited, but next to the shore of Gatmeau channel the border is
denned by a heavy bed of greenstone running parallel with the
slates and the intrusive dykes, and dipping with them toward
the adjacent channel. The mineralised dykes which constitute
the known rninable ore occur just beneath this greenstone, which
1
Lindgren, Geological Features, etc., p. 829.
2 F. B. Carpenter, "The Ore Deposits of the Black Hills of Dakota,"
Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xvii. p. 570, 1889.
3 A. C. Spencer,
" Geology of the Treadwell Ore Deposits, Alaska," Pamph-
let, Am. hist. M.E., p. 14, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
164 MINING GEOLOGY.
thus constitutes the hanging-wall both of the intrusion zone and
of the ore-bodies. Many of the dykes of albite-diorite away from
the hanging-wall have been greatly altered and impregnated with
pyrite, but workable ore-bodies have not yet been discovered
in them.
The relations of the mineralised diorite dykes to the associated
country-rock are shown in the accompanying diagram.
NE
Fig. 68. Cross-section through Alaska-Treadwell Mine and Northern
Side of Douglas Island. (After Spencer.)
The gold is generally associated with pyrites in strings of
quartz and calcite ramifying through the ore-body.
1
The ore is extremely low grade, but, notwithstanding this, the
annual profits are large and regular.
In the Yukon and Nome districts the gold is derived from
placers.
TRANSVAAL. Practically the whole of the gold of this State is
derived from beds of pyritic quartzose conglomerate, interbedded
with quartzites of Lower Palaeozoic age. The banket reefs, as
these gold-bearing conglomerates are locally termed, vary from a
few inches to 4 feet in thickness. They dip south at angles which
are steeper at the outcrop than elsewhere. The most productive
beds occur in a belt of quartzite about 115 feet thick.
The gold is not contained in the quartz pebbles, but in the
siliceous cementing matrix. Thebankets are remarkable for their
great extent and uniform value over wide stretches. A detailed
description of the chief banket-beds is given in Chapter II.
RUSSIA. Almost all the gold produced in Russia is derived
from placer-deposits on the western flanks of the Ural Mountains.
The foothills on the western slopes of the range consist of younger
Palaeozoic sedimentaries intruded by masses of granite, diorite,
and diabase. Gold-bearing veins, but not generally very pro-
1
R. A. Kinzie, "The Treadwell Group of Mines, Douglas Island, Alaska,"
Pamphlet, p. 9, Trans. Am. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xxxiv. p. 334, 1894.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 165
ductive, occur in these rocks. The returns froin placer-deposits in
Siberia have shown a large increase during recent years.
INDIA. The chief gold-bearing deposits of Southern India occur
in a belt of hornblendic and chloritic and argillaceous schists
which are intruded by massive dykes of diabase. In the Kolar
Goldfield, in the Province of Mysore, the country-rock is principally
a coarse-grained gneiss, traversed by a belt of diabase, in which
the gold-bearing veins occur.
BORNEO. The gold-bearing rocks of Upper Sarawak and the
mode of occurrence of the ore-bodies are of a somewhat unusual
character. The rocks are a basal Jurassic limestone containing,
according to Professor J. Boehm, many finely preserved Ammonites
of zonal value. The limestone is overlain by shales and sand-
stones which complete the series. These rocks are intruded by
dykes and sills of several varieties of quartz-porphyry.
1
Gold occurs in both the limestone and in the shales, the richest
ore-bodies being found in the former. In the limestone the ore
occurs in irregular caverns, fissures, and joint planes, often asso-
ciated with stibnite, pyrites, blende, galena, etc. In the shales
the gold is found as impregnations or disseminated.
GRAPHITE.
This mineral is commonly found in crystalline limestones,
gneiss, mica-schist, and granite. It occurs in irregular masses, in
beds, and often disseminated throughout the rock in thin flakes.
The world's supply is mainly derived from Austria, Ceylon, and
Italy.
The finer grades of graphite are put into the market under the
name crystalline, and the inferior grades as amm*phou*. The
value of the raw product varies from <4 to <15 per ton, accord-
ing to its quality.
Artificial graphite, manufactured in electric furnaces at Niagara
Falls, is now produced in considerable quantities.
.
Graphite is used in the manufacture of crucibles, stove-polish,
foundry facings, paint, lubricants, pencils, glazing, steam-packing,
etc.
GYPSUM.
This mineral is commonly found in clays, marls, and shales of
Secondary and Lower Tertiary age. It generally occurs in beds,
not forming continuous layers, but rather layers of nodular
masses.
1 J. S. Geikie, "The Occurrence of Gold in Upper Sarawak,
" Inst. Min. and
Met., Pamphlet, Nov. 1905.

--- Page Break ---
166 MINING GEOLOGY.
At the present time France produces more than half the
world's output. Then follow the United States, with an output
amounting to 30 per cent., Canada with 8 per cent., and Great
Britain with 7 per cent, of the total production.
1
Gypsum is used in the manufacture of plaster of Paris, of
plaster for interior walls of houses, and for agricultural purposes.
The price varies, according to locality, from 6s. to 12s. per ton.
IRON.
The ores of iron of commercial value are siderite, limonite, or
brown hsematite, magnetite, and haematite or specular iron.
The carbonate or spathic ores commonly occur in beds forming
members of a stratified series, or in layers of nodular masses, more
especially in association with coal-measures. Clay ironstone, an
impure argillaceous carbonate of iron, is common in most of the
British coalfields, and in those of Pennsylvania and Ohio, in the
United States. In Scotland it contains a large proportion of
carbonaceous matter, and is known as black-band ore.
The close association of coal and iron-ore enabled Britain for
many years to occupy a dominant position in the manufacture of
iron and steel.
Beds, nodular layers, and even veins of spathic iron occur in
many geological formations. The veins are generally small and
of little value. Among the most valuable deposits of spathose
ore, outside the Carboniferous coal-measures, are those of Cleve-
land, which occur in the Middle Lias of England.
The red and brown haematite deposits of Bilboa, in Spain, are
of great extent, and furnish about 70 per cent, of the raw ore
imported into Great Britain for the manufacture of iron and steel.
They occur in beds in a limestone of Cretaceous age.
The brown haematite deposits of the United States are of great
extent and value. They embrace all the varieties of hydrated
sesquioxide of iron recognised as limonite, gothite, turgite, bog-
ores, etc. The principal producers are the States of Virginia,
West Virginia, Alabama, Colorado, and Pennsylvania.
The Huronian and Laurentian rocks of North America contain
vast deposits of magnetite and red haematite, which occur as huge
contact-deposits and as regional metamorphic masses interstratified
with the crystalline rocks with which they are associated.
The most valuable deposits of magnetic ore occur in Laurentian
rocks in the States of Pennsylvania, New Jersey, New York, and
Michigan.
2
1 The Mineral Resources of the United States, Washington, 1901.
2 The Mineral Resources of the United States, 1903, Washington, p. 44.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 167
Red haematite constitutes 83 per cent, of the annual output of
iron-ore in the United States, and continues to be supplied by the
Lake Superior region. The principal sources of supply are the
Mesabi Range, in Minnesota, with an annual output of 14,000,000
tons; the Menominee Range, in the States of Michigan and
Wisconsin, with an output of 5,000,000 tons ; Marquette Range,
in Michigan, 4,000,000 tons ; and Gogebic Range, 4,000,000 tons.
The annual output of the Mesabi Range has never been
reached by any other iron-ore region in the world, the closest
competitor being the Bilboa district, in Biscayan Spain, which
produces 7,500,000 tons.
The output of iron-ore in Great Britain amounts to nearly
13,500,000 tons, being mainly spathic and haematite ores.
The magnetite and specular iron-ore deposits of Scandinavia,
more especially of Sweden, are of great extent. They occur
generally in crystalline rocks, in some districts as regional
metamorphic deposits, and in others as contact-deposits genetically
connected with eruptives. The total annual output is about
2,500,000 tons, the bulk of which is exported to Germany.
Iron-ores of commercial value are not very abundant in
Australasia. What has been described as the most important is
that at the Iron Knob and Iron Monarch, 41 miles W.S.W. of
Port Augusta, in South Australia, which has been estimated to
contain 21,000,000 tons of high-grade haematiteandmanganic iron.1
InNew Zealand, a large deposit of limonite occurs at Parapara ; and
enormous quantities of titanic ironsand are distributed along the
shores of Taranaki and Patea.
Iron-ores containing less than 40 per cent, of the metal are
rarely smelted, and only those containing over 50 per cent, are
considered rich. A rich commercial sample of red haematite
should contain from 60 to 65 per cent, of the metal.
A deposit of iron to become of any market value must be of
great extent, must contain rich ore, be free from silica, sulphur,
and phosphorus, easily smelted, situated in the proximity of coal
and limestone, or so accessible to deep water that it could be
transported to the smelters at a minimum cost for handling, and
within easy reach of the great markets of the world.
Silica is the most deleterious matter found in iron-ores, and
should not exceed 10 per cent. Sulphide-ores are of no com-
mercial value for the production of iron, as the whole of the
sulphur can only be removed by a dead oxidising roast, which is
a costly operation. Iron-pyrites, however, is mined for the manu-
facture of sulphuric acid. Deposits of rich haematite are sorne-
1
H. Y. L. Brown, "Notes on the Iron and Phosphate Deposits of South
Australia," Supplementary Mining Records, 1905, p. 6. Adelaide.

--- Page Break ---
168 MINING GEOLOGY.
times rendered valueless by the presence of a percentage of
sulphide-ore.
Arsenical pyrites is generally of no value as a source of arsenic,
except it contains gold or tin.
The presence of sulphur, copper, or arsenic in iron-ores should
in no case exceed 0*10 per cent. The coke available for smelting
must not contain sulphur exceeding 1 per cent.
Iron-ores for the manufacture of acid steel must be practically
free from sulphur or phosphorus. On the other hand, ores rich
in phosphorus may be used for the manufacture of basic steel.
In normal blast-furnace work nearly the whole of the phosphorus
present in the ore goes into the pig.
For steel-making purposes the relative value of iron-ores, as
regards their phosphorus-contents, depends on the process in view.
For the Bessemer acid process, ores rise in value in proportion as
the phosphorus is low, the maximum being about O03 per cent.
For the Bessemer basic process the valuation is the reverse.
An average sample of pig for the basic process contains :
Per cent.
Silicon, . . . 0-50-1-00
Sulphur,
. . . 0-05-0-15
Manganese,
. . 0-35-2-00
Phosphorus,
. . 1 '00-3-00
Ores containing a phosphorus-percentage between the above
limits are suitable for foundry-work, in which, however, an excess
of phosphorus is very objectionable.
LEAD.
The most valuable and abundant ores of lead are galena and
cerussite, which are generally found in veins in limestones,
calcareous slates, and sandstones, and occasionally in gneiss,
mica-schist, and andesite. Cerussite in only found in the shallow
parts of lead-mines. Galena usually contains a small proportion
of silver, varying from 2 oz. to 3 oz. to hundreds of ounces per
ton, and is commonly associated with blende and pyrite.
The world's production of lead amounts to about 1,000,000
short tons, of which the United States' domestic output is equal
to 26 per cent, of the whole. The other chief producers of lead
are Spain, Germany, Mexico, and New South Wales. 1
The Broken Hill Proprietary Company (Limited), in New
South Wales, is the most productive lead-mine in the world.
Lead-ores are purchased by smelters on the fire assay.
1 The Mineral Industry, vol. xiii, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 169
MAGNESITE.
This mineral is generally found in veins and masses in
serpentine. The world's supply comes principally from Styria,
in Austria, the Island of Euboea, in Greece, and California.
Calcined magnesite is extensively used in the manufacture of
bricks for lining electric and basic-steel furnaces, in the manu-
facture of paper-stock in the sulphite process, in the production
of Epsom salts, magnesia, and carbon dioxide for the carbonating
of mineral waters, etc., and as a non-conducting material to
prevent loss of heat from boilers, steam-pipes, etc.
The market value of crude magnesite is about 1 per ton.
MANGANESE.
The principal ores of manganese are the oxides, psilomelane
and pyrolusite. They are generally found in superficial masses,
or in beds, veins, or masses, in slates and slaty shales, often
associated with haematite.
Rich manganese ores, containing over 70 per cent, of the oxide,
are used for making ferro-manganese, which contains about 80
per cent, of manganese, and is then in a convenient form for
using in Bessemer and Siemens plants.
Silica in manganese ores should not exceed 12 per cent. The
best ores contain less than O'lO per cent, of phosphorus; but on
the London metal-market the value of the ore is not seriously
affected even if the percentage reaches 0*20. Beyond this limit
it diminishes the selling-value of the ore.
A few years ago, when spiegeleisen was used extensively, there
was a good demand for manganiferous-iron ores containing 20 to
30 per cent, of manganese and about 30 per cent, of iron.
Some manganese-ores contain sufficient silver to make them
more valuable for their silver-contents than for the manganese.
Pyrolusite of high grade, say over 70 per cent., is used to a
small extent in chlorination-works, and for the manufacture of
bleaching-powder. For these purposes it must be as free from
carbonates as possible.
The great manganese-producing countries are Russia, United
States (where the bulk is raised in Michigan and Wisconsin),
India, Brazil, Chili, Spain, Germany, and Turkey. The total
output in 1904 amounted to nearly 2,000,000 tons, of which the
United States produced about a third and Russia about a third.
The Russian output is mainly derived from Miocene sandstones
and clays in the Caucasus. The price varies from 7d. to lid.
per unit.

--- Page Break ---
170 MINING GEOLOGY.
MICA.
Mica is a constituent of many rocks, but only possesses a
commercial value when it occurs in blocks or masses that are
capable of being split into sheets a square inch or more in size.
The valuable deposits are not abundant, and occur generally in
pegmatitic veins in granite, and in micaceous gneiss in hornblende
and mica-schist. The veins vary from a few inches to several
hundred feet thick.
These pegmatite veins, or dykes, as some writers suppose them
to be, consist of the three essential minerals quartz, felspar, and
mica in varying proportions. They commonly resemble a coarse
granite, and in general the best mica is found in those veins in
which the constituent minerals have crystallised in large masses.
Where the felspar and quartz are in small masses, the mica is
usually of little value. The Canadian mica is found in apatite.
Valuable mica occurs in the vein in rough crystals, called blocks
or books, sometimes evenly distributed throughout the mass, at
other times near the contact with the country-rock.
Mica when found on the surface is soft and cracked. Clearer
and better-coloured mineral is found lower down in the solid ; and
the harder and more uniform the rock-formation, the better is the
mica in colour and substance. In other words, the quality
improves with the depth.
Veins under 2 feet in width seldom contain mica of commercial
value, except as scrap-mica.
As a general rule not more than 10 per cent, of the mica mined
is capable of being cut into plates, the balance being waste or
scrap-mica. In some mines in the United States the yield of
sheet-mica is less than 3 per cent. 1
India and Canada are the chief sources of the mica used in
Europe and the United States. The latter country contains mica-
deposits in many places, but few are of commercial value, and at
present the supply for domestic use is mainly derived from India.
In the mica-mines of Bengal in India, the best mica is found in
rock. The greatest demand there is for sheets of the ruby-
coloured variety, from 3 square inches upwards.
Sheet mica is largely used for furnace and stove windows and
doors, lamp-protectors, and insulators for electrical machinery.
For furnace and stove doors and windows the material must be
clear and free from spots. The choicest is in blocks of wine-
colour, white mica being preferred next. Biotite or black mica is
of little value. The standard sizes for the purposes stated above
range from 1J in. by 2 in. up"to 8 in. by 10 in. Smaller sizes
1 Mineral Resources of the United States, p. 874. Washington, 1901.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 171
seldom pay for mining and preparation. Large size and fineness
of grain are essential characters.
The bulk of the mica placed on the market is used for electrical
purposes, principally in the construction of dynamos, alternators,
transformers, etc. For these uses the sheets must be flexible, free
from cracks, capable of withstanding high temperatures, and must
be non-conducting, a low percentage of iron being an essential for
the latter. Colour is of little moment, but perfect cleavage is of
the highest importance, as " electrical mica " must be of uniform
thickness, and is often gauged to the thousandth part of an inch.
The following communication, received by the Agent-General,
in London, for South Australia, from Messrs Nathan & Co., of
London, gives some useful particulars as to the price and market
condition of mica l
:
"All the sizes which the native crystal will yield are at present
readily saleable by auction at prices ranging from 3d. per pound
for 2 in. by 3 in., to 7s. 6d. per pound for 8 in. by 12 in. Thick-
ness must not exceed J- in. Anything from y
1
^ in. to J in. is
saleable. All qualities are saleable, but it is obviously impossible
to give an estimate of probable prices, as no two properties yield
precisely similar mica, and it would be necessary to see a case or
two of the actual stuff before anything approaching a final
judgment could be passed upon it.
"One or two important pointsmay be made. The mica crystals,
after being split, may be trimmed with ordinary hand-shears, all
cracked edges being removed. Do not waste the material by
aiming at regularity of shape, but, as far as possible, without
such waste, remember that rectangular plates are preferred."The chief thing to secure is sound area without cracks, for it is
obvious that even microscopic cracks would militate against a
material to be used as an electric insulator.
"The next in importance is to secure a perfectly flat surface 911
splitting the mica into sheets. Any 'lumps' or unevenness between
the laminse are due to hydration or often to metallic insertion,
and the latter shows itself in spots. Mica with metallic insertions
is used for a variety of purposes, but is useless for insulating.
"Summarising
:
(a) Avoid marginal cracks.
(b) Split to a thickness of y
1
^ in. to J in.
(c) Avoid uneven plates as far as possible.
(d) Cut in rectangular plates as far as possible.
(e) Throw out broken plates altogether they will not
pay freight and charges."
1 The Neiv Zealand Mines Record, February 1905, p. 299.

--- Page Break ---
172 MINING GEOLOGY.
For some purposes small irregular pieces of mica, otherwise
useless, are cemented together, and built up into sheets of any
desired size and thickness.
Ground mica is used as a lubricant and for decorative purposes.
The greatest care must be exercised in the preparation of mica
for the market.1 The sheet should be about
-J-
in. thick, and cut
cleanly and sharply into rectangular shapes if possible.
The plates should be trimmed so as to cut away any crumpled
or flawed pieces, and sorted according to their colour.
The price of mica varies according to its size and colour. It
rises rapidly with increase of size ; thus English price lists quote
sheets 2 in. by 6 in. at 2s. 6d. per lb., and 3 in. by 6 in. at
6s. 6d. per lb.
FIG. 69. Section through Pegmatite Vein. (After H. K. Scott.;
a, Metamorphic schist ; b, decomposed pegmatite with
mica books ; c, quartz.
MOLYBDENUM.
The commercial ores of this metal are molybdenite, the sulphide ;
molybdite, the yellow oxide ; and to a small extent wulfenite, the
molybdate of lead.
Molybdenite occurs in beds, or disseminated in scales through-
out crystalline rocks such as granite, gneiss, and granular lime-
stone. It is produced in commercial quantities in California and
Canada. In the Haliburton district, in Ontario, it occurs in
quartz veins, commonly associated with pyrites, pyrrhotite, and
chalcopyrite.
At Wolfram Camp, in the Hodgkinson Goldfield, Queensland,
molybdenite has been found in payable quantities in clean white
1
H. Kilburn Scott, "On the Occurrence of Mica in Brazil and on its
Preparation for the Market," Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. xi., 1902-3.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 173
quartz veins traversing a grey biotite-granite. It is associated
with wolfram and native bismuth. The molybdenite and wolfram
occur in large masses scattered through the quartz matrix, and
are separated by hand-dressing.
At Jeffs Camp, in the same district, the outcrops consist of
blows, or roughly circular or oval-shaped outcrops of quartz
carrying wolfram and bismuth. The molybdenite does not
generally appear until a depth of 10 feet or 12 feet below the
surface has been reached.1
The blows when followed downward develop into irregular pipe-
shaped masses surrounded on all sides by granite, in places
vertical and in others dipping at flat angles. When the quartz
has been extracted there remain only the empty pipes or vents
in the granite.
Molybdenum is used for the production of ammonium molybdate,
in the preparation of blue carmine for colouring of porcelain, and
in the production of a ferro-molybdenum alloy which is in demand
for the manufacture of a special steel.
In 1903 Queensland exported 11 tons of molybdenite, valued
at 1320, equal to a value of 120 per ton. Buyers require ore
containing not less than 45 per cent, of MoS.
MONAZITE. (See "Thorium.")
NICKEL.
The most valuable and abundant ores of nickel are garnierite,
the nickel-magnesium silicate, found in New Caledonia, containing
from 7 to 10 per cent, of nickel; and nickeliferous pyrrhotite,
found in Canada, containing an average of 2 '62 per cent, of
nickel.
The price of mining garnierite, transporting to Europe, and
reducing to metal is about Is. per pound of metal produced, and
of pyrrhotite, about Is. 4d. per pound of metal.
The principal nickel-mines in Europe are situated in Norway
and Sweden, the common ore being nickeliferous pyrrhotite. In
Norway the ore is found in a contact-deposit between schistose
quartzite and gabbro ; and in Sweden in large veins in granite,
associated with other sulphides, especially copper-pyrites. The
oxidized ores of New Caledonia occur in decomposed serpentine.
At present Canada is the largest producer of nickel in the
world. The development of the nickeliferous pyrrhotite in the
Sudbury district, at Ontario, on the Canadian Pacific Railway,
1 Walter E. Cameron, "Wolfram and Molybdenite Mining in Queens-
land," Geological Surrey Report, No. 188, Brisbane, 1904, p. 7.

--- Page Break ---
174 MINING GEOLOGY.
has been attended with great success during the past few years,
and the production of nickel has been so large that the monopoly
so long enjoyed by the New Caledonia mines has been completely
broken up.
In addition to nickel, the Sudbury ore contains copper about
2'8 per cent., and cobalt about 0'8 per cent., and a little
platinum, about 1 oz. in 1000 Ib. of nickel matte.
In the Sudbury district there is no regular vein-system. The
ore-bodies occur separately, or in detached groups.
The deposits are commonly lenticular, pinching out in both
directions and conforming to the general strike of the enclosing
Huronian schists. The ore always occurs in, and contains frag-
ments of, a basic and altered eruptive of the gabbro type relative
to norite.
According to C. W. Dickson l the ore-bodies occur either well
within this eruptive or at its contact with the other prevailing
rocks of the district, namely, granite or granitic-gneiss, quartzite,
or the metamorphosed representative of a series of basic sedi-
mentaries, now termed "greenstones" by the Survey of Canada.
NW
Cliff
FIG. 70. Section of Ore Deposit at Copper Cliff. (After J. H. Collins. 2
)
a, Huronian schists ; b, Diorite (norite) ; c, Pyritic ore-body.
Three main belts of these norites and associated micro-pegma-
tites are now recognised, designated as the Northern, Middle, and
Southern belts respectively. They are, at present, mapped as
separate, but genetically and mineralogically they are essentially
identical. Economically the Southern belt is the most important.
1 C. W. Dickson, "The Ore-Deposits of Sudbury, Ontario," Trans. Am.
Inst. M. E., vol. xxxiv. p. 3, 1904.
2 J. H. Collins, Quart. Jour. Geo. Soc. London, vol. xliv. p. 834, 1888.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 175
The genesis of the pyrrhotite of Sudbury is still a question of
doubt. According to some writers, including Vogt, it is due to
the development of magmatic differentiation in a cooling rock-
magma. That many deposits of magnetite, chromite, and
corundum have originated in this way is almost certain; but
that metallic sulphides can separate out as primary constituents
of a rock-magma is still open to doubt.
Philip Argall
l considers that the nickel and copper were leached
out of the norite in which they were originally formed and con-
centrated along zones of fracture bya process of replacement, a view
supported by Professor Beck 2 of Freiberg, who maintains that the
brecciated nature of the ore must have been due to deposition
during, or after, the metamorphism.
The most important use of nickel is in the manufacture of
nickel-steel, containing about 3J per cent, of nickel. Considerable
quantities are used for plating iron goods, and in the coinage of
the United States and many European countries.
OIL-SHALE.
This occurs in beds or layers as members of a stratified forma-
tion. It yields mineral oil by slow distillation.
The origin of the hydro-carbonaceous matter in these shales is
somewhat obscure. In many cases it has been shown by micro-
scopic observation to be due to accumulations of gelatinous alga?
which lived in shallow fresh-water lakes and lagoons.
The shale-deposits in the Lothians of Scotland are of great
extent, and of poor quality. The Broxburn 3 shales yield from
24 to 30 gallons of crude oil and 42 Ibs. of ammonium sulphate
per ton, while the Drumshoreland shales yield 20 gallons of
crude oil and about 60 Ibs. of ammonium sulphate. The industry
is maintained by the production of bye-products.
The Permo-carboniferous shales of New South Wales are of
high grade, but occur generally in thin seams. They are now
nearly exhausted.
The oil-shales of New Zealand are of Middle Tertiary age.
They are, in places, of great extent, but generally poor and low in
ammonia.
PETROLEUM.
Mineral oil is found in geological formations of all ages, but in
commercial quantities occurs chiefly in two horizons namely,
the Middle Palaeozoic and lower half of the Tertiary.
1 Proc. Col. Sc. Soc., December 1893.
2 R. Beck, Lehre von den Erzlagerstdtten, 1901.
3 Trans. Inst. Min. Eng., vol. xxii. p. 581, 1902.

--- Page Break ---
176 MINING GEOLOGY.
In America it is found mostly in rocks ranging from Silurian
to Carboniferous, and in Eastern Europe and Asia in rocks of the
Eocene and Miocene periods.
Generally speaking, petroleum is found beneath the crowns of
anticlinal folds, saturating porous uncemented sandstones.
The genesis of natural oil has not yet been satisfactorily
explained. The French school maintain that it is chemical,
resulting from the reaction of alkali metals at a high temperature
on steam and carbon dioxide. Crude petroleum, in many respects
the same as natural oil, was prepared synthetically by Berthelot in
this way. The hydrogen of the water and the carbon of the
carbon dioxide having been deprived of their oxygen, unite to form
an oily substance closely resembling rock-oil.
The destructive distillation of shale, peat, wood, and animal
matter produces an oil having the same carbon and hydrogen
compounds as the natural oil of Pennsylvania. But, on the other
hand, oils have been found in Canada, Tennessee, and elsewhere
of a different composition, filling cavities in a richly fossiliferous
rock. The rock in which the oil is imprisoned is a thickly bedded
limestone of Silurian age, probably deposited in a deep sea swarm-
ing with animal life. Tt is generally assumed that the oil, which
can apparently be liberated only when the rock is broken, is
indigenous to the rock in which it occurs.
The porous oil-bearing sandstones of Pennsylvania are under-
lain comforrnably by a formation of shale more than 1000 feet
thick, containing fossil animals and fossil seaweed in vast quantities.
Experiments have shown that this fucoidal shale, when subjected
to slow destructive distillation, in some cases yields as much as
50 gallons of crude oil to the ton of rock. This oil in many
respects can hardly be distinguished from the natural crude oil.
The commonly accepted theory is that petroleum is a natural
distillate from carbonaceous or animal remains imprisoned in rocks.
The distillate would naturally rise into the overlying strata, where
it would become condensed ; and where the rocks were porous it
would accumulate.
The heat required for the distillation may have been derived
from igneous intrusions, plutonic or volcanic, from the reactions
of deep-seated metamorphism, or from the heat due to pres-
sure in cases where the strata have been involved in deep crust-
folds.
Mineral oil is produced in vast quantities in the United States,
particularly in the States of Pennsylvania, Texas, Ohio, California,
and Indiana ; in the Baku region, in Southern Russia ; Galicia, in
Austria ; Roumania, Burmah, Borneo, Sumatra, and Java.
The output of the Appalachian oil-fields in Pennsylvania and

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 177
West Virginia amounts to about a third of the total production
of the United States.
PHOSPHATE ROCK.
Mineral phosphates are now used in vast quantities as
fertilisers. They are found in many countries, the chief producers
being Canada, United States, and Algeria. The output of
Florida and South Carolina, besides supplying the market of the
United States, is able to furnish large quantities for export.
Of late years the American industry has been seriously affected
by the large output of the Algerian phosphate beds, which produce
a high-grade mineral containing from 63 to 65 per cent, of
phosphate of lime, and a second grade containing from 55 to
63 per cent.
The formation of phosphate-deposits is generally believed to
have been due to the leaching or lixiviation of phosphate-bearing
rocks by waters containing carbonic and other organic acids,
followed by the subsequent concentration of the phosphate under
favourable conditions. In some cases they deposited their calcium
phosphate in caverns formed in limestone or calcareous sandstone,
and the subsequent removal by solution of the walls of the
caverns, either wholly or partially, left the phosphate in the
remaining sands
It is of interest to note that the apatite beds and veins of
Ottawa, in Canada, occur in rocks of Laurentian age. The
brown rock-phosphate of Tennessee is believed to have been
derived from the underground weathering of certain phosphatic
layers in the Lower Silurian limestone which forms the basin
of middle Tennessee. These layers do not occupy an unvarying
stratigraphical position, but occur in various horizons in the Lower
Silurian formation. 1
The phosphate-deposits in the South of England, in France,
and Belgium occur associated with Cretaceous chalk. Those of
Algeria and Tunis are of Eocene age, the phosphates occurring in
nodules in marl or as phosp^tic limestone. In Algeria, which
has been estimated by M. Chateau, a French mining engineer, to
contain from 150,000,000 to 300,000,000 tons of phosphate rock,
it is considered risky to mine rock containing less than 60 per
cent, of the tricalcic phosphate.
2
The celebrated phosphate-deposits in Peninsular Florida occur
in detached pockets lying on the uneven surfaces of an Eocene
limestone, and in Western Florida on Miocene limestone.
1 William Hayes, Annual Kept. U. S. GeoL Survey, p. 633, 1898-99.
2 Memoirs of the French Society of Civil Engineers, August 1897.
12

--- Page Break ---
178 MINING GEOLOGY.
The once-famous beds of South Carolina are considered to be of
Post-Pliocene age.
1
The phosphate of lime formerly worked at Aruba and Sombrero,
in the West Indies, was originally a coral limestone converted
into a phosphate by the percolation of water containing phosphoric
acid derived from the overlying deposits of bird-guano.
A valuable deposit of rock-phosphate was discovered in 1901 at
Clarendon,
2 in the Province of Otago, in New Zealand. It occurs
in chemically eroded pockets and hollows on the upper surface of
a Miocene limestone, as shown in the following diagram
:
FIG. 71. Section of Clarendon Rock-phosphate.
A, Loose phosphatic sands ; B, rock-phosphate ; C, limestone, generally
glauconitic ; D, glauconitic givensands.
The geological conditions which accompany and doubtless
determine the existence of workable deposits of phosphate are the
presence of a phosphate-bearing formation at the surface, lying in
a favourable position for underground weathering over consider-
able areas, and subsequent concentration of phosphate by replace-
ment or secondary enrichment.
The phosphate deposits in Yorke's Peninsula, South Australia,
occur in caves and fissures in a Cambrian limestone. They are
reported to be of large extent, high grade, and favourably situated
for working.
3
To become of commercial value a phosphate-deposit should fulfil
the following requirements
:
(1) Be of such magnitude as to justify the erection of tramwaysand other surface-plant necessary for development and
winning of mineral.
1
Penrose, U.S. Geol. Survey Bulletin, No. 46, p. 60, 1898.
2 J. Park, "The Rock-phosphates of Otago," Trans. N.Z. List., vol.
xxxv. p. 391, 1902.
3 H. Y. L. Brown, "Notes on the Iron and Phosphate Deposits of South
Australia," Supplementary Mining Records, 1905, p. 5. Adelaide,

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 179
(2) Be of high grade, averaging not less than 50 per cent, of
tricalcic phosphate before dressing.
(3) In a position easy of access to a railway or seaboard.
(4) Easy to win that is, in a position in which it can be
worked water-free by open cuts and quarrying. The
overburden must also be shallow and easily removed.
When it exceeds 20 feet the cost of stripping runs away
with the profit.
It is only in exceptional cases that it pays to mine phosphate by
underground workings. At Ross Farm, in Pennsylvania, during
the year 1899, 2000 long tons were mined from a stratum 30 feet
thick, 4000 feet long, and inclined at an angle of 60 from the
horizontal. The stratum was mined to a depth of 300 feet below
water-level, and averaged about 56 per cent, of phosphate. Here
the matrix consisted of a yellow marl, easily and cheaply broken.
The producers, however, did not compete in distant markets with
the higher grades of phosphate from South Carolina, Tennessee,
and Florida, but looked only for a remunerative local market.1
PLATINUM.
This valuable metal is generally found sparingly disseminated
in olivine, in olivine-gabbro, serpentine, and other ultra-basic rocks
in Russia,- Germany, France, and New Zealand. It is found in
gold placers in many parts of the world in small quantities.
It is commonly associated with chromite of iron, which also has
a preference for inagnesian eruptive rocks.
Platinum, as sperrylite, the arsenide of platinum, occurs in the
cupriferous nickel-ores of Sudbury, in Canada, and in the copper-
ores of Rambler Mine, in the Medicine Bow Mountains of Albany
County, in the State of Wyoming. Refined methods of analysis
have shown that this metal in minute traces exists in cupriferous
sulphide-ores in many parts of the world.
Hundeshagen
3 records the occurrence of platinum in Sumatra
in wollastonite which is associated with schists, granite, and
augite-diorite. He thinks that the ore-deposit was originally a
big lens of limestone imbedded in the schists, subsequently altered
to garnet and wollastonite, and mineralised by hot solutions carry-
ing copper, gold, and platinum.
The world's supply of platinum is mainly derived from placer
deposits in the Ural Mountains, mostly situated on the western
1
Slsf Annual Rept. U.S. GeoL Survey, p. 494, 1899-1900.
2 J. F. Kemp, Bull. U.S. GeoL Survey, No. 193, p. 72.
3 L. S. Hundeshagen, Trans. Inst. Min. and Met., vol. xiii. 1904.

--- Page Break ---
180 MINING GEOLOGY.
slopes. In 1904, the output of Russia amounted to 14,230 Ibs.,
equal to about 90 per cent, of the world's production. In
September of that year two lumps of platinum were found at
Krestowosdwischensk, one weighing 756 Ibs., the other over 360
Ibs. A small part of the domestic requirements of the United
States is obtained as a secondary product from the gold-placers in
Trinity and Shasta Counties in California.
Some of the gold-placers of Colombia, Alaska, Siberia, Australia,
and New Zealand contain platinum, but rarely in payable quantity.
The Fifield Goldfield, in New South Wales, yielded, in the year
1902, 375 oz. of platinum, valued at 750.
"
In the same year
Russia produced 234,478 oz., which represented over 90 per cent,
of the world's output. The balance is mainly furnished by the
State of Colombia, in South America.
QUICKSILVER.
The only valuable ore of this metal is cinnabar, the sulphide,
which occurs in veins traversing slates and sandstones, or dis-
seminated in altered andesites. It is, however, found in rocks of
all ages and all kinds, but shows a preference for sandstones, and
in most cases is found along lines of country that have been
affected by volcanic disturbances.
Some cinnabar has been deposited from hot solutions brought
up by volcanic springs. At Ohaeawai Hot Springs, in New
Zealand, the cinnabar-deposits were formed in this manner, as
probably were those of Almaden.
The principal quicksilver-producing mines at the present time
are situated at Almaden, in Spain, New Almaden in California ;
Idria, in the Provence of Carniola, in Austria ; and Russia.
The average yield of the Almaden ores is from 7 to 10 per cent.,
but ores containing as little as 1 per cent, have been mined with
profit. The grade of the Russian ore is generally under 1 per
cent.
SILVER.
Among the principal ores of silver are kerargyrite, or horn
silver, embolite, and argentite, the subsulphide. Large masses
of the two former were found at the Broken Hill mines, in New
South Wales, disseminated throughout kaolin clay.
Masses of native silver have been found in Saxony and Hartz
Mountains, but the largest masses were discovered in Mexico and
Peru, and in the Lake Superior mines, associated with native
copper.

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 181
Silver-ores are commonly found in granite, gneiss, mica-schist,
and sandstone, and frequently in andesite and trachytic rocks.
All galena and some copper-ores contain more or less silver.
The great bulk of the silver of commerce is derived from silver-
lead ores, the balance being mostly obtained from dry silver-ores,
from copper-ores, and from gold alloyed with silver.
The gold extracted from veins in older Tertiary eruptives
usually contains a large proportion of silver.
The great silver-producing States in America are Colorado,
Montana, Utah, and Idaho, where the bulk of the silver is derived
from silver-lead ores. The dry ores of the Comstock lode in
Nevada were for many years the source of a large output of
silver.
The yield of Colorado is nearly one-third of the United States'
production, mostly derived from the silver-lead ores in Leadville
district.
The silver-lead ores of Butte district, in Montana, are the
source of the bulk of the production of that State.
Among the most productive silver-mines in the United States
is that of the DalyWestMiningCompany, which, in 1902, produced
3,575,796 oz., equal to a third of the Utah output.
In 1902 the silver produced in Mexico exceeded that of the
United States. It was derived from silver-lead and dry ores, and
largely as a by-product from the treatment of copper and pyritic
gold-ores.
The bulk of the 10,000,000 oz. produced annually in Austral-
asia is extracted from the silver-lead ores of Broken Hill. For
the year ending the 30th November 1902 the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Mine alone produced 5,477,143 oz. of silver.
SLATE.
The essential requirements of a roofing-slate are hardness and
toughness. The tests recommended are as follow :
(1) Weigh the dry slate. Immerse in water for twenty-four
hours. Take out, wipe dry, and reweigh. Note the
amount of water absorbed.
(2) Place the dry slate 011 its edge in water so that half the
surface is covered ; if it be of poor quality, moisture will
creep by capillary attraction into that part of the slate
which is above the water-line.
(3) Breathe on the slate. If a strongly marked argillaceous or
clayey odour is detected, it is safe to assume that the
slate will disintegrate easily under atmospheric influences.
The slates should be of uniform colour throughout. Spotted

--- Page Break ---
182 MINING GEOLOGY.
slates are often inferior in durability. Marcasite is objectionable
in slate, as it oxidises readily. Cubical pyrites does not oxidise
readily, and is therefore not so objectionable.
A good slate should be capable of being split into smooth thin
laminae parallel to the planes of slaty cleavage.
The specific gravity of slate varies from 2 '7 to 2 '9.
Large quantities of slate are quarried in. the United States,
France, and England.
SULPHUR.
The sulphur of commerce is derived from native sulphur and
pyrites.
Native sulphur is common in most volcanic regions, more
especially around the vents and fissures, both active and extinct.
The world's production of native sulphur in 1904 amounted to
600,000 tons, of which Italy produced over 93 per cent. The
balance is mined in Japan, United States, France, Austria, and
Greece.
The price of crude sulphur varies according to quality from
<3 to per ton. The sulphur is principally used in the manu-
facture of sulphuric acid.
The principal producers of pyrites for the manufacture of sul-
phuric acid are Spain, France, United States, Germany, Norway,
Italy, Canada, and Russia.
TALC.
This mineral in its fibrous and massive forms occurs in beds
and lens-shaped masses in talcose and chloritic schists. It is
often associated with granular limestone.
The massive form is generallyknown as steatite or soapstone.
Talc is used as flour-talc, and as pieces cut into various shapes.
The flour is used as a base for fireproof paints, for electric in-
sulators, for boiler and steam-pipe coverings, as a base for dyna-
mite, in the manufacture of wall-paper, for leather dressing, and
as a lubricant.
The harder varieties of soapstone are cut into hearthstones,
linings for furnaces, laboratory tables, ovens, pencils, and gas-
tips. The talc produced in the United States is valued at about
3, 5s. per ton.
THORIUM.
This rare and valuable metal is obtained from the mineral
monazite, which is essentially an anhydrous phosphate of the
rare earthy metals cerium, lanthanum, and didymium, having the

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 183
formula (CeLaDi)P04
. A small but variable proportion of thoria
(ThO2) is nearly always present.
Monazite is described by J. H. Pratt 1 as light-yellow, honey-
yellow, reddish, brownish, or yellowish-green in colour, with a
resinous to vitreous lustre. It is translucent to subtranslucent ;
brittle, with conchoidal fracture, and hardness from 5 to 5'5 :
monoclinic, and in crystals up to 2 in. long. Perfect crystals are
generally small, from J- in. to T
T
F in. downward to those of micro-
scopic size. The specific gravity is high, and ranges from 4'64
to 5-3.
It is incompletely insoluble in hydrochloric acid, but completely
and readily in sulphuric acid. If oxalic acid is added to the very
dilute filtered sulphuric acid solution, or to the solution obtained
by fusing the mineral with soda, and if the mass is treated with
water and the residue filtered and dissolved with hydrochloric
acid, a precipitate is obtained, which, upon ignition, becomes
brick-red, due to the presence of cerium oxide.
Before the blowpipe the mineral turns grey, but is infusible.
If heated with sulphuric acid it colours the flame bluish-green,
due to phosphoric acid.
Monazite is found in granite, gneissic rocks, and mica-schist in
the Maritime Mountains of Brazil, in South Mountain region of
North Carolina, and many other places, but only in minute
quantity. The monazite of commerce is derived from sands or
placers resulting from the denudation of the mineral-bearing rock.
The Brazilian deposits occur as beach sands.2
Thorium is chiefly used in the manufacture of mantles for
incandescent gaslights.
The value of monazite is about 4d. per pound.
Tix.
The only ore of this metal of commercial value is the oxide,
cassiterite, which occurs in lodes, beds, and stockworks, and in
alluvial drifts.
Tin-ore is found in granite, felspar-porphyry, and other acid
eruptives, and in sedinientaries which have been intruded by
granite, etc.
At Mount Bischoff,
3 one of the greatest tin mines on the
globe, the Palaeozoic slates and sandstones are intruded by dykes
Joseph Hyde Pratt, Mineral Resources of the United States, p. 1163,
Washington, 1904.
2 Loc. cit., p. 951.
3
Sydney P. Fawns, "Notes on the Mount Bischoff Tin Mine/' Trans.
List. Min. and Met., Pamphlet, p. 16, London, 1905.

--- Page Break ---
184 MINING GEOLOGY.
of porphyritic felsite which carries topaz both crystalline and
amorphous. The topazisation was probably a pneumatolytic
process proceeding from deep-seated granite. The felspar of the
ground mass is replaced by topaz. The analysis recorded by
Baron Von Groddeck showed no alkali. The rock consisted
practically of quartz, topaz, and tin. Wolfram does not occur in
payable quantity in the topaz tin-ore.
The common associates of tin-ore are wolfram, quartz, mica, and
tourmaline.
About 65 per cent, of the world's supply is derived from the tin-
placers in the Straits Settlements and Dutch East Indies, where
the tin-bearing gravels cover hundreds of square miles.
The world's annual production is about 100,000 tons.
Tin containing 5'5 per cent, of arsenic is useless for commercial
purposes and requires further purifying.
Tin-ore is bought by the smelters from the results of the dry
assay, and is subject to certain schedule deductions.
TUNGSTEN.
The principal ores of tungsten are scheelite, the tungstate of
lime ; wolfram, the tungstate of iron ; and megabasite, the
tungstate of manganese.
Wolfram is usually associated with tinstone. Scheelite occurs
in veins in schists and sandstones, generally associated with
quartz. When the vein-stuff contains gold or silver, as often
happens, the scheelite can be produced very cheaply as a
by-product.
The best-known deposit of megabasite is that in the Ima
Mining Company's property at Patterson Creek, in the state of
Idaho, where it occurs with wolfram in a vein varying from
5 feet to 15 feet wide, and assaying from 5 per cent, to 50 per cent,
of tungstic acid.
The principal sources of the world's tungsten are England,
Austria-Hungary, Saxony, Germany, New South Wales, and
Queensland.
The price varies with the quality of the ore. German and
English buyers give from 7s. to 8s. per unit.
In the United States prices are somewhat higher, the value of
scheelite containing from 45 per cent, to 55 per cent, of tungstic acid
being about 8s. per unit, while ores containing from 55 per cent,
to 65 per cent, of tungstic acid command 10s. per unit of scheelite.
The ferro-tungsten ore wolfram is mainly produced in Cornwall
(England), Hungary, New South Wales, and Queensland. It is
sold on the tungstic acid basis. Wolfram to be marketable must

--- Page Break ---
ORES AND MINERALS CONSIDERED ECONOMICALLY. 185
be brought to an average of 50 to 70 per cent, of timgstic acid.
It is essential that the ore be free, or nearly so, from phosphorus
and sulphur, but the presence of carbon and silica will not be
considered injurious. At present an ore averaging 60 per cent.
W03, and containing not more than 0'25 per cent, phosphorus,
and 0*01 per cent, sulphur, can be sold in New York at 28s. per
unit of tungstic acid, equal to 84 per long ton.
A typical ore, used by German steel works, analyses from :
W03, . . . 60-76
FeO, . . . 8-10
MnO,
. . . 9-12
CaO, . . 0-4-1
Buyers as a rule do not care tohandle ore running under 40 per
cent, of tungstic acid. Therefore to be broughtup to a marketable
grade the ore must be crushed and concentrated. High-grade
ores can be bagged as they come from the mine, or their grade
may be improved by hand-sorting; but quartzose ores can only
be made marketable by wet-crushing and concentration.
The wolfram produced in Queensland is of very high grade, and
for a time commanded as much as 140 per ton.
The chief use of tungsten is in the manufacture of tungsten
steels, which possess the special property of self-hardening.
Recently tungsten has been added to a copper-aluminium alloy,
to which it imparts greater strength and toughness. Tungstate
of soda is used in conjunction with starch for rendering light
fabrics non-inflammable. It is also used by dyers as a mordant,
for hardening plaster-of-paris, and to a small extent in the arts.
ZINC.
The principal source of the zinc of commerce is the sulphide,
sphalerite or blende, and to a less extent the carbonate, calamine.
Zinc-ores are commonly associated with galena, pyrites, and
often copper.
The principal zinc-producing countries are Germany, United
States, Belgium, Italy, Sweden, England, and Austria.
The ores of Broken Hill, in New South Wales, contain a large
percentage of zinc, the economic extraction of which has proved
a difficult problem.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VIII.
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE-VALUATION.
CONTENTS :
Sampling Equipment Sampling Intervals Record of Samples
Breaking the Sample Sampling Reduction of Sample Assay of
Samples Calculating Value Future Prospects Sample Values and
Mill ValuesSampling Dumps and Heaps.
IN the majority of mines sampling proceeds simultaneously with
the mine development, the results being recorded on assay plans,
which are generally longitudinal or stope plans. Where the
sampling during development has been carefully and systemati-
cally done, the averages should approximate those obtained by the
mine-examiner.
Sampling Equipment. This includes new sample bags of
canvas or stout calico, say 14 in. long and 9 in. wide; a canvas
sheet, about 6 ft. long and 5 ft. wide ; a short-handled 4 Ib. or
5 Ib. hammer ; a gad or two ; small linen tape or foot-rule ; a
number of small metal tags or strips of soft wood, each with a
distinctive number or mark ; and a stout canvas lock-up sack
for the safe custody of samples.
Sampling Intervals. Begin the sampling of a level at the
end of the main cross-cut, or at some point easily located with
respect to a survey station.
When the whole width of the vein or seam is exposed in the
drive it is customary to sample the higher or foot-wall portion
lying on the back of the level, as the lower portion may be partly
underfoot, and often covered with mud and water.
Divide the level into sections of 5 ft., 10 ft., or more, according
to the extent of the open ground and character of ore. Mark
the divisions with chalk, or by blackening the wall with a candle-
flame.
With respect to the sampling intervals, it is well to remember
that a large number of small samples taken at short intervals are
often more reliable than a small number of large samples taken at
wide intervals.
When the ore is known to be consistent in value, and is
186

--- Page Break ---
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE-VALUATION. 187
exposed in long stretches, the sampling intervals may be 20 ft.
apart; but when the vein is somewhat irregular in width and
value the 5 ft. intervals will give the most trustworthy results.
Record of Samples. Carefully measure and record the
width of the vein in feet and inches at each interval.
A simple and accurate method of recording the sampling
intervals, widths, and sample numbers is to draw a diagram in
FIG. 72. Showing Record of Widths, Values, and Sampling Intel vals.
field-book representing a longitudinal section of the level. On
this diagram, which need not be drawn to scale, all the necessary
information can be shown graphically. This method has also
the advantage that the assay-values can afterwards be filled in at
the different intervals, thus completing the record.
FIG. 73. Longitudinal Section of Block between 150 and 300 feet Levels.
The widths, numbers, and values are commonly recorded on
mine-assay plans in different coloured inks, according to the
individual fancy of the engineer ; but this is not necessary in the
examiner's field-book, which is a private record.
In the above figure the widths of ore are shown in inches under

--- Page Break ---
188 MINING GEOLOGY.
the level, and the value in dwts. above the level. The sampling
intervals are represented by dots.
In the Meyer and Charlton J
Mine, at Johannesburg, the
values entered upon the continuous section are not the assay
values, but the recovery values which the different processes in
use are estimated to be capable of recovering.
Breaking the Sample. Dress the face down with a pick, so
as to expose a fresh surface, and, if necessary, clean it with
water.
With the hammer and gad break a sample at each interval,
allowing the material to fall on to the canvas sheet, or into a stiff
felt hat or narrow box held by an assistant.
The sample is taken from a groove cut at right angles to the
plane of the dip; or, in other words, across the thickness from
wall to wall, as shown in fig. 72.
In cases where the width of the vein is less than that of the
level or stope, it is necessary to square the ore on the back of the
level or stope in order that the true width of the vein, from wall
to wall, may be exposed for sampling.
In ore of fairly uniform hardness the width of the groove will
vary from 4 in. to 6 in., and from J in. to 1J in. deep. The
sample will generally weigh from 2 Ibs. to 10 Ibs. for every foot
of vein or bed.
When the vein-matter is arranged in distinct bands of crustifi-
cation that is with a ribbon-structure it is advisable to sample
each band separately to determine where the values lie.
Wide lodes should also be sampled in widths of 2 ft. or 3 ft., as
sometimes the values are carried by the foot-wall portion, some-
times by the hanging wall or by the central portion. In such
cases a single sample taken from wall to wall may convey quite
an erroneous impression as to the commercial value of the lode.
Where a level is driven on a wide lode, only a small portion of
the ore is exposed for examination. In such cases it is customary
for the management during the progress of development to cross-
cut the lode at intervals of 20 ft. or 50 ft., according to the
metalliferous character of the ore. These cross-cuts will afford
the examiner an opportunity of sampling the lode from wall to
wall in such manner as the case may require. Where there are
no cross-cuts through the lode from the level, the full, or, at any
rate, the payable, width of ore will generally be found exposed in
the stopes.
It often happens, in the case of flat-lying veins, that the level
has been driven on the footwall of the vein, or that the level has
1 T. A. Rickard, The Sampling and Estimation of Ore in a Mine, p. 174,
New York, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE VALUATION. 189
been timbered for the stoping. In these cases there is no ex-
posure of the ore in the level, and the samples must be obtained
from the stopes overhead.
When sampling a lode composed of very soft, friable, or sugary
ore, it is advisable to expose a fresh surface by cutting a groove
6 in. or 8 in. wide and several inches deep. The material from
this groove is rejected, and the assay sample broken down from
the fresh surface exposed in the cut.
With uniformly soft material throughout, a pick may be safely
used in breaking the samples ; but with hard ores, or ores con-
taining hard and soft patches, the hammer and gad must alone be
used, as the pick is liable to find the soft places more frequently
than the hard, with the result that a relatively larger proportion
of the soft ore is broken than of the hard.
If the softer material is richer than the harder, as it often is,
manifestly the sample will be unduly enriched ; but if poorer,
then the sample will be impoverished. In any case the assay
value will not represent the true value of the ore.
Sampling
1
on Floor of Levels. In cases where the ore
has been stoped out above a level it may be necessary to sample
the vein along the floor. Here the rails, sleepers, water, and
sediment will increase the difficulties of the sampler. The
blasting will have shattered the ore, and the interstices will have
become filled with sediment either richer or poorer than the ore
itself. In these circumstances the sampling must be conducted
with much care and judgment.
Sampling Specimen Veins. The valuation of gold-bearing
veins in which the gold occurs in isolated bunches or patches at
irregular intervals, or only at the intersection of cross-veins or
indicators, is impossible by the ordinary methods of sampling.
Even bulk or battery tests are not to be relied upon, as the values
generally lie in a very small space. Thus, while hundreds of
ounces of gold may be found in the space of a few yards, the ore
for long stretches 011 both sides may contain no gold whatever.
The valuation of such properties is a problem of almost impossible
solution.
Sampling of Stopes. Stopes are merely a succession of
horizontal drives. They are sampled in the same manner as
levels. Samples are broken from the back, sides, and working
faces, according to circumstances.
When the width of the vein is less than the width of the stope,
the vein and the rock must be sampled separately, the widths of
each being carefully noted.
Sampling of ^A/inzes. Ore exposed in rise and winzes is
valued by breaking samples at 5-feet or 10-feet intervals from

--- Page Break ---
190 MINING GEOLOGY.
grooves cut at right angles to the plane of the dip. The thick-
ness of ore is measured and recorded on a diagram in the field-
book, together with the sample number at each interval.
Reduction of Sample. The weight of the sample broken
down will vary with the width and hardness of the ore. When it
is larger than the capacity of the sample-bag, the sheet must be
carried to a convenient place underground, and its contents
broken down to the size of a walnut. When this has been done,
the sample is thoroughly mixed, formed into a very flat truncated
cone, and quartered.
Two opposite quarters are rejected, being removed completely
with all their fines from the sheet. The material in the two
remaining quarters is then broken down to a size half the diameter
of a walnut, thoroughly mixed, and again quartered. The two
quarters lying in the position of the two quarters retained in the
first operation are rejected and removed from the sheet.
A common method of mixing the ore on the sampling-sheet is
to toss the material from one side to the other. In this process
care must be taken to insure that the fines are not concentrated
in one particular part of the sample, but evenly distributed
throughout the whole mass before each quartering.
In three-quarterings, a sample weighing 80 Ibs. will thus be
cut down to 10 Ibs., which is about the maximum capacity of the
sample-bags.
The time required to break down a sample will depend upon
the hardness and size of the lode. It seldom is less than half an
hour, and may extend to several hours, depending upon the
number of quarterings needed to reduce the sample to a convenient
weight. The sampling of a large mine may occupy several weeks,
and run into a cost of several hundred pounds.
Assay ofSamples. The whole of the sample should be dried,
crushed in a rock-breaker in the laboratory to pass through a
10-mesh sieve, mixed, and sampled by quartering till reduced to
a pound or two in weight, all of which should be finally pulverised,
passed through a 60-mesh sieve, again mixed, and divided into
two portions. One portion is handed to the assayer, while the
other is retained as a duplicate sample for subsequent reference
and verification if the necessity should arise.
Carelessness in the laboratory may stultify all the care exercised
in the sampling underground.
If the mine-examiner submit his samples to an assayer whose
qualifications are unknown to him, he should take care to be
present during the crushing, pulverising, and final division of the
assay samples.
The duplicate samples should be put into small calico or stout

--- Page Break ---
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE VALUATION. 191
brown-paper bags, labelled, and secured in a lock-up sack, which
should be removed from the laboratory.
The examiner's samples should never be submitted to the rnine-
assayer; and only in very exceptional circumstances should the
samples be placed in the hands of an unknown assayer.
Calculating- Average Width and Value oif Vein. The
assay-values may be expressed in pennyweights of gold per ton ;
percentage of metal ; or, in the case of low-valued gold or bullion,
the money-value may be stated in dollars or s. d. per ton.
The thickness of the ore is most conveniently expressed in
inches for veins up to 8 feet or 10 feet thick. Take the case of
ten samples from a gold-bearing vein, as follows :
i
356 2388
The average width is found by dividing the sum of the widths
by the number of samples. Thus, in this case we have s
^ = 35 6
inches average width.
The average assay-value is found by dividing the sum of the
inch-dwt. by the sum of the widths as under: 2
5
3
/gr
8 = 6'7 dwts.
per ton for a width of 35'6 inches.
When a vein contains two bands of payable ore separated by a
band of no value, which cannot be sorted out economically, the
average assay value is ascertained as follows :
Let band A be 18 inches wide, and have an assay value
of 2 per ton.
,, B ,, 6 inches wide and worthless.
,, C ,, 12 inches wide and worth 3 per ton.
Then (18 x 2)+ (6 x 0)+ (12 x 3)_ ft
18+6+ 12

--- Page Break ---
192 MINING GEOLOGY.
If it is practicable to sort out half of the worthless band, then
the average assay value of the ore will be found as under :
8
) _ _
In estimating the net profit in siyhl in a block of ore, it is mani-
fest that the recovery value, and not the assay value, must form
the basis of the calculation.
High Assay Values. A sample giving an exceptionally
high assay-value may be dealt with in different ways. It may be
discarded entirely and not included in the average ; or ascertain
the average value with it included, and replace the original excep-
tional value by this average, and then calculate the average value
for the average width.
For example
: Five Samples gave values of 10 dwt., 20 dwt.,
25 dwt., 120 dwt., and 25 dwt. per ton. The average is 40 dwt.
Replace the exceptional value, 120 dwt., by 40 dwt., and then
proceed with the calculation of results.
The exceptional value may represent a small patch of rich ore,
or a bunch of rich ore increasing in dimensions going upwards or
downwards, or even a solitary speck of gold. The most satis-
factory manner of dealing with an exceptionally rich assay from a
sample is to resample the vein a second time. T. A. Rickard 1
also recommends the taking of intermediate samples as a further
precaution against fraud or mistake.
Future Prospects. When satisfactory values have been
obtained around a block of ground, the natural inference is that
the area of ore is of the same approximate value.
Experience has shown that where a block is exposed on four
sides, such inference is fair and reasonable. Where the block is
exposed on three sides the inference is open to doubt.
Before arriving at a definite conclusion as to the future
prospects of the mine, it is advisable for the examiner or mining
engineer to carefully consider the following questions
:
(1) Is there any change of rock-formation enclosing the lode
in any part of the mine? If so, what influence does
this change of country exercise upon the value of the ore?
(2) Is there any indication of barren zones of ore, either in
depth or horizontal extension, along the course of the
lode?
(3) Are the values in the zone of oxidation likely to be main-
tained in the unoxidised portion ?
(4) What are the probabilities of impoverishment in depth 1
1
T. A. Rickard, loc. cit., p. 42.

--- Page Break ---
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE-VALUATION. 193
Sample Values and Mill Returns. Manifestly the assay-
values obtained represent only the values of the actual material
broken by the examiner. The variations of value obtained at
the different intervals clearly emphasise the variable value of the
ore. Hence the mean values deduced from the assay-values can
only be regarded, even in the most favourable cases, as close
approximations.
A mining engineer with a personal knowledge of the ore and
values in a mine extending over a considerable period can often
so adjust his averages by the experience of the past as to make a
very close estimate of the quantity and value of ore in newly
developed ground in the same or adjoining mines.
The discrepancy that often exists between the sampler's estimate
and the mill returns, in the case of gold-ores particularly, may be
due to one or several causes, among which the following may be
enumerated :
(1) A sudden increase of width of ore without a corresponding
increase of values.
(2) A sudden decrease in values ; or the payshoot may be split
by a horse into two legs which reunite between two
levels.
(3) A greater proportion of mullock or rock is sent to the
mill than was contained in the examiner's samples. This
is a contingency very liable to occur in the breaking of a
narrow vein in the stopes, especially where the vein is
less in width than the width of the breast or face. In
cases where the walls of the vein are well denned and
the stripping easy, the proportion of rock introduced with
the ore is not likely to be very great, especially where a
stretch of ore is stripped before it is broken.
(4) Imperfect tally of the tonnage of ore sent to the mill.
(5) Inadequate allowance for moisture.
The sampling of a mine for valuation purposes is most exhaust-
ing, both physically and mentally. When the work has been
carried out carefully and conscientiously, the mine-examiner should
be prepared to stand by his results.
The examiner must remember that he is the confidential
adviser of his principals, and for that reason must keep a discreet
silence about the results of his examination, and of his opinion as
to the probable value of the mine.
Sampling of Dumps or Paddocks of Ore. The stack of
ore is divided into a number of small blocks by two systems of
cuts or trenches passing through the ore at right angles to each
other.
13

--- Page Break ---
194 MINING GEOLOGY.
(a) Each block can now be sampled separately by picking
pieces of ore from its four sides.
(b) Or the material excavated from the trenches can be wheeled
to a clean piece of ground, spawled into small pieces,
mixed, and quartered repeatedly until a sample of con-
venient size is obtained. Before each quartering the
larger pieces of ore must be broken to half their diameter
in the preceding quartering.
(c) Or the material from the trenches can be crushed in a rock-
breaker, mixed, and quartered down till the assay sample
is obtained.
Sampling Heaps of Tailings. If the accumulation of
tailings is large it should be sampled in separate sections, as
large piles of sands are liable to vary considerably in value in
different parts.
Stake oft' the heap, so as to divide it' into sections about 5
yards square. Make a diagram in field-book corresponding to
sections. Record the dimensions of the sections, and distinguish
each section by a letter, as A, B, C, etc.
Sample each section, beginning with section A :
(1) With a sampling-iron take samples all over the section at,
say, every foot or two.
(2) If there is reason to believe that the values are not the
same from top to bottom, put the top material into one
bag and the lower into another ; or, if necessary, separate
samples can be taken for every foot of depth.
(3) If there is no sampling-iron available, holes are dug at
intervals of every 4 feet or 6 feet. The sands from the
holes are wheeled to a clean place, mixed, and reduced by
quartering to a convenient size.
If required, the sand obtained from different depths can be
kept separate.
Salting of Mines. By "salting" is meant the illegal
enrichment of the ore, with the object of giving the property
a fictitious value.
The mine-examiner should be familiar with the methods adopted
by unscrupulous persons, so as to be able to protect the interests
of his principals.
A common method is to tamper with the examiner's samples ;
and for this reason the samples should always be in safe custody
until the assay results are known.
Cases are known where the sample-bags have been enriched
before the samples were put into them. It is therefore a wise
precaution to keep the sample-bags in a lock-up sack until they

--- Page Break ---
MINE-SAMPLING AND ORE-VALUATION. 195
are required. And even then it is advisable to turn each bag
inside out and shake vigorously before use.
In the case of gold-mines, soft ore has been artificially enriched
to a depth of a foot or more with a strong solution of chloride
of gold.
Fraud has been practised on mine-examiners by stretches of
rich ore having been skilfully built into the wall of a level at
different intervals and at the working face, the joints being
obscured by liberal splashes of mud. In the same way artificial
outcrops have been prepared.
Dumps of ore have been stacked with rich ore on the sides and
top surface. An imposture of this kind is at once disclosed by
the process of trenching when procuring samples for assay.
Samples of gold-wash intended for examination by panning
have been enriched, either before or during the washing, by the
agency of gold-bearing tobacco-ash, pellets of clay, and gold-
bearing finger-nails. The gold obtained from the panning of gold-
wash or tailings should be examined under the microscope.
Bulk samples of ore have been salted during the process of
treatment in the battery, either by the addition of gold or
amalgam.
The examiner's samples may be unlawfully enriched at any
stage from the breaking of the material in the mine to the
assaying in the laboratory. Strong solutions of gold chloride
have been injected into the bags with a syringe, and gold-dust
added to the litharge and fluxes. Fraud is so easily practised
in this stage that the examiner should either supply his own assay
materials or test those placed at his disposal.
In these days of mine-valuation by systematic sampling, cases
of stacking or salting of the ore in the mine are rare, and easily
circumvented by the watchful examiner. But, besides covert acts
intended to beguile, the examiner may be misled by the suppres-
sion of important developments, or by the blocking-up of workings
where unfavourable results might be obtained.
On his part the mine-examiner must be careful not to assume
an attitude of restraint and distrust towards those connected with
the management. In the writer's experience, miners are as
honest as most men ; and if they sometimes put the best side
before you it is more from a feeling of loyalty to their employers
than a deliberate desire to deceive. Probably not more than one
in a hundred would wilfully mislead you, or use unlawful means
to enrich your samples. But the hundredth man is generally
a clever rogue, and needs close watching ; and because of this
one man you must take no risks, either in the mine or in the
laboratory.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTEK IX.
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF
MINES.
CONTENTS : Valuation of Metal Mines Developed Mines and Going
Concerns Classification of Ore in a Mine Valuation of Coal Areas
Valuation of Alluvial Ground.
THE payable ore in a vein or coal in a seam is manifestly a
certain finite quantity ; therefore the greatest coalfield and largest
ore-deposit must eventually see a day of exhaustion. And if the
total quantity of ore or coal and the annual output are known,
the date of exhaustion is a matter of simple calculation.
A mining property blessed with a good constitution that is,
endowed with a considerable quantity of valuable ore, from the
date of discovery to the point of exhaustion naturally passes
through the successive stages of infancy, youth, full-grown man-
hood, middle age, old age, and extinction.
Infancy is the discovery stage of mine existence; youth, the
development stage ; full grown, the payable going concern in the
meridian of life ; middle age, the going concern past the meridian ;
old age, the period of decadence and exhaustion. But all this is
true only of the mine that survives the early stages of existence,
and lives what may be termed a full and profitable life, leaving
an honoured name behind.
Some mines give promise of their later vigour even in early
infancy, and others that are weakly in infancy develop into a
robust manhood. The greatest mortality takes place in infancyand
youth. Scores of promising mineral discoveries are unable to sur-
vive the stage of development. They never become going concerns.
But sudden exhaustion is not an affection peculiar to the very
old or the very young mine. There are many notable examples of
vigorous mines coming to a sudden end through exhaustion of the
ore reserves in a way not expected or provided for by the
management.
The mine-examiner will, therefore, like the careful physician,
196

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 197
have an eye open for possible constitutional defects that may
cause sudden decadence in even the most vigorous. A mining
property may be examined by a mining engineer for the following
objects
:
(a) The purchase of mine by his principals.
(b) The purchase of shares or a share interest.
(c) Recommendations as to future development work.
The examination and valuation of a mine go hand-in-hand, but
mine-examination is a very different thing from mine-valuation.
Two independent engineers may examine the same property and
collect the same data and information, but form quite different
conclusions as to the prospective value of the property.
Experience and the personal equation count for much. The
latter means that some naturally possess a sounder judgment and
more discriminating mind than others, are better able to compre-
hend the meaning of facts, and hence more competent to form a
true conception of a proposition presented to them.
The valuation of a mine is a prosaic, matter-of-fact problem
requiring the exercise of the commercial faculty. Even in the
most favourable circumstances the problem is not easy of solution,
for the reason that some of the essential factors are often wanting,
or merely represented by approximations. On the other hand, it
must be clearly understood that mine valuation is something more
than a purely mechanical operation. There is, besides, the subtle
element that always distinguishes the skilful diagnosis of the in-
ternal condition and prospects of a patient made by the physician
from certain external symptoms.
The essential factors of mine valuation may be summarised in
two phrases, namely
:
(a) Adequate development.
(b) Systematic and conscientious sampling.
For purposes of examination, miningproperties maybe considered
as belonging to one of three classes, as follows :
(1) Metal mines ;
(2) Coal-mines ; (3) Alluvial mines.
Valuation of Metal Mines. In the case of a property
known to be metalliferous, or to contain some valuable mineral,
the scope, and to some extent the method, of examination will be
determined by the stage the mine has reached in its existence.
The different stages in the life of a mine may be sub-divided as
follows: (1) Discovery stage; (2) development stage; (3) going-
concern stage ; (4) decadent stage ; (5) abandoned.
Discovery Stage. In this stage we assume (a) That a vein or

--- Page Break ---
198 MINING GEOLOGY.
ledge has been located by the prospector, and a legal title obtained
for the ground, forming what may be termed a surface-show ; or
(6) that the claim has been pegged out on position alone, no vein
or seam of valuable mineral being exposed at the surface.
A Surface Show. In this case the outcrop has probably been
prospected by trenches and shallow shafts, sufficient to disclose
the width, direction of strike, and dip of the deposit.
Having provided himself with the best topographical and
geological maps obtainable, the mine-examiner will proceed with
his examination, which will embrace a consideration of the
following points
:
(1) The geological features.
(2) The physical features, particularly with reference to the
subsequent working of the property, should the results
warrant this course ; note such points as the backs avail-
able that is, if the vein can be worked water-free ; but,
if not, mention if sinking is likely to be wet or dry,
mine-timber and water-power available, etc.
(3) Sample the outcrop at different points, noting the width
of vein and peculiarities of structure.
(4) Mention the proximity, or absence, of valuable or worthless
mines in the district.
(5) Make inquiries as to past history of the field, obtaining
official statistics when possible.
(6) Gain a personal knowledge of the local peculiarities of the
ore-deposits in the neighbouring mines, especially noting
vein-structure, average width and value of ore, accessory
minerals, country-rock, influence of different kinds of
country, faults, intrusive dykes, methods of treatment,
monthly output, mining costs, etc.
When once on the ground, the mine-examiner should make a
point of acquiring all the general and particular information he
can obtain for his future reference and guidance.
The results of the sampling and observations may be satis-
factory, but the experienced mining engineer will be careful not
to commit himself to a definite opinion as to the potential value of
the property upon surface indications alone. The young engineer
must not be afraid to report to his principals
" that the develop-
ment work is insufficient to enable me to form a definite opinion
as to the probable value of the property." The experienced
engineer finds no difficulty in doing so.
Bear in mind that the outcrops of silver, lead, zinc, and copper
lodes are often less valuable than they are at some depth below the
surface; while those of gold are in many cases more valuable.

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 199
Hence, with the former, the judgment must be guided more by
mineralogical and geological considerations than by sampling.
If the outcrop values and general surroundings are satisfactory,
the examiner will in most cases be warranted in recommending
further development work being undertaken in order to open up
the ground for a fuller examination. The mine-examiner, from
his knowledge of the ground, will be able to indicate to his
principals the nature, extent, and probable cost of such work.
In this case it will manifestly be to the interest of the intend-
ing purchasers to acquire a working option over the property for
a period of six, nine, or twelve months, or, may be, if the work to
be undertaken is considerable, two years.
The deed of option should be legally executed between the
interested parties ; clearly specify the term of purchase, and state
which party is under obligation to pay rents, taxes, royalty, and
comply with the labour regulations, etc., during the currency of
the option.
The vendor may sometimes require an immediate cash payment
of an agreed sum of money on the execution of the deed of option,
such sum to be considered part of the purchase-money should the
property be taken over ; or he may covenant that a certain
specified sum be spent in mine-development, either monthly or
during the whole period of the option, as a guarantee that the
work will be prosecuted with vigour.
It should be remembered, however, that the engineer for the
purchaser is generally the best judge as to what sum should be
spent in the development work necessary to enable him to form a
reliable opinion of the value of the property. On the other hand,
the chance of doing good business should not be lost by pursuing
a niggardly policy with the vendors. Therefore, each case must
be judged on its own merits.
So far we have assumed that the surface outcrops gave
sufficient values to warrant further development being under-
taken with a view of opening up the ground for a more critical
examination. According to the configuration of the surface and
position of the outcrops, the ore-vein will be prospected by levels
driven "end on" i.e. along the course of the ore-body, or by
cross-cuts and levels therefrom, or by a shaft or shafts.
In selecting the sites for the aforesaid levels or shafts it is in
most cases advisable to keep in mind the possibility of these works
being utilised in the permanent working of the mine, should the
results justify this course.
Again, the surface outcrops may be worthless and the prospects
insufficient to warrant any expenditure on prospecting. On the
other hand, the value of the property may be so obvious that the

--- Page Break ---
200 MINING GEOLOGY.
mine-examiner is justified in recommending the immediate
purchase. In this case no prospecting should be undertaken by
the examiner until a firm option of purchase has been acquired on
bed-rock terms.
Undeveloped properties of such obvious value are rare, and
hence extreme caution must be exercised by the examiner before
recommending an immediate purchase. Ledges of silver-lead ore
and gossans of pyritic ore-bodies have been discovered in situations
that left little room for doubt as to their great value, even from sur-
face sampling and examination ; and thesame has proved true of not
a few valuable deposits of magnetite, specular iron, and manganese.
But even if the examiner have the immediate purchase of the
property in his mind, he will seldom have much difficulty in
obtaining the right (under an option of purchase) to spend a
month or two in sampling and surveying preparatory to the
completion of the purchase.
Pegged on Position. This is generally an undeveloped property,
often possessing no surface indications of valuable ore or mineral.
It is, however, not on all-fours with the cases we have already
discussed. In some cases position means everything ; in others,
nothing. For example, an area surrounded by working coal-mines,
iron-mines, or oil-wells occurring in the same formation, in the
FIG. 74. Section of Valuable Bedded Deposit.
absence of faults or igneous dykes, is an area already proved
valuable by its juxtaposition to valuable mines. Or a claim
pegged out on the strike of a lode that has proved to be payable
up to the boundary is a potentially valuable property. Or a
claim pegged out on the dip of a flat-lying lode, seam, or bed that
has been proved to be valuable by the outcrop mines is a property,
in the absence of great faults, igneous dykes, or a change of rock-
formation, thatmay prove to be of great value.
In the above figure, A is an outcrop claim assumed to be

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 201
valuable. Here B and C are claims pegged on position, and
their potential value will depend upon the value and character-
istics of the ore-body as disclosed by the mine working in the out-
crop claim.
Manifestly the value of claims B and C can only be determined
by shafts or by bore-holes. In the majority of cases boring will
be resorted to as being cheaper, quicker, and affording the means
of testing the deposit at a greater number of points.
Claim D has been pegged out on position. It is next to the
out-crop claim, but being situated on the foot-wall side of the
deposit its position counts for nothing.
In the case of steep lodes, claims pegged out on the dip-sidemay
be worth little commercially, from the extreme depth at which
mining operations would have to be conducted.
In this example claim B may be, for all practical purposes, of no
more value than Claim C.
The valuation of position properties presents many difficulties.
The mine-examiner will therefore need to make a critical
examination of the ore-bodies in the adjoining mines, of the
FIG. 75. Section of Steep Lode.
geological structure of the country, and a particular search for
dykes, faults, or change of country.
The points which the examiner will bring under the notice of
his principals are as follows :
(1) Situation of claim and means of access.
(2) Area of claim and name of owners.
(3) Title i.e. leasehold or freehold with particulars of rents,
royalties, labour conditions, etc.
(4) Geological features.
(5) Physical features, mentioning climate, forests, water-power,
etc.

--- Page Break ---
202 MINING GEOLOGY.
(6) Particulars of vein-outcrops, prospecting work done.
(7) Values obtained from sampling.
(8) Discussion of general surroundings.
(9) Opinion as to future prospects, and recommendations.
Three courses may he pursued, according to the circumstances
i.e. the property may be
(a) Rejected.
(b) Secured on working option.
(c) Purchased.
If the engineer recommends that an option be secured, he
should give full details of the character and extent of the proposed
work, its probable cost, time required for the work, its effect when
completed, and proposed method of supervision.
Developed Mines and Going Concerns. The commercial
valuation of a mining property in this stage is based upon the
following considerations :
(1) The quantity and value of ore developed, and quantity of
ore being developed.
(2) The net profit per ton.
(3) The annual output to yield a net profit per cent, on a
certain capitalisation.
(4) The probable life of mine.
The quantity of ore that might be expected to be opened up by
further development work must not be lost sight of. But the
quantity and value of such ore are unknown quantities, and the
importance to be attached to them in calculating the mine value
must in every case be determined by the character of the
ore-body and the value of the ore already developed and won.
In all cases the fundamental basis of mine valuation is the net
profit in sight.
Some veins are notoriously patchy, while others are equally
consistent as metal-producers ; hence no safe rule can be laid down
as to the prospective value of undeveloped ground. The local
conditions must govern each case. It is, however, well for the
engineer to remember that the ore-values of vein-deposits are
more liable to sudden variation than those of bedded deposits.
As in the former cases, the mine-examiner will proceed to the
ground equipped with the best topographical and geological
maps obtainable ; also official reports and statistics, if any are
available.
When once on the ground, the examiner will find it advan-
tageous to pursue the following course of procedure, although it

--- Page Break ---
UNIVERSITY
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF ^K^gfe. TC_P
must be clearly understood that circumstances alter cases. The
suggestions given here are general rather than special, and must
be modified to suit the needs of each case :
(a) Carefully examine the mine-plan. Get the mine manager
to explain the general scope and extent of the underground
workings.
(b) Examine the surface outcrops (if any), and note the
geological and physical features.
(c) Examine the boundary-lines, and carefully note their position
with respect to the dip and course of the vein ore-body
or seam being worked in the mine.
(d) Note the relation of the underground workings to the
surface boundaries.
(e) Have a look at the ore coming to the surface, also at the
rock on the dump.
(/) Examine and make a note of the surface equipment, includ-
ing mills and all metallurgical plant and appliances.
When describing steam-engines, give the number and
size of cylinders, maker's name, pressure of steam carried
by boiler, etc.
The first day or two is spent in getting your bearings, and
becoming acquainted with the manager and noting what manner
of a man he is. A few days occupied on the surface in pre-
liminary work is generally time well spent. Make a note of any
facts presented or offered to you. Do not note opinions, and on
your side be careful to offer none.
(g) Examine the underground workings accompanied by the
mine manager or his deputy. According to the extent of
the workings, it may take a day or two to do this.
(A) Again examine the mine plans. You will be able to follow
them intelligently from the information you have gained
underground.
You have now reached the critical stage in your examination.
You have next to determine the condition of the mine ; and
among the questions that will naturally come into your mind will
be the following
:
(1) Is this a young mine with a prosperous future ahead of it?
(2) Is this a young mine doomed to early exhaustion ?
(3) Has this mine reached its maximum point of production
'?
(4) Is this an old mine approaching exhaustion ?
(&) Is this an old mine with the eyes picked out 1
The answer to these questions is to be found in the quantity

--- Page Break ---
204 MINING GEOLOGY.
and value of ore in sight. Do not forget that in a vigorous, well-
managed mine the development work will be commonly two years
ahead of the mill.
(i) Go underground with your own assistant, and sketch out
your scheme of sampling.
(j) Sample the mine in a systematic manner. This may take
a week or several weeks, according to the magnitude
of the workings and size of ore-bodies. (The general
principles of mine-sampling are described in the chapter
treating of "Mine-sampling and Ore-valuation.")
(k) Complete your surface investigations. Get mine returns of
output of ore and values extracted, or of mineral shipped
or exported, mining and milling costs, etc. Carefully
verify doubtful points.
(I) Before leaving the district make as complete an examina-
tion of the neighbouring mines as circumstances will
permit, noting character of country, ore-bodies being
worked, general characteristics of said ore, output,
returns, methods of treatment, costs of mining and
milling.
On no account allow yourself to be hurried in your examination.
Take your own time. Cultivate a deliberate temperament.
Base your estimates on facts, but be sure of your facts ; and in
your report be careful to differentiate between facts and opinions.
Your next care is the assay of your mine samples, and in this
you must be guided by local considerations. If you are a skilful
assayer, it is preferable for you to hire an assay office for a day or
two, supply your own fluxes, crucibles, etc., and perform your own
assays ; or your assistant will probably be able to do so for you.
In whatever way the work of assaying is done, it is imperative
that the results must be accurate and reliable.
(m) Plot your assay values on tracings of mine-plans, and then
consider the results.
The form of your report will depend upon your recommenda-
tions. Manifestly the property may be
(1) Rejected.
(2) Secured on option.
(3) Purchased at once.
If, in your opinion, the property should be rejected, it will be
unnecessary to furnish elaborate details concerning it. But if

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 205
you recommend its purchase, it will devolve on you to supply
information upon the following points
:
(1) The situation of property, and its relation to any valuable
or worthless concerns in the vicinity.
(2) Means of access, with particulars of roads, railways,
waterways, distances from centres of population, etc.
(3) The area, owners, and names of old claims (if any), included
in the area; history, nature of title, labour obligations,
etc.
(4) Physical features, including particulars of rivers, moun-
tains, forests, rainfall, water-power available, etc.
(5) General geological structure : detail the rock-formations
present, their probable age, relations, disposition, and
distribution.
(6) Description of ore-bodies or mineral-deposits, with par-
ticulars as to their position with respect to boundaries of
prospect j their dimensions, dip, strike, outcrop, etc.
(7) Description of old workings (if any).
(8) Character and extent of present workings.
(9) Quantity and value of daily output of ore.
(10) Quantity and value of ore in sight.
(11) Method of treatment of ore, or of disposal of mineral.
(12) The cost of mining and treatment.
(13) Probable net profit per ton, and per annum, on a specified
annual output.
(14) Probable life of mine with a specified annual output.
(15) Description of present mining and metallurgical plant
and appliances.
(16) Development work recommended (if any), and estimated
cost.
(17) Details of additional plant, if any required.
(18) Recommendations as to management of property.
(19) Schedule of prevailing salaries and wages.
(20) Schedule of mine supplies required, and their cost
delivered at the mine.
(21) Local and general rates, import and export duties,
insurance, income and other taxes.
(22) Number of working-days in the year.
(23) Climatic conditions and prevailing sickness (if any).
(24) Mining legislation of country.
(25) Amount of working capital required to develop mine to a
paying point.
Classification of Ore in a Mine. Ore in sight and ore
developed are terms used in mining to define bodies of ore con-

--- Page Break ---
206 MINING GEOLOGY.
tained in more or less rectangular blocks of limited size exposed
by workings on all sides. They are only applied to ore that can
be extracted and treated at a profit.
The phrase ore in sight is ambiguous, and maymean ore exposed
on one, two, ormore sides. It may thusbe misleading, and should
therefore be allowed to fall into disuse.
A simple and clearly defined classification of ore is as follows :
(i) Ore Developed. Blocks of ore exposed on four sides,
(ii) Ore Partly Developed. Blocks of ore exposed on three or
two sides.
(iii) Ore Expected to be Developed. Blocks of ore that may be
reasonably expected to exist beyond or below the last
visible ore. Exposed on one side.
Philip Argall
l considers that the three phrases ore-developed, ore
being developed, and ore expectant should cover all the estimates
a mining engineer is called upon to make.
In the case of a vein exposed by surface outcrops only, there
is no ore in sight, notwithstanding that the values may be high.
FIG. 76. Longitudinal Section on Course of Lode.
Ore exposed in One Dimension. In fig. 76 the letters a, b, c,
and d represent prominent outcrops on the course of a lode.
The hollows between these outcrops are assumed to be obscured
by overburden. A number of samples selected at each outcrop
showed the presence of valuable ore. Manifestly any estimate of
the quantity of payable ore would be mere guesswork.
There is nothing to show that the payable ore is continuous
between the different outcrops It may or may not be so. Again,
the payable ore at the different outcrops may be mere local
patches, or the truncated remains of a pay-shoot that may have
been of considerable dimensions prior to the later sculpturing of
the country.
1 T. A. Rickard, The Sampling and Estimation of Ore in a Mine, p. 80,
New York, 1904.

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 207
In the above example we have the proof of the first principle,
in accordance with which an ore-body exposed in one dimension
affords no basis for the estimation ore in sight.
Ore exposed in Two Dimensions. We will now assume that
surface excavations have proved the continuance of the pay-shoot
from points a to c, fig. 77, and that a shaft has been sunk on the
vein at point b to a depth of 60 feet.
FIG. 77. Longitudinal Section of Lode.
The shaft sunk at 6 exposes two sides or dimensions of the
triangles of ore a b e and c b e for a thickness equal to the width
of the breast of ore exposed in the shaft.
Let a b=35 ft., b c=35 ft., and b e=60 ft., and the mean
width or thickness of pay-ore=4 ft. Assuming that the payable
values continued to the bottom of the shaft, we have two triangles
of ore partly developed.
From the above we get the mining engineer's second principle,
That an ore-body exposed in two dimensions gives a triangle of ore
only partly developed.
Ore exposed on Four Sides. In this example a level has been
driven on the course of the vein, and a rise put up from point/ to
the surface, and another rise from z to n. The dotted line s n in
shows the limits of the pay-shoot on the west side of the shaft.
The ore developed now includes the rectangular block b efc. The
irregular block b s in e is exposed on three sides, and therefore
contains ore not fully developed. The reliance to be placed upon
estimates of value in this block will depend upon the character-
istics of the ore-body and local conditions. The capacity of these
ore-bodies can easily be calculated for any given width.
From the above we get the third principle, That an ore-body
exposed in four dimensions gives a rectangular area of ore-
developed of a known approximate mean width and value.

--- Page Break ---
208 MINING GEOLOGY.
It is manifest that three dimensions do not fully expose a
rectangular body of ore. If in the above example we take sides
be, efj and / c as the known dimensions, then the value of the
triangle b k c is an unknown quantity. Again, if e b, b c, and cf
are the known dimensions, then the triangle of ore e Tcf is
unknown.
FIG. 78. Longitudinal Section of Lode.
In working mines, with the development well in advance of the
mill, the levels and rises by means of which the ore is cut up into
rectangular blocks for stoping afford four dimensions or sides for
examination and sampling.
Only in exceptional cases should the length of a block exceed
twice the height. The smaller the blocks the more trustworthy
will be the estimates of ore developed.
Estimation of Tonnage. This is found by dividing the number
of cubic feet of solid ore contained in the block by the number
of cubic feet of solid ore in a ton. The number of cubic feet in a
ton of ore depends on the specific gravity of the ore, and varies
from 12 to 15 cubic feet for a ton of 2000 Ibs.
In measuring up ground which is fully developed allowance must
be made for faults, dykes, probable horses of rock and pillars of ore
that will never be taken out. A deduction of 10 per cent, will
be sufficient in most cases ; but obviously no empirical rule can
be laid down. The character of the ore-body and containing rock,
and local experience, will afford the safest guides to follow.
Probable Ore Reserves. In many cases the mine-examiner may
be justified in assuming that the payable ore extends above or
below the working faces or open ground. In this matter he must
exercise great caution. His only guide is the general metalliferous

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 209
character of the ore already won. The pay-shoot may extend
a hundred, or only a few, feet beyond the face, or below the
level. Strong pay-shoots have been known to cut out in the
height of a stope or two ; and for this reason the examiner must
clearly discriminate between ore developed and probable ore.
Valuation of Coal Areas. In no department of mining is a
knowledge of field geology so requisite as in the examination and
valuation of a coal-bearing area. A seam of coal is a member of a
geological formation, and therefore the determination of its extent
is a geological problem.
The examiner should provide himself with the best topo-
graphical and geological maps obtainable, and any official reports
dealing with the geology of the district.
When the ground is reached, he will first make himself familiar
with the different members of the coal-bearing series, noting
particularly their physical character, thickness, fossil contents, the
horizon in which the coal seam or seams occur, and the character
of roof and floor of coal.
A visit to the -
neighbouring coal-mines, if any exist, will enable
the examiner to obtain much valuable and necessary information
respecting the above.
The next point is to determine the relationship of the coal-
measures to the underlying and overlying formations. This is
most readily determined by running cross-sections across the line
of strike at different intervals, carefully noting distances and
elevations of prominent outcrops and changes of rock-formation.
Having made himself familiar with the general geological struc-
ture of the district, and more particularly with the members of the
coal-measures, the examiner will proceed to plot the boundaries of
the coal-bearing rocks on his topographical map, whereon he will
also mark the direction of strike, dip, angle of dip or inclination
of beds, thickness of seams, faults, dykes, coal-outcrop, etc.
A cross-section of each outcrop is recorded in the field-book,
with remarks as to thickness of seam, character of coal, fireclays,
ironstone, associated rocks, etc.
If the angle of inclination of the coal-measures and contours of
the ground preclude the possibility of coal-outcrops existing in the
area under examination, the examiner will have to base his opinion
as to the coal-bearing prospects of the ground solely upon
geological considerations. In this case his examination of the
geological structure of the field and of the neighbouring coal-
mines will be more exact and critical than if numerous outcrops
existed. And in many cases he will be warranted in recommend-
ing boring at selected points, in order to determine the thickness
and depth of the coal.
14

--- Page Break ---
210 MINING GEOLOGY.
In the majority of cases the examiner's report will deal with
the following points
:
(1) Situation and means of access.
(2) Area, title, owners, rents or royalty, etc.
(3) Geological structure, illustrated with cross-sections.
(4) Physical features, with reference to forests, rainfall, water-
powers, etc.
(5) The area of coalfield. (This should be shown on a coloured
plan.)
(6) Thickness of seams, and presence of stone-partings.
(7) Existence of faults and dykes.
(8) Probable tonnage of coal ; presence of fireclay and ironstone.
(9) Quality of coal. Is it hard and strong, or soft and friable ?
Give analyses of coal : state whether it is useful for steam,
household, gas, smelting, etc., purposes. Discuss pro-
portion of sulphur present, water, ash, etc.
(10) State if any portion of the field lies so as to be water-free,
and, if so, what area.
(11) Give probable cost of mine-development.
(12) Cost of surface equipment.
(13) State probable cost of production.
(14) State situation of market for coal, access and probable
cost of transport of same.
(15) Discuss extent of market, probable competition, etc.
(16) State the probable net profit per ton.
In an area in which the quantity of coal is deduced from surface
outcrops and a few boreholes it is a needless refinement to attempt
to calculate the quantity of coal with mathematical exactness.
Having determined the approximate area and thickness of coal,
and made due allowance for broken coal along outcrop, faults,
and dykes, the quantity of coal that can be extracted may be
calculated on the following basis :
Tons per Acre.
For every foot of brown coal, . . 1000
pitch coal,
. . 1100
bituminous coal,
. 1200
,, cannel coal, . . 1300
,, anthracite,
. . 1500
Seams of coal and beds of shale are sampled in the same way as a
vein that is, by cutting a narrow groove from roof to floor at right
angles to the plane of the dip. Surface outcrops should be dressed
down with a pick before the sample is broken, as outcrop coal is
often waterlogged ; and sometimes the cracks are filled with fine
sediment or sand carried over the exposure byrunning water or rain.

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 211
VALUATION OF ALLUVIAL GROUND.
The valuation of alluvial or placer deposits, either for dredging
or hydraulic sluicing, is affected by determining the amount of
gold contained in a measured quantity of material obtained from
shafts or boreholes placed at regular intervals in the area under
consideration.
The Work of Sampling. First survey the block of ground, and
plot it on paper to a large scale say, 2 chains to the inch for
areas between 50 and 100 acres, and 1 chain to the inch for areas
under 50 acres.
Divide the ground on the plan into blocks of 1 to 5 or 6 acres.
The shape of the blocks will depend on the surface contours,
the direction of the drainage, and the probable direction of the
gold-leads.
In some cases the ground is a long narrow strip situated on one
or both sides of a river ; in others, terrace lands in a valley, which
are in many cases intersected by lateral streams.
Make a mark in the centre of each block, and then number the
blocks in consecutive order. Proceed to the ground and put a
stake or flag in the centre of each block. These stakes mark the
sites of the sampling holes.
The depth of gravel may vary from nothing to 40 feet, or more in
very deep ground.
Where the ground is dry and not deep it is customary to sink
holes or shafts at the selected points. The whole of the material
excavated from the hole is carefully measured in a box of known
capacity, washed by cradling, the gold contents weighed, and the
results recorded.
The record of each hole embraces information on the following
points
:
(1) Depth of ground.
(2) Character of bottom that is, whether slate orfalse bottom.
(3) Character of gravels (note particularly if beds of clay, large
boulders, or drift timber exist in ground).
(4) Quantity of material excavated in cubic yards, plus 20 per
cent, (all the boulders, both small and great, must be in-
cluded in the measurement).
(5) Quantity of gold obtained.
(6) Quantity of gold per cubic yard.
In ground where the sinking of holes would be impeded to any
considerable extent by water, it is usual to put down 5-inch or 6-inch
bore-holes at the selected points. The holes are lined with tubing,
and the material extracted by the sand pump, collected in a
wooden trough, washed, and the gold contents weighed.

--- Page Break ---
212 MINING GEOLOGY.
Record the depth of the hole, and calculate the cubic contents
from the outside diameter of the pipe, plus 20 per cent. The
excess is added because experience has shown that the gold values
calculated from the displacement of the pipe alone are always
higher than the actual returns. This is, no doubt, largely due to
the circumstance that a higher extraction or saving of the gold is
effected in the sampling tests than in actual practice.
Wrong Methods of Sampling. The method of selecting the test
samples from open faces or from the sides or floor of small
streams has often led to erroneous conclusions. In these places
the gold is generally more or less concentrated, thus rendering it
impossible for the examiner to form an approximate estimate of
the average value of the gravels.
Pannings taken from the toe of gravel faces and from water-
courses cut through the gravels are interesting, but inferences
drawn from the gold obtained are usually very misleading.
Furthermore, it must not be inferred that a placer claim which
returns good wages to a small party of working mates will
necessarily pay dividends to a company working on a large scale.
Working on a small scale the miners are always on the track of
the gold. If the lead is lost, the fact is known at once ; but work-
ing on a large scale, where the shifting of quantity is an important
factor in order to insure adequate returns for the capital invested,
rich and poor gravels alike are moved, thereby reducing the
general average.
Calculating the Average Value. The average value per cubic
yard is found by multiplying the number of grains of gold per
cubic yard found in each hole by the depth of the hole in feet,
and dividing the sum of these products by the sum of the depth
in feet, as follows :

--- Page Break ---
THE EXAMINATION AND VALUATION OF MINES. 213
The sum of the products is 536 and of the depth 134, there-
fore the average value is fff= 4 grains of gold per cubic yard.
The average depth is^= 13'4 feet.
The area of the ground and the mean depth being known, the
total cubic content is easily determined ; but ample allowances
must be made for the possible inequalities of the bottom, etc.
Dredging for gold in river-channels, river-terraces, lagoons, etc.,
and the working of placer-deposits by hydraulic sluicing and
elevating, are conducted on a large scale in New Zealand and
California.
At the end of 1903 there were in the South Island of New
Zealand 1 272 dredges, of which over 200 were working, the
balance being under repairs, or removed to other ground, stand-
ing idle, wrecked, etc.
At the end of the same year there were 2932 water-races,
having a total length of 6852 miles, and carrying 12,285 cubic
feet of water per second ; and 2346 tail-races in connection with
placer mining.'
2
The experience of gold-dredging and hydraulicking in New
Zealand has proved conclusively that where the ground has
been systematically sampled by an experienced engineer practically
no failures are known.
1
Report of Department of Mines, New Zealand, 1904, p. 12.
* Loe. cit., p. 188.

--- Page Break ---
INDEX.
AGES of geological time, 4.
Alluvial deposits, samplingand valua-
tion of, 211-213.
Alum, 142, 143.
Aluminium, 144.
Alum shales, 142, 143.
Alunite, 142, 143.
Anamorphism, 68.
Anatase, 91.
Andesites, minerals found in, 6, 7 ;
affinities, 7 ; propylitisation of, 112,
113, 116.
Anthracite, age of, 29 ; lignite
changed to, by basalt, 30.
Antimonite, 144.
Antimony, 144.
Apatite, 177.
Argentite, occurrence of, 42, 180; in
lodes, 54.
Arsenic, 144, 145.
Arsenopyrite, in ore veins, 61, 144,
145 ; minerals associated with, 84.
Asbestos, 145.
Asphaltum, 145, 146.
Augite, a product of contact meta-
morphism, 127.
BALKS, 30.
Banket, mode of occurrence of, 33,
34, 164.
Barytes, 146, 147.
Basalt, affinity of, 7.
Bauxite, 142, 143, 144.
Benches, 71.
Biotite, change of, 91.
Bismuth, 147.
Bitumen. See Asphaltum.
Black-band ore, 166.
Blende, in contact deposits, 39, 127 ;
at Broken Hill, 44 ; at Duckton,
45 ; in gash veins, 52 ; in ore
veins, 61 ; vertical distribution of,
76 ; minerals associated with, 84 ;
the main source of zinc, 185.
Blue carmine, 173.
Blue ground, 154.
Bog-iron deposits, 22.
Bonanzas, 71, 72.
Borate of soda, deposits of, 25.
Borax, deposits of, 25, 37, 147.
Boric acid, 123, 147.
Bornite, occurrence of, 42, 58.
Bosses, 5 ; minerals found in, 6.
Brasses in coal, 30.
Brine springs as indicators of salt, 70.
Bromide of silver, occurrence of, 44.
Bunches, 71.
CAINOZOIC period, 4.
Cairngorm, associated with sapphires,
22.
Calamine, 185.
Calcite, vertical distribution of, 76 ;
quartz pseudomorphs of, 91.
Cambrian age, 4.
Carbon, association of productive ores
with, 83.
Carbon dioxide, 115, 121, 134.
Carbonation of minerals, 68
Carboniferous age, 4.
Cassiterite. See Tinstone.
Cat's eye, associated with sapphires,
22.
Cellulose, absorption of copper by,
80.
Cement, 147, 148.
Cement placers with gold, 16, 17.
Cementation, belt of, 68.
Cerussite, occurrence of, 43, 44.
Chalcopyrite, occurrence of, 44, 46,
58 ;
in ore veins, 61 ; vertical dis-
tribution of, 75 ; minerals associated
with, 84.
Chalybeate springs as indicators of
iron, 70.
Chiastolite, a product of contact
metamorphism, 127.
Chimney-shoots, 71.
214

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 215
Chloride of silver, occurrence of, 58.
Chlorite, minerals associated with, 84.
Chromite, minerals associated with,
84 ; in peridotite, 108, 130 ; in
serpentine, 108, 148 ; uses of, 149.
Chromium, 148, 149.
Chrysolite, 145.
Cinnabar, minerals associated with,
84 ; deposits of, 117, 118, 119.
Clastic rocks. See Sediments.
Clay, absorptive power of, for metal,
79. 80; formation of, 79; petro-
leum absorbed by, 80.
Coal, origin of, 27-29 ; mode of
occurrence, 29 ; age of, 29 ; effects
produced in, by dykes, 30 ;
varieties of, 32 ; stages in forma-
tion of, 32, 33 ; world's production
of, 149.
Coal areas, valuation of, 209, 210.
Coal seams, position of, 29 ; faulting
of, 29, 30.
Cobalt, 149, 150.
Cobalt ores, minerals associated with,
84 ; occurrence of, 150.
Cobaltine, 149.
Colemannite, 147.
Colloids, power of, to absorb metals,
80.
Comb structure, 67.
Conglomerates, 3.
Contact deposits, 38-46, 124-127.
Contact metamorphism, 124-127.
Copper, occurrence of, 34, 35, 38 ;
ores of, in contact deposits, 40 ;
ores of, in veins, 70 ; absorption of,
by cellulose, 80 ; in serpentine,
etc., 109, 130; sources and pro-
duction of, 150-152.
Copper-glance in contact deposits,
39 ; in lodes, 58.
Copper ore in stockworks, 38 ; in
lodes, 53, 57, 58 ; in serpentine
and other rocks, 72, 73 ; pseudo-
morphous after wood, 83.
Copper pyrites, occurrence of, 38, 45 ;
in contact deposits, 39, 127.
Coprolites, occurrence of, 36.
Country, influence of, on ore veins,
72, 73, 81, 82, 134, 135.
Courses, 71.
Cretaceous age, 4.
Crush zone, 42.
Cryolite, 143, 152.
Cullinan diamond, 158.
Cuprite, occurrence of, 38.
DEEP leads with gold, 14, 15, 16.
Deep mining, limits of, 86, 89.
Denudation, 2, 3.
Devonian age, 4.
Diabase, affinities of, 7.
Diamond placers, 21, 157.
Diamonds, associated with sapphires,
22 ; at Kimberley, 38 ; Ivimberley
diamond mines, 153-155 ; parent
rock, 155, 156 ; genesis of, 156 ;
in dolerite, 157 ; largest, 158 ;
supply of, 158.
Diorite, affinities of, 7.
Dip of strata, 26, 27.
Dip faults, 98.
Dolerite, diamonds in, 157.
Downthrow, 96, 100.
Dry-blowing placers, 18.
Dykes, 5 ; minerals found in, 6 ;
effects produced by, 30.
EARTH, evolution of the, 2.
Eclogite, 156.
Elements, distribution of, in the
earth's crust, 107.
Embolite, occurrence of, 43, 180.
Enargite, occurrence of, 62.
Eocene age, 4.
Equisetums in Carboniferous age,
28.
Erubescite, occurrence of, 38 ; in
contact deposits, 39.
Excelsior diamond, 158.
FAHLBANDS, 9, 46, 47, 82, 127.
Fahlore, occurrence of, 42.
Faults, in coal seams, 29, 30 ; extent
of, 30 ; along veins, 72 ; definition,
93, 94 ; dynamics of, 93, 104.
Felspar, change of, to kaolin, 58 ; to
topaz, 184.
Ferns, geological development of, 28.
Fireclay, 158.
Flinties, 83.
Floater, 67.
Flucan, 72.
Fluorite (fluor-spar), 159.
Folds in coal, 31, 32.
Forests of Carboniferous age, 28.
GALENA, in contactdeposits, 39, 127 ;
at Broken Hill, 44 ; at Duckton,
45 ; in gash veins, 52 ; in ore
veins, 61 ; vertical distribution of,
76 ; minerals associated with, 84 ;
pseudomorphs of, after wood, 116.

--- Page Break ---
216 INDEX.
Garnets, associated with gold, 18 ;
minerals associated with, 84 ; a
product of contact metamorphism,
127.
Garnierite, 173.
Gaws, 30, 31.
Geological time, 2 ; periods of, 4.
Gold, forms of alluvial, 18 ; associates
of alluvial, 18 ; origin of alluvial,
18, 19 ; precipitates of, 19, 20 ;
in
the Rand banket reefs, 33, 34 ; in
Treadwell mines, 37, 38 ;
in contact
deposits, 40 ; in saddle-reefs, 49-
51 ; in lodes, 53-57 ; in veins, 70 ;
in bonanzas, 72 ; in clay, 79 ;
indicatorbeds for, 82, 83 ; minerals
associated with, 84 ; in andesites,
114, 115 ; in sea water, "135 ;
sources, production, and yield of,
159-161 ; sampling and valuation
of alluvial deposits containing,
211-213.
Gold ores, secondary enrichment of,
in zone of weathering, 77 ; diminu-
tion of, with depth, 81, 82.
Gold placers, 10-19, 159, 160.
Gossan, 69.
Granite, tin ore in, 6 ; classification
of, 7.
Graphite, age ot, 29 ; formation of,
30 ; sources and uses of, 165.
Gravels, 3.
Great Mogul diamond, 158.
Gypsum, deposits of, 25, 36 ; sources
and uses of, 165, 166.
HADE of fault, 93, 94.
Hpematite, in lodes, 57 ; deposits of,
166, 167.
Heave of faults, 99, 100.
Hornblende, a product of contact
metamorphism, 127.
Hornsilver. See- Kerargyrite.
Horses, 30, 67, 68.
Hydration of minerals, 68.
Hydrogen sulphide, 79, 111, 118,
119, 120, 121.
IGNEOUS rocks. See Plutonic rocks.
Ilmenite, associated with tinstone,
20 ; change of, 91.
Impregnations, 9, 47-48.
Indicator beds, 82, 83, 160.
lodyrite, occurrence of, 43, 44.
Iron, sources and production of, 166-
168.
Iron hat, 69.
Iron ore in limestone, 73.
Iron pyrites, in contact deposits, 39,
41, 43, 127 ; near granite, 41 ; at
Broken Hill, 44
; in fahlbands, 46 ;
in lodes, 56, 57 ; in ore veins, 61 ;
vertical distribution of, 75, 76 ;
oxidation of,78 ; mineralsassociated
with, 84 ; occurrence of, in fissures
of basalt, 117 ; in metamorphic
rocks, 127 ; gold reduced by, 141.
Ironstone blows, 69.
JURASSIC age, 4.
KAOLIN, 158.
Katamorphism, 68.
Kerargyrite, 154.
Koh-i-nor diamond, 158.
LAND, origin of surface features of, 2.
Lateral secretion, theory of, 134-141.
Laurentian age, 4.
Lava, 5 ; minerals found in, 6.
Lead ores, occurrence of, 36 ; in
lodes, 53 ;
in limestone, 73 ;
sources and yield of, 168.
Leader, 75.
Lead-zinc ores, in contact deposits.
40.
Lepidodendrons in Carboniferous age,
28.
Lignite, age of, 29 ; mode of occur-
rence of, 32, 33.
Limestone, 3.
Limoirite, deposits of, formed by
descending waters, 23, 24, 166,
167.
Lodes, characters of, 53-58 ; width
of, 63, 64 ; length of, 64, 65 ;
strike of, 65 ; dip of, 65, 66 ;
depth, 66 ; arrangement of matter
in, 66, 67 ; recovery of lost, 101-
104.
Lycopodimns in Carboniferous age,
28.
MAGMAS. See Plutonic rocks.
Magmatic segregation of ores, 106-
110, 129-133.
Magnesite, 169.
Magnetite, in beach sands, 12 ;
associated with gold, 18 ; with tin
ore, 20 ; in contact deposits, 39 ;
minerals associated with, 84 ; oc-
currence of, in magmas, 107 ; a

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 217
product of contact and of regional
metamorphism, 127 ; deposits of,
166, 167.
Manganese, deposits of, 23-25 ; ores
and production of, 169.
Marbles, 3.
Megabasite, 184.
Mercury. See Quicksilver.
Mining geology, scope of, 1.
Mesozoic period, 4.
Metamorphism of sediments, 3 ; of
igneous rocks, 6 ; of sedimentary
rocks, 89.
Metasomatic processes, classification
of, 92.
Metasomatic replacement of minerals,
89-92.
Mica, a product of contact meta-
morphism, 127 ; sources and pro-
duction of, 170-172.
Mine-sampling, 186-196.
Mineral deposits, classification of,
8-58 ; modes of occurrence of,
105-128 ; genetic classification of,
106.
Mineral oil. See Petroleum.
Mines, examination and valuation
of, 196-213 ; successive stages in
development of, 196 et scq. ; valua-
tion of metal, 197-209 ; of coal
areas, 209-210.
Miocene age, 4.
Mispickel, 145.
Molybdenite, 113, 172, 173.
Molybdenum, ores, sources and pro-
duction of, 172, 173.
Molybdite, 172.
Monazite, 182, 183.
Mosses, geologicaldevelopment of, 28.
NESTS, 71.
Nickel in fahlbands, 46 ; use of, 175.
Nickel-iron in serpentine, etc., 109,
130.
Nickel ores, mineralsassociated with,
84 ; sources and yield of, 173-175.
Nips, 30, 31.
Normal faults, 94, 97.
Nuggets ofgold in drift and in veins,
19.
OIL shale, 175.
Olivine, minerals associated with, 84 ;
occurrence of, in magmas, 107,
108.
Ore against ore, 74.
Ore deposits. See Mineral deposits.
Ores, distribution of, in depth,
75-77.
Ore veins, characters of, 59-92.
Organic matter, reducing power of,
83.
Organisms, gradual succession of, in
time, 3, 4 ; as indicators of geo-
logical periods, 4.
Orthoclase, pseudomorphs of tin ore
after, 90 ; quartz pseudomorphs of,
Osmosis as an agent in ore formation,
90, 107.
Overlap faults, 94.
Oxidation of minerals, 68, 69, 70,
75, 76, 77, 78, 81.
Oxide of iron, absorption of, by
pulverised silica, 80.
Ozokerite, 146.
PALAEOZOIC period, 4.
Paragenesis, 84.
Patches, 71.
Pay dirt, 10.
Pay shoot, 71, 72.
Pay streak, 10.
Pay wash, 10 ; position of, 12.
Peat, 32.
Peridot, associated with sapphires.
22.
Periods of geological time, 4.
Penman age, 4.
Petrography, importance of, 7.
Petroleum, absorption of, by clay, 80 ;
sources and yield of, 175, 177.
Phosphates, sources and yield of,
177-179.
Pipes, 71.
Placer deposits, definition of, 10 ;
various kinds of, 10-22.
Plants, typescharacteristic ofdifferent
geological periods, 28.
Platinum associated with gold, 18 ;
occurrence of, 109, 110 ; in eruptive
rocks, 130 ; sources and yield of,
179-180.
Platinum placers, 21.
Pleistocene age, 4.
Pliocene age, 4.
Plutonic rocks, forms of, 4, 5 ; altera-
tion of, 5 ; contents of, 5 ; classi-
fication of, 6 ; mineral contents of,
106-110; fusion of, 110, 111;
mineral changes during cooling of,
124-127.
15

--- Page Break ---
218 INDEX.
Pockets, 71.
Pot-blows, SO, 31.
Primary period, 4.
Pseudomorphism of minerals, 89, 91.
Psilpmelane, deposits of, 23, 24, 169.
Pyrite. See Iron pyrites.
Pyrolusite, deposits of, 23, 24, 169.
Pyroxene, minerals associated with,
84.
Pyrrhotite, occurrence of, 45, 46, 173,
174, 175 ; in lodes, 57 ; vertical
distribution of, 76 ; minerals
associated with, 84 ; in meta-
morphic rocks, 127.
QUARTZ, as a gangue of minerals, 59,
66, 67 ; vertical distribution of,
75 ; absorption of oxide of iron
by pulverulent, 80 ; minerals as-
sociatedwith, 84 ; pseudomorphous
after calcite and orthoclase, 91 ;
deposits of chalcedonic, 113, 114,
115.
Quartzite, 3.
Quicksilver, sources and yield of, 180.
REALGAR, vertical distribution of.
76.
Recent age, 4.
Redruthite, occurrence of, 42.
Regent diamond, 158.
Reversed faults, 94.
Rhyolite, affinities of, 7.
Rider, 67.
Rocks, temperature of, 85, 88.
Rubies, associated with gold, 18 ;
with sapphires, 22.
Ruby placers, 21, 22.
Rutile, pseudomorphous forms of, 91.
SADDLE-BACKS, 30.
Saddle reefs, 42, 45, 49, 50, 160,
161.
Salt, deposits of, 25.
"Salting" of mines, 194, 195.
Sampling, methods of ore, 186-196.
Sands, 3.
Sandstones, 3.
Sapphire placers, 22.
Scapolite, a product of contact meta-
morphism, 127.
Scheelite, 184.
Schists, 3.
Seas, origination of, 2.
Secondary period, 4.
Sediments, first origin of, 2 ; con-
tinuous formation of, 3 ; earth's
crust chiefly formed of, 3 ; altera-
tion of, 3.
Serpentine, minerals associated with,
84.
Shaken coal, 30, 31.
Shales, 3.
Siderite, 166.
Silica, depositions of, 77, 111-117 ;
absorptive powers of gelatinous and
pulverised, 80 ; pseudomorph of,
after wood, 116.
Silurian age, 4.
Silver, occurrence of, 35, 36, 44 ; in
fahlbands, 46 ; ores of, in veins,
70 ; in limestone, 73 ; in clay, 79 ;
sources and yield of, 180, 181.
Silver-lead ores, in contact deposits,
40 ; sources and yield of, 181.
Slates, 3, 181, 182.
Slickensides, 72.
Slips, 29.
Smaltite. 149.
Solfataric action, effects of, in pro-
ducing mineral deposits, 111-123.
Specular iron, in contact deposits,
39, 127 ; a product of regional
metamorphism, 127 ; deposits of,
166, 167.
Sperrylite, 179.
Spinel, associated with gold, 18.
Step-faults, 29, 30, 100.
Stibnite, vertical distribution of, 76.
Stockworks, 9, 37, 38.
Strike of strata, 26.
Strike-faults, 95, 97.
Sulphide of copper. Sec Copper
pyrites.
Sulphide of lead. See Galena.
Sulphide of silver. See Argentite.
Sulphide of zinc. See Blende.
Sulphides, precipitants of gold, 19,
78, 83, 141 ; vertical distribution
of, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79 ; oxidation of,
78; formation of, 114, 141; in
siliceous sinters, 121 ; in eruptive
rocks, 130.
Sulphur, deposits of, 25, 26, 37, 111,
117, 118, 119, 120, 123, 124 ;
sulphuretted hydrogen as an in-
dicator of, 70 ; sources and yield
of, 182.
Sulphur dioxide, 111, 123.
Sulphuric acid, formation of, 78.
Swellies, 30, 31.
Syenite, affinities of, 7.

--- Page Break ---
INDEX. 219
TALC, 182.
Telluride of gold, occurrence of,
56.
Tellurium, minerals associated with,
84.
Temperature of rocks, 85-88.
Tertiary period, 4.
Thickness of beds, 27.
Thorium, 182, 183.
Throws, 29.
Thrust plane, 98.
Tin, origin of stream, 20 ; in lodes,
57.
Tin placers, 20, 21.
Tinstone, 20, 38 ; occurrence of, 47,
48 ; in lodes, 53 ; in granite, 72,
130 ; minerals associated with, 84 ;
pseudomorphous, after orthoclase,
90; in eruptive rocks, 130, 131,
132 ; sources and yield of, 183, 184.
Titaniferous iron in sands, 21 ; in
eruptive rocks, 130.
Topaz, associated with gold, 18 ; with
sapphires, 22 ; change of felspar
to, 184.
Tourmaline, minerals associated with,
84.
Trachyte, affinities of, 7.
Triassic age, 4.
Troubles, 29.
Trough-faults, 100, 101.
Tungstate of lime, 185.
Tungsten, 184, 185.
Ul'THHOW, 96.
VEINS, origin of cavities in, 60 ; age
of filling of, 61-63 ; outcrops of,
68, 69 ; condition of metallic con-
tents of, 70 ; position of contents,
71 ; wall movements of, 72 ; second-
ary enrichment of, 77-80 ; im-
poverishment of, with depth, 80-
82 ; recovery of lost, 101-104 ;
theories of formation of. 129-139 ;
valuation of, 192, 193
Veins, fissure, 9, 52-58, 112.
Veins, gash, 9, 51, 52.
Veins, segregated, 9, 48, 51.
Vesuvianite, and product of contact
metaniorphism, 127.
WANT, 30.
Water, action of, 2, 3, 136-140 ;
when descending, 22-24, 137, 139,
140; at high temperatures, 110-
123 ; when ascending, 122, 123,
137, 138, 139, 140.
Weathering, belt of, 68.
Wolfram, minerals associated with,
84, 184, 185 ; occurrence of, 173.
Wollastonite, a product of contact
metaniorphism, 127.
Wood, a precipitant of gold, 19 ; of
horn silver. 83 ; ofcopper ores, 83 ;
pseudomorphs of galena after,
116 ; and ofsilica after, 116.
Wulfenite, 172.
ZINC, sources and yield of, 185.
Zinc ore in limestone, 73.
Zircon, associated with gold, 18.
PRINTED BY NEILL AND CO., LTD., EDINBURGH.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
YB 15520
IS-6170
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
