
--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
THE GEOLOGY OF COAL
AND COAL-MINING

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
ARNOLD'S GEOLOGICAL SERIES
General Editor: DR. J. E. MARR, F.R.S.
THE
GEOLOGY OF COAL
AND COAL-MINING
BY
WALCOT GIBSON, D.Sc., F.G.S.
LONDON
EDWARD ARNOLD
1908
{All rights reserved}.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
EDITOR'S PREFACE
THIS book is the first of a series of works on economic
geology undertaken by experienced geologists. Other
books will shortly follow, dealing with the geology
of metalliferous mining, quarrying, water-supply, and
precious stones.
The economic aspect of geology is yearly receiving
more attention in our great educational centres, and
the books of this series are designed in the first place
for students of economic geology. It is believed, how-
ever, that they will be found useful to the student of
general geology, and also to surveyors and others who
are concerned with the practical applications of the
science.
Dr. Gibson has, as the result of many years' pro-
fessional work among the coal-bearing rocks of this
country and of South Africa, rendered himself peculiarly
qualified to write upon the subject treated in the
present work.
J. E. MARK.
177723

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
AUTHOR'S PREFACE
THE limited size of this work makes it imperative that
certain portions of the subject should be treated with
brevity in order that additional space may be devoted
to general principles of practical significance. Many
branches, therefore, of strictly scientific or of general
interest receive scanty notice. For the same reason
simple geological terms in almost daily use by the
miner are explained and illustrated, while the termin-
ology used in the petrological descriptions of igneous
rocks is not elucidated.
In the account given of the Foreign Coalfields it will
be noticed that a geological and not a geographical
arrangement has been adopted.
Except in a very few cases, references have been
intentionally omitted in the text, and indebtedness is
here freely acknowledged for information obtained from
the Reports of various Geological Surveys at home
and abroad, and from the Final Report of the Royal
Commission on Coal Supplies for 1905.
The author wishes to express his thanks to the
Council of the Palseontographical Society for permis-
sion to reproduce from its volumes the figures of fossils
given on Fig. i, and to the Council of the Geological
vii

--- Page Break ---
viii AUTHOR'S PREFACE
Society, London, for the same privilege accorded with
respect to Fig. 2. The author is also greatly indebted
to Mr. R. Kidston, Dr. A. C. Seward, and Mr. E. A. N.
Arber, who have kindly allowed him to reproduce
those photographs to which their names are appended.
WALCOT GIBSON.
LONDON, 1908.

--- Page Break ---
CONTENTS
CHAPTER PAGE
I. INTRODUCTION : I
II. VARIETIES CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL CHARACTERS 6
III. COAL AS A ROCK - 21
IV. FORMATION AND ORIGIN 32
V. DISTRIBUTION 42
VI. FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 48
VII. PROSPECTING AND BORING 7 2
VIII. STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 84
IX. STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD - Il6
X. COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN, SOUTHERN PRO-
VINCE -
142
XI. COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN, MIDLAND PRO-
VINCE -
169
XII. COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN NORTHERN PRO-
VINCE, INCLUDING IRELAND -
-213
XIII. COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE - - 231
XIV. NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS - - 260
XV. COALFIELDS OF AFRICA, INDIA, AUSTRALIA, AND
SOUTH AMERICA 279
XVI. COALFIELDS OF CHINA, CENTRAL ASIA, JAPAN,
NEW ZEALAND, AND DUTCH EAST INDIES -
313
INDEX - - -
329
IX

--- Page Break ---
LIST OF PLATES
PLATE FACING PAGE
I. PECOPTERIS ARBORESCENS 48
II. SIGILLARIA RUGOSA 51
III. NEUROPTERIS GIGAXTEA - -
52
IV. ALETHOPTERIS LOXCHITICA 55
V. STIGMARIA FICOIDES 58
VI. SPHENOPTERIS OBTUSILOBA - 6 1
(LEPIDODENDROX VELTHEIMIAXUM)vn J - - 66
[GLOSSOPTERIS BROWNIANA J
(SIGILLARIA BRARDI ]
VIII.-J
- 201
[GLOSSOPTERIS BROWNIANAJ

--- Page Break ---
Or TUt
NIVERSITY
THE GEOLOGY OF COAL
AND COAL-MINING
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
THE yearly increase in the demand for coal and the
correspondingly greater output have of recent years led
to a consideration of the available supply, both in Great
Britain and in other countries.
In Europe the areas from which coal could be easily
obtained at little expense are either entirely or almost
entirely exhausted. New explorations, therefore, are
being undertaken in regions often far removed from
existing workings, and where the expenditure is neces-
sarily very great before there can be any hope of return.
The working of coal by day-levels in Monmouthshire
and eastern Glamorganshire belongs to the past. Such
coals as could be easily got by tunnelling into the hills
in South Wales ; except in the west, have been for the
most part worked out, as also have the seams obtained
by shallow pits sunk near the outcrops.
In the Black Country of South Staffordshire the
exhaustion of coal over a large part of the old coal-

--- Page Break ---
2 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
fields was anticipated many years ago, and new pits
have been successfully sunk both to the east and west,
and also to the north, far beyond the boundary lines
which were formerly considered to mark the extreme
limits of the coal-bearing strata in this district.
In Yorkshire and Nottinghamshire the same story
is repeated, and new pits creep continuously from the
known coal-bearing area on the west eastwards to the
unknown, each new enterprise entailing increased initial
expenditure and a subsequent costly maintenance.
In Scotland, explorations are now in progress to
win the coals beneath the Firth of Forth. Indeed, so
valuable has coal become that explorations in search of
it are at the present time being pushed forward in the
south-eastern counties of England, w
T
here for a long
time the question of its existence belonged to the
realms of pure geological speculation.
Crossing the channel, we find that France is busily
engaged in ascertaining the hidden resources of her
coalfields in the north, and also in French Lorraine.
Belgium enterprise, again, has proved the existence
of productive Coal-measures in the Campine, thus
enormously increasing the future life of her coalfields
in the north.
New methods of utilizing coals of inferior quality
are being successfully tried on an extensive scale in
Germany and Austria, and seams hitherto considered
worthless are now being exploited.
The United States has more than quadrupled the
output of coal within the last twenty years, and now
produces over 100,000,000 tons per annum more than
Great Britain. Explorations in the Pennsylvanian and
vast Appalachian coalfields, from which the bulk of

--- Page Break ---
INTRODUCTION 3
American coal is obtained, are being carried on at a
rapid rate, so that the day is not far distant when the
United States, like Europe, will have to win the coals
at greater depths and in less easily accessible regions.
In South Africa, India, and Australasia the use of
coal is continually on the increase. Many local in-
dustries of great importance depend to a large extent
on the proximity of coal, and several of the iron
industries, such as those of India, can, or it is pre-
dicted will shortly, enter into competition in the East
with those of Europe, owing to the existence of cheap
and suitable coals in close proximity to extensive
deposits of iron ores.
Japan supplies her navy with native coal ; and China,
aware of the national importance of her vast coal
supplies, preserves a watchful and guarded interest in
the development of her coalfields.
So easily, and without any special geological know-
ledge, has coal been got in the past, and to the early
miner so great must have seemed the visible supply
compared' to the output, that the possibility of ex-
haustion of the known coal areas, and the consequent
extension of the workings into regions which, a century
ago, were condemned as barren ground, could never
have been considered.
Wherever individual enterprise was successful, and
could be maintained without co-operation, those con-
cerned in the working of any one colliery were naturally
satisfied with a knowledge sufficient to understand the
geological circumstances governing their particular
enterprise.
It, therefore, happens that much information, so
readily obtained at the time, and which would now
i 2

--- Page Break ---
4 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
prove of such inestimable value in the interpretation
of the difficulties met with in exploring fresh areas, has
never been recorded, and new enterprises start very
much on the same basis as did the older explorations.
Unrivalled sections, obtained during the sinking of
new pits and in underground workings, are being almost
daily made ; but the character of the new ground
receives little attention either from local geologists or
mining engineers, and much valuable information is
still being undoubtedly lost.
If the knowledge of the geological features of many
of the older coalfields is far from satisfactory, it is still
more difficult to obtain reliable information about the
coalfields of new and only partially explored countries,
and even about those districts where coal-mining has
been in operation for several years.
In no case is reliable information more wanted than
in that of the distribution of the fossils of the coal-
bearing Carboniferous rocks of Europe and America,
since the best coals of the world are found among these
strata,andthe fossilsofwhichsome geologists believewill
prove of great service to the miner in the identification
of horizon. Many stratigraphists and mining engineers
still ignore the value of fossil evidence, except on the
more general lines, in spite of repeated instances where
even a slight knowledge would have prevented mistakes
being made.
The amount of such knowledge required is not really
great, nor is it difficult to attain, and, leaving aside the
practical aspect of the inquiry, the search for fossils
will ever exert a fascinating influence.
In the account of the coalfields chief attention will,
however, be given to those fossils of greatest use to

--- Page Break ---
INTRODUCTION 5
the miner, without reference to their scientific interest.
Undue importance must not, however, be attributed
to palaeontological evidence, for the determination of
horizons by means of fossils must conform to strati-
graphical sequence and geological structure.
In coal-mining, as in metalliferous mining, geology
necessarily takes a prominent place in the curriculum
of the engineer; but coal what it is, how it occurs,
how it is distributed, and in what quantities must, from
its preponderating influence on modern civilization, form
a branch of inquiry interesting to every nation.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER II
VARIETIES CHEMICAL AND PHYSICAL
CHARACTERS
THE term
'
coal
'
includes those solid combustible sub-
stances which have resulted from the decomposition
and alteration of once living vegetable organisms, now
occurring in a fossil state in geological formations of
various periods. Since the stages reached in the
decomposition and alteration vary within wide limits,
and the changed vegetable matter is more or less mixed
with foreign material, it is obvious that what is coal
and what is not coal cannot be satisfactorily denned.
Solid bitumens, soluble in naphtha or benzene, and
whether of organic or of inorganic origin, are excluded.
Coal in the state in which it commonly occurs is
mainly composed of oxygenated hydrocarbons, together
with hydrocarbons free of oxygen. Free carbon is
inferred in anthracite, though some chemists dispute
its existence in a free state in any coal.
Sulphur in combination with iron is usually present,
and there are always certain mineral impurities, con-
sisting of silica, iron oxides, silicates of alumina, potash,
and soda, constituting the ash.
Plant tissues and coal agree in the essential con-
6

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 7
stituents of both being some combination of carbon,
hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen, the carbon being
largely in excess of the other elements.
The main bulk of plants, whether of a high or low
organization a forest tree or a moss plant consists of
woody fibre, remarkably uniform in composition. In
each of these plants, separated so widely in organiza-
tion, the carbon percentage of the woody fibre varies
between 48 and 51, the hydrogen between 5*9 and 6*5,
and the oxygen and nitrogen between 41*8 and 44*5.
From this it is inferred that the chemical nature of
woody fibre has been the same throughout geological
time.
While woody fibre throughout the vegetable world
possesses a remarkably uniform composition, other
parts of a plant vary greatly in chemical constituents,
and the same part of one plant may differ in the pro-
portion of its chemical components from the cor-
responding part in another plant. It is found, for
instance, that leaves, leaf-stalks, and bark are richer
in carbon, but poorer in hydrogen and nitrogen, and
contain more ash than spores, seeds, and cuticles. A
coal formed out of spores may therefore differ ab initio
from one derived from the alteration of bark and
leaves.
Ordinary coal usually consists of obviously distinct
layers one bright and glistening, termed
'
bright coal,'
and another dull black, silky, and fibrous, known as
*
mineral charcoal
'
or
'
mother of coal
'
(fusain, houille
daloide, faserkohle, of continental wTiters). These layers
correspond to the laminae of all ordinary sedimentary
rocks, like shale or sandstone. Along the dull layers
fragments of charred vegetable tissue, either leaves, leaf-

--- Page Break ---
8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
stalk, bark, or wood, are often clearly distinguishable.
In the bright layers organic structure is not so evident,
but, as in the Better Bed Coal of Yorkshire, these
bright layers can be seen under the microscope to
consist largely of spores. The difference in chemical
composition of the two layers, the dull and the bright,
agrees with that of the materials composing them ; the
layers of mineral charcoal, or dull layers, are richer in
carbon, but contain more ash than the bright layers.
In assuming, however, that coals in which spores are
abundant have entirely originated from spores, the fact
must not be lost sight of that the spores are the more
conspicuous element owing to their greater resistance
to destruction.
Besides the organic compounds, all plants, as before
stated, contain mineral salts,w
r
hich are not only different
for distinct plants, but also vary greatly both in quantity
and nature in different parts of the same plant. Lyco-
podium clavatum, one of the commonest of the British
club mosses, contains 47 per cent, of ash, and a
closely allied species, Lycopodium chamcecyparissum, as
much as 6*7 per cent., while the ash contained in forest
trees rarely exceeds 2 per cent. The spores of the
Lycopodiacce, however, contain an appreciably smaller
quantity of ash than the other tissues.
The character of the ash is most marked in Lyco-
podium and in the common bog moss Sphagnum. Both
these plants, it has been ascertained, possess the power
of dissolving alumina out of the soil. From its insolu-
bility in water, alumina remains after the plant has
rotted, and after a large proportion of the other soluble
mineral constituents has been dissolved out and
carried away. Salts of iron and lime, though more

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 9
soluble than alumina, are less so than alkalis and lime
salts. The sulphur present in all plants unites to form
more or less insoluble compounds. Thus, in a mass of
decaying vegetation certain mineral salts which existed
in the living plant will be concentrated, while others
will be carried away in solution.
Apart, then, from the mineral matter introduced
from extraneous sources to the spot where the decaying
vegetable matter was accumulating, some of the in-
organic salts present in coal will be due to the aggrega-
tion of the insoluble salts present in the living matter
from which the coal was derived. It is interesting to
note that the ash present in the mineral charcoal of the
Bette Bed Coal contains from 28 to 33 per cent, of
alumina.
Changes affecting the decayed vegetation subsequent
to its burial beneath sediments, and those resulting
from earth pressure and other geological agencies, will
be dealt with in a succeeding chapter. Sufficient has
been said to show that coal has its origin in vegetable
matter, and that one coal may differ in composition
from another coal as much according to the parts
of the plant as to the kind of plant from which it
originated.
In describing the different varieties of coal, as com-
monly designated, it is usual to commence with those
coals of which the vegetable origin is the least obscured,
and then to pass to those in which the original organic
structure is partially, or it may be wholly, indistin-
guishable even under the microscope. Peats and
lignites, though excluded from the coal series, will be
considered first, since these two kinds of vegetable fuel
occur in a fossil state, and illustrate the earlier stages

--- Page Break ---
io GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
through which woody fibres and tissues may pass
during their conversion into coal.
Peat. The purest, thickest, and most extensive
accumulations of vegetable debris at the present day
occur in peat-bogs and swamps. These are most
prevalent in the Northern Hemisphere, and extend up
to the polar limit of vegetation, the 56th degree north
parallel forming the chief zone.
In Ireland peat-bogs cover an area of over 3,000,000
acres, and in some places the peaty accumulations
attain a depth of over 50 feet. France contains large
tracts of peat, and Russia the largest of all. There are
few peat-bogs of any size in the tropics except in
Madagascar.
The swamps of Virginia and those in the deltas of
the Ganges and Brahmaputra afford examples of areas
where decaying vegetation is accumulating at the
present day. Swamps differ from peat-bogs by the
presence of free circulating waters, and this, as will be
shown later on, has some effect on the decay of the
plants.
The rate of growth of peat varies considerably. It
is stated to be as much as 26 inches in a century, but
immersion and low temperature tend to retard the
accumulation. The upper layers in a peat-bog are
light coloured, and the vegetable origin is obvious ; but
deeper down the layers become darker in colour, until
near the bottom they are almost black, and have lost
to a considerable degree all visible signs of organic
structure.
In the 'Red Bogs' of the central plains of Ireland
the organic matter, partly in a living state, forms a layer

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES ii
from 2 to 6 feet in thickness, termed the
'
clearing ';
beneath this comes a layer of
'
white turf,' passing down
into 'brown turf,' and thence downwards, till at the
bottom of the bog comes the
'
black
'
or
'
stone turf.'
Each layer consists of laminae, increasing in the number
per square foot from above downwards. The 'black
turf
'
is the most valuable for fuel purposes, giving out
a strong heat and brilliant light.
The percentage of ash is usually highest in the
'
black
turf,' but much interesting work remains to be done as
to the composition of the different layers of Irish peat.
Mosses, monocotyledonous, and, more rarely, dicotyle-
donous plants, enter into the formation of modern peats.
The composition varies within wide limits. The per-
centage of carbon ranges from 50 to 60, of hydrogen
from 5 to 6, and of oxygen and nitrogen from 28 to 50.
A large quantity of moisture is usually present, air-dried
peat containing as much as 15 per cent.
Fungi and bacteria are considered to have taken an
active part in the elimination of the oxygen and hydrogen
from the original woody tissue. The ratios of carbon to
the hydrogen and the oxygen being g'8 and r8 respec-
tively, as compared with 7*2 and o*g for woody fibre,
represent the change in the proportion of these elements
effected during the conversion.
Peats belong to the Quaternary or latest period in the
geological record. A few thin bands are Pre-Glacial
and some Inter-Glacial, but the most extensive areas of
peat are of recent formation, though at the present time
peat is not being formed to any appreciable extent.
Lignite. This variety of fuel forms the connecting
link between peat and the bituminous coals, but is

--- Page Break ---
12 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
not, as we have stated, classed with true coals. The
term is sometimes restricted to those varieties pre-
senting the appearance of woody tissue ; the other
kind, in which the woody character is more or less
obscure, being termed
'
brown coal.' Classified accord-
ing to external characters, lignites are divided into
(i) woody or fibrous brown coal, possessing the form
and structure of wood ; (2) earthy lignite, compact and
easily rubbed into a powder ; (3) common brown coal,
with the woody structure indistinct, possessing a slaty
cleavage and always black or dark brown in colour ;
(4) bituminous lignite or
'
pitch coal
'
(' peckkohle,'
*
glanzkohle '), having a conchoidal fracture, pitch-black
in colour and frequently resembling coal, and sometimes
even anthracite.
Lignites contain fragments of leaves, bark, tissues,
spores, macrospores, and pollen grains, all in an
advanced stage of decomposition. They were formed
in shallow waters in which infusoria could live, and in
which fungi and bacteria were abundant.
Like peats, the chemical composition of lignites
varies. The carbon percentage ranges between 53
and 73, that of hydrogen between 3 and 6, and that
of oxygen between 19 and 37. There is always a large
amount of moisture and ash present. The carbon-
hydrogen and carbon -
oxygen ratios are respectively
12 to 6 and 3 to 6-
Lignites are chiefly met with in the Tertiary forma-
tion, and form an important source of fuel on the Con-
tinent and in other countries, sometimes constituting
the only source of fossil fuel. They are of rare occur-
rence in this country, those of Bovey Tracey being the
best known. In Russia the Blatter Kohle and Papier

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 13
Kohle are regarded as lignites of Lower Carboniferous
age, and show how long some vegetable debris will
resist alteration.
Coal. As popularly understood, coal includes the
several varieties of fuel intermediate in physical appear-
ances and in chemical composition between brown coal
and the stone-like, but combustible, substance called
anthracite. The different kinds of coal are known
under the several names given on a succeeding page,
and are classed according to their chemical composition
or commercial qualities. We are here concerned with
the varieties based to a large extent on physical char-
acters and appearances.
Ordinary coal is a more mineralized substance than
lignite, and, except in the layers of mineral charcoal,
usually shows few visible signs of its organic origin.
The amount of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen differ in
the several varieties, but that of carbon is higher in coal
than in lignite, while that of oxygen and hydrogen is
lower.
Cannel. In association with true coal, or else exist-
ing as a bed by itself, a dull, black, lustreless variety,
breaking with a conchoidal fracture, is often met with.
Cannel coal, as this variety is called, burns readily
without melting, and emits a bright candle-light flame,
whence it derives its name. It is frequently capable of
taking a fine polish and, like jet, which is a variety of
cannel found in the Upper Lias clays on the Yorkshire
coast, is made into ornaments. A cannel found in the
Midlothian Coalfield burns with a crackling noise, and
is termed
'
parrot coal.'
'
Horn coal,' found in South
Wales, is a cannel emitting an odour like burning horn.

--- Page Break ---
14 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The composition of cannel consists of : carbon, 81 to
86 per cent. ; hydrogen, 5 per cent. ; oxygen, 3 to 8
per cent. ; and ash, I to 8 per cent. Sulphur is also
usually present.
Cannel coal is a valuable source of gas, a ton of
Wigan cannel yielding 14,111 cubic feet of gas of
39 candle-power, as well as a large percentage of by-
products of much value. Jet and cannel coal contain
ethane gas occluded in the pores of the coal.
Cannel always occurs in lenticles, and was evidently
laid down in water which was very little subject to
disturbance, and in which fish and other animals must
have lived, since they are often found in an almost
perfect state of preservation in the cannel coal itself.
Under the microscope some cannels are seen to be
rich in the fructification of trees and other vegetable
debris ; some are rich in the fructifications of crypto-
grams ; and some are without any visible structure.
Boghead. Boghead coal, or Torbanite, as it is
sometimes called, from its occurrence in Torbane Hill,
is regarded by some authorities as a variety of cannel
coal, but others dispute its right to be included with
the coals ; indeed, such a dispute led to a long lawsuit
during the past century. Some bogheads contain no
oxygen, and these cases represent the total deoxygena-
tion and partial dehydrogenation of the original vege-
table matter ; others, again, contain a small percentage
of oxygen. All are rich in volatile hydrocarbons, that
of Torbane Hill containing over 70 per cent. The ash
percentage is high, due, no doubt, in a great measure
to the foreign substances introduced during the ac-
cumulation of the organic material, for bogheads, like
cannel, were deposited in water.

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 15
Algae are said to enter largely into the composition
of some bogheads.
The boghead coals of Torbane Hill and Armadale in
Scotland, and those of Russia and the United States,
are all of Carboniferous age. Those ofAutun in France,
at Ermelo in the Transvaal, and in New South Wales,
belong to the Permian and Permo - Carboniferous
periods.
Anthracite. Coals of this class are stone-like in
appearance, or have a semi-metallic lustre, and can be
handled without soiling the fingers. They burn with
a feebly luminous but smokeless flame, and are much
less easily combustible than any other variety of coal.
The amount of volatile matter is under 10 per cent.,
and the carbon percentage in true anthracites is over
93, while the amount of ash is very small. Many coals
classed as anthracites, however, contain a considerable
quantity of ash, and if the ash is included in the
analysis, the carbon percentage is, in consequence,
lowered. This is notably the case in anthracites which
can be proved to have been formed from bituminous
coals by the action of heat due to igneous intrusions.
Anthracites contain immense quantities of occluded
gas, especially marsh gas, which is retained in the coal
owing to its dense structure, unlike the gas occluded in
less coherent coals, which often rushes out in great
volumes from the working face.
By the nearly total elimination of the volatile con-
stituents, anthracites may pass into graphites, though
it is by no means certain that all graphites have been
formed from vegetable matter.
Anthracites are the least widely distributed of all the

--- Page Break ---
16 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
varieties of coal. The purest and most free from ash
occur in South Wales. Pennsylvania possesses large
quantities (p. 271), and immense beds are reported to
exist in Shan-Si in China, but of which little is known,
though recent explorations confirm the reports of early
travellers.
In greatly disturbed and folded regions where the
seams of anthracite have been subjected to great
pressure, as in Pembrokeshire, the coal has been crushed
into a finepowder, which is called
'
culm.' This powder,
after being artificially kneaded or compacted, is used as
a fuel, which burns very slowly.
A few rare varieties of coal, or of combustible
substances which have at times been mistaken for coal,
occur in various parts of the world. One of these,
known as
'
Anthraxolite,' is a coal-like substance of
variable composition found in the older formations of
Quebec and Ontario, and is usually regarded as a form
of inspissated petroleum.
'
Albertite
'
is another com-
bustible mineral similar in appearance to anthraxolite,
but considered to be a mineral asphalt. The carbon-
aceous deposit in the Laxey lead-mine is probably some
form of one of these minerals. The term
'
Byerite
'
has
been given to a bituminous coal from the Middle Parks,
Colorado. The mineral
'
Huminite,' obtained from
Ostmark, in Sweden, is some form of hydrocarbon.
'
Tasmanite
'
is a carbonaceous shale of a brown colour
met with on the River Mersey, in Tasmania, in a bed
from 6 to 7 feet thick. It is allied to the White Coal
of Australia, of Tertiary age. The carbonaceous matter
of both these varieties is composed to a great extent of
spores. In White Coal the ash attains a percentage
of over 68, and it is also very high in Tasmanite,

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 17
Analysis and Sampling. The value of an analysis of
coal depends in the first instance on themethod adopted
in the selection of the samples. This is evidently of
the utmost importance, and frequently falls into the
hands of the geologist or the pioneer in new countries.
A seam of coal is generally made up of layers possess-
ing different properties, and a small piece chosen from
one thin band would give very misleading results where
the analysis of a thick seam is required. In selecting
a sample for analysis the following method should be
adopted
:
A sample of about 20 pounds in weight is taken from
each of at least two of the working faces situated as
far apart from each other as possible. A cut about
3 inches wide is made from roof to floor across the
seam, neglecting the bands not sent to market, but
including those taken out and sold with the coal. If a
sample of 20 pounds is too bulky for transport, it is
reduced by breaking up all the material of the sample
into small pieces, thoroughly mixing them, and making
four portions of the broken material, and then taking
alternate quarters and again mixing and halving. This
process, which is called quartering, is continued until
the requisite amount is arrived at; but whenever
possible this breaking, mixing, and quartering should
be left to the analyst.
Classification. Coals may be classified according to
their suitability for certain purposes, or according to
their chemical composition, or a scheme of classification
may be propounded, fitting both commercial properties
and chemical composition. In this latter case a classi-
fication based on the ultimate composition of coal

--- Page Break ---
18 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
that is, the percentage of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen
is considered to be most satisfactory. It is found
that the amount of volatile matter, on which the com-
mercial quality of coals so largely depends, is propor-
tionate, though not directly, to the hydrogen ratio in
most coals in which the percentage of carbon is over
84, but the hydrogen ratio is not so reliable when the
carbon percentage is less. In the following table the
connexion between the hydrogen ratio and volatile
matter is obvious :
According to the nature of the flame coking power
distinctions are made between anthracites, dry, lean
(maigre), non -
coking and free-burning coals, and
between the bituminous ('fat,' 'gras') coking coals
giving a luminous flame.
No term is perhaps more loosely applied than that
of
'
steam
'
coal. In the highest class of steam coal the
carbon percentage, neglecting ash and moisture, lies
between 91*2 and 93*3, and the volatile matter between
14 and 24 per cent. Coals having the same carbon
percentage, but with volatile matter between 8 and
14 per cent., pass, over to the anthracite class, but for
commercial purposes are retainedamong the steam coals.
In the north of England a coal having 84 to 87 per cent,
of carbon is considered to furnish a good steam coal.

--- Page Break ---
VARIETIES 19
The marketable value of a coal depends to a great
extent on the amount, chemical composition, and fusi-
bility of the ash, and its liability to attack the material
with which it comes in contact. Sulphur, always
deleterious, frequently renders a seam worthless, and,
even in small quantities, often causes a seam to be
practically useless for many metallurgical purposes.
Phosphorus is always present in coal, but in varying
quantities, and forms an injurious constituent in coals
used for steel-making and in the manufacture of calcium
carbide. Arsenic commonly contained in the
'
brasses
'
or pyrites of coals, when used for malting, is a dangerous
quantity when it rises to TV or J of a grain per pound.
Commercial Properties. The properties of coal of
chief practical importance are the calorific power, the
specific gravity, the nature and quantity of the coke,
and the friability.
The heating power of coal chiefly depends upon the
amount of carbon and hydrogen. To ascertain the
calorific power of a coal, a known weight is burnt
under the most favourable circumstances so as to
insure complete combustion. The unit of heat
adopted is either the calorie or gramme degree that
is, the amount of heat required to raise one gramme
of water, one degree C. ; or that of the British Thermal
Unit which expresses the amount of heat needed to
raise one pound of water, one degree F. The calorific
power, therefore, expresses the number of units of heat
produced by the combustion of unit weight of fuel.
The calorific power expressed in British Thermal
Unit per pound may be converted into calories per
gramme by multiplying by 5 and dividing by 9.
2 2

--- Page Break ---
20 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Supposing the ash and any water existing in the
pores of the coal to be removed, a pound of ordinary
coal gives out during combustion about 14,000 British
units of heat. Anthracites possess a higher calorific
power than ordinary bituminous coals, and these than
lignites.
The specific gravity of coal becomes of importance
where the storage space is limited, as on railway-
engines and in ship's bunkers. In anthracites the
specific gravity varies from 1*33 to 1*48, and in bitu-
minous coals from 1*26 to 1*31.
Friability, depending largely on the pressure to which
coals have been subjected, naturally varies from place
to place, but is an important factor where the coal has
to be transported long distances and also transhipped
several times. Some seams yield a large amount of
'
smalls
'
and slack, others give a good proportion
of
'
large
'
coal. Modern coking-ovens permit the
utilization of the slack of many seams to form coke.
Bituminous coals usually yield coke, except when the
volatile matter exceeds 40 per cent.
Coal, it will now be understood, affords many
varieties differing in physical characters, chemical com-
position, and the uses to which they can be applied.
A district may possess only one class of coal, or it
may yield several kinds. The physical and chemical
characters determine to a great extent the uses to
which the coals of any district can be put ; but it is
only providing a sufficient number of samples can be
secured, and that proper precaution is taken in selecting
them, that the value of a seam or seams as a whole
can be arrived at, otherwise the estimated value of a
new coalfield may be misleading.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER III
COAL AS A ROCK
FROM considering coal as a mineral, we have now to
study it as a rock in its relation to other rocks.
In whatever region of the globe, or in whatever for-
mation coal occurs, it is always found in connexion
with sediments which have been laid down under water,
but whose lithological characters and fossil contents
show the close proximity of land.
Among these sediments coal forms a distinct layer or
bed, varying from a few inches up to as much as 300 feet
in thickness, but usually occurring as a bed from about
4 to 6 feet thick.
Coal-bearing strata often much exceed 5,000 feet in
thickness, and throughout this great mass of sediments
the coal seams occur at different horizons. Usually
several seams are grouped together, but others again
may be separated by several hundred feet of barren
strata. In all cases, the coal forms only a small pro-
portion of the sediments, and the united thickness of
the different seams rarely amounts to more than a few
hundred feet, and is usually less.
Coal. The 'floor,' or bed of rock on which the
coal rests, is commonly a white or pale grey clay
'
underclay,'
'
seat-stone,'
'
warrant,'
'
spavin
'
but not
21

--- Page Break ---
22 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
infrequently consists of conglomerate or sandstone
(Garw Coal, Beaufort, South Wales), occasionally of
limestone (Fifeshire), of volcanic rocks (Central France),
or of granite and schist, without any trace of an under-
clay, or merely by a layer an inch or less in thickness.
In deep workings, where the pressure exerted by the
overlying strata is enormous, the nature of the floor
becomes of considerable importance
: a floor of clay or
soft shale swells up, and increases the difficulty of
keeping open the underground roadways.
The
'
roof,' or bed of rock immediately overlying a
seam, is usually shale or sandstone, but may be a
conglomerate, clay, or limestone.
Both the roof and floor of the same seam often
change rapidly. A sandstone roof may give place to
one of shale or clay, and the floor may be at one spot a
sandstone or shale, and at another a seat-earth. This
variation in the character of the roof, like that of the
floor, affects the commercial value of a seam, a good
roof rendering the coal safer and less costly to work.
Igneous rocks may form the roof or floor of a coal-
seam, but this occurrence can be regarded as accidental.
The seam, as a bed of coal is commonly called,
though the term
'
vein
'
is sometimes erroneously used,
may be confined to a very limited area, or, as in the
case of the Pittsburg Seam of the Appalachian Coal-
field, it may extend over an area exceeding 14,000 square
miles. In SouthWales several seams, though receiving
different names, have been traced along the entire
length of the coalfield ; and in the eastern counties of
England individual seams have been followed almost
uninterruptedly from Nottingham to near Leeds.
A seam of coal may possess the same character over

--- Page Break ---
COAL AS A ROCK 23
wide areas, any particular seam being a bituminous,
semi-bituminous, or steam coal throughout its lateral
extent and for its entire thickness. Generally, however,
a seam is composite, being built up of different qualities
in separate layers. These layers may be arranged in
one order in one place, and in a somewhat different
order in another place, though many seams present the
same arrangement in the composition of the layers over
considerable areas.
Some seams, again, consist of good marketable coal
from top to bottom, and retain this character for
several miles; then locally bands of clay, shale, or
sandstone become intercalated, and finally these bands
become abundant, and the seam passes into a worthless
mixture of foreign matter, and thin layers of coal. In
some cases the introduction of
'
dirt
'
layers takes
place in a definite direction, but as a rule they occur
irregularly.
The Thick Coal, or 3O-Feet Coal, of South Stafford-
shire affords a good instance of the gradual introduction
of foreign material in a definite direction. In the
southern district (Thick Coal area) a seam of coal,
averaging 30 feet in thickness, splits up northwards
into fourteen seams by the gradual introduction of
sandstones and shales.
Local inclusions of lenticles of sandstone, shale, or
other foreign material into a coal-seam are common,
and are termed
*
horses,'
'
washouts,' or
'
rock faults
'
by the miner.
Lenticular masses of sandstone or shale may in this
way entirely replace a seam, or only a portion of the
seam ; or, again, they may occur as a wedge in the
heart of the coal, dying out on all sides. The inter-

--- Page Break ---
24 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
ruption of the seam may be only local, extending over
a few yards, or the foreign material may cover several
acres. Sometimes a ridge of sandstone or shale rises
up through the floor of the coal, which ends off abruptly
against it, forming what is termed a
'
roll
'
or
'
swell/
In the descriptions of many foreign coals the
numerous intercalated thin bands of coal, shale, or
other material are often included in the total thickness
of a seam, and its importance is in this way much
exaggerated. Many of the seams in the Transvaal, for
instance, are said to attain a thickness of over 20 feet,
but in many cases only a comparatively small portion
of this is marketable coal.
Of the different varieties of coal given in the preced-
ing chapter, cannel coal is the most inconstant in its
occurrence. Sometimes the whole of a seam is cannel,
sometimes only a part ; but in all cases it occurs as
lenticles, either as a seam by itself, or forming part of a
composite seam.
Like the seams of coal, the associated sediments
occur in layers or beds, constituting the rocks called
sandstones, shales, clays, and limestones. These do
not, however, occur in any definite relation to the coal
seams. Sometimes a sandstone, at others a shale or
clay, is in immediate contact with the coal, which yet
retains its character, no matter with which of these
rocks it may be in contact. When a porous rock forms
the roof of a coal, it in some cases permits the volatile
constituents to escape, and so the carbon percentage
may be increased (p. 41).
Intrusive igneous rocks, again, frequently change the
nature of the coal completely by driving off the volatile
matter, and not infrequently render a seam valueless.

--- Page Break ---
COAL AS A ROCK 25
This is notably the case with intrusions of acid rocks,
but is often scarcely appreciable with intrusions of
basic igneous rocks such as basalt.
Sandstones. The prevailing character of the sand-
stones found in association with most coals is their great
variability in thickness and composition. They occur,
not as regular beds, but as wedge-shaped masses, com-
mencing suddenly, rapidly swelling out, and as quickly
dying away. In composition they vary from a fine-
grained, laminated rock to a coarse, thick-bedded sand-
stone. By the addition of shaly material in grains or
layers they lose their individuality, and pass into sandy
shales, or a mass made up of sandstones and shales in
alternate thin layers.
When closely associatedwith seams of coal, the sand-
stones are universally grey or yellow in colour, red
sandstones, in which the colouring matter is original,
being scarcely ever found in close proximity to coal.
It is also a common experience that the red strata of
later Palaeozoic, Mesozoic, and Tertiary ages are not only
remarkably barren of organic remains, but are equally
destitute of coal. When coals do occur in red measures
they are almost invariably thin and impersistent, and
are accompanied by a local development of grey
measures in the midst of the red strata.
Although an individual bed of sandstone may vary
greatly both in thickness and composition, certain
groups of sandstones occupy very definite horizons and
extend over miles of country. In the coalfields of
South Wales and Bristol, for instance, the Pennant
Sandstone made up of sandstones and shales of great
thickness separates a lower coal-bearing series from

--- Page Break ---
26 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
an upper series, and can be traced over the entire coal-
fields.
In other coalfields groups of sandstones occur over
considerable areas at definite horizons, and mark the
approximate position of seams of coal.
Shales and Clays. These terms are applied to lami-
nated rocks, in which argillaceous material forms an
essential constituent. Unlike the sandstones, the shales
and clays occur in regular beds. By the addition of
sandy materials these rocks may pass into sandy shales,
sandy clays, and so on into sandstones.
The term
'
shale
'
is usually restricted to a finely-
laminated rock, and the term
'
clay
'
to an argillaceous
rock, in which lamination is more or less indistinct.
In this country the laminated varieties are known to
the miner as
'
binds,' and when sandy material is
present they are called
*
stony binds
'
or
'
rock binds.'
The unlaminated varieties are commonly known as
1
soft binds.' A high percentage of carbonaceous matter
is sometimes present, when the rock is termed a
'
bass
'
or
'
batt.' These carbonaceous shales, however, seldom
exceed a few feet in thickness, and are closely associated
with seams of coal. They frequently contain mineral
oil, and pass laterally into cannel coal.
The shales vary in colour from light grey to black.
Among the lighter-coloured varieties the miner applies
the term
'
soapy binds
'
to a greasy light-blue shale, and
it is found that this term is frequently applicable to the
bands of shale in which marine fossils occur.
Shales, or
*
binds,' besides forming the roof or floor
of a coal-seam, are often interstratified in layers, varying
in thickness from a mere film to several feet, with the

--- Page Break ---
COAL AS A ROCK 27
seams of coal. Sandstones are rarely thus met with,
and when they do so occur are of very limited extent.
Fire-clays. Among the sandstones, shales, and clays
there are found thin beds of unstratified clay, seldom
exceeding a few feet in thickness, and varying in colour
from dark grey to white. They generally form the floor
of a coal-seam, and contain rootlets of plants (Stig-
maria), but more rarely overlie a seam or occur apart
from coal. These unstratified argillaceous rocks vary
very much in composition. They often consist of clay,
but usually contain a large proportion of sand. The
different varieties are known as gannister, underclay
(when overlain by a coal), fire-clay, and clunch.
The most siliceous form, the gannister, is an in-
tensely hard, close-grained compact stone. When the
silica percentage is high (57 to 96), the clay makes
excellent fire-bricks.
The terms
'
fire-clay
'
and
'
clunch
'
are very loosely
applied. Technically, a fire-clay contains a high per-
centage of silica, but the term is frequently used for a
clay without any test being made as to its composition.
The term
'
clunch
'
is indiscriminately used for a pure
clay or an underclay, whether a fire-clay or otherwise,
while the term
'
stone clunch
'
is often applied to a
gannister.
The shales and clays, with the ironstones occurring in
them, either as distinct beds or in nodules, contain the
more important fossils. These constitute valuable means
of identification among the Coal-measure strata of
Carboniferous age (p. 52).
Limestones. These are not of such general occur-
rence among the coal-bearing strata as either sand-

--- Page Break ---
28 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
stones, shales, or clays, and are seldom found in actual
contact with a seam of coal. In the Carboniferous
formation of Britain, for instance, the coals in the lower
or limestone division are restricted to the north, where
the limestones are thin and interstratified with sand-
stones and shales. In the south, where the limestone
is massive, workable seams of coal are unknown,
though coal occasionally occurs in pockets and thin
layers. In Russia, however, limestones are more
general among the coal-bearing strata of Carboniferous
age.
Ironstones. Coal-bearing formations generally con-
tain nodules and bands of ironstone interstratified with
the shales and clays, and sometimes with the coals.
The laminated bands of ironstone, containing sufficient
coal to be self-calcining, are called
'
Black Band,' and
form valuable beds in North Staffordshire, Scotland,
and elsewhere. In many cases the iron of Black Band
ironstones can be proved to have replaced carbonate
of lime, and they frequently pass laterally into lime-
stones. Nodules of clay-ironstone, composed of a
mixture of clay and carbonate of iron, occur in great
profusion in nearly all Coal-measure clays and shales.
The nodules are either flat, oval, or irregular in shape,
sometimes occurring in layers, at others irregularly
distributed, and frequently contain a fragment of fern,
shell fish, or other fossil.
Conditions. All the sedimentary rocks associated
with coal strata have been laid down in water, but under
very different physical conditions. Some have been
deposited in the comparatively tranquil waters of lakes,
and others in the agitated waters of estuaries and along

--- Page Break ---
COAL AS A ROCK 29
sea borders. In quiet waters the sediment brought
down by rivers quickly sinks to the bottom and is
roughly stratified, whereas material carried into tidal
waters is spread out and sorted into more definite
layers. This difference in the arrangement of the sedi-
ments is very marked among the different coal forma-
tions of the world.
The lacustrine coal-bearing formations of the central
plateau of France are noted for the irregularity in the
thickness of the seams of coal and associated rocks;
while the regularity of the coals among the more evenly-
bedded estuarine and marine sediments in the coal-
fields of northern France is remarkable.
We now come to a class of sediments marking the
close of the Carboniferous period in many coal regions
of Europe, Asia, and America. The rocks of this type
consist of red sandstones, shales, and clays, often several
hundred feet in thickness. Thin bands, a foot or two
thick, of creamy white or black limestone, invariably
fine grained, occur at intervals. With the exception of
a few plants in the shales and sandstones and of small
organisms (Entomostraca) in the limestones, these rocks
are alike destitute of coal and organic remains. It is
impossible to escape the conviction that these strata
were laid down under very different conditions to those
under which the coal-bearing rocks beneath were de-
posited. It is interesting also to note that the closing
phases of the coal-bearing strata of later formations are
generally of a red colour.
The probable solution of the difference is to be found
in the closing up of the outlet through which the waters
of the lagoon bordering on the swamps of the coal-
bearing period escaped and the formation of a closed

--- Page Break ---
30 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
basin. Under these conditions, each grain of sand and
each pellicle of clay would become coated with a thin
layer of iron oxide (Fe2O3), precipitated from the stag-
nant waters. The water containing the iron salts also
held lime in solution, which w
r
as precipitated to the
bottom as evaporation took place, and gave rise to the
limestone bands, which are, therefore, to a great extent
of inorganic and not of organic origin, like those of the
Carboniferous Limestone.
The sediments of coal-bearing formations were not
only distributed very irregularly, but were deposited at
very different rates. Most of the Carboniferous strata,
it is generally accepted, were laid down very rapidly,
and, according to a recent estimate by Mr. Sorby, some
of the sandstones were precipitated at a rate of one inch
per minute. The same bed may have been very rapidly
formed at one spot, and very much more slowly over a
closely contiguous area, afew inches of strata in the latter
case having been deposited, it may be, during the time
represented by several feet of strata in the former case.
This affords one solution for the very great variability
met with in the thicknesses of individual beds separating
two or more seams of coal in areas a few miles and
sometimes only a few yards apart, a variation with
which the coal-miner is only too familiar.
Associated Igneous Rocks. The sedimentary rocks
associated with coal-bearing strata are arranged in
layers one bed above the other. The igneous rocks, on
the other hand, are for the most part thrust intrusively
among these stratified sediments. The igneous material
may occur as a bed interstratified with the sediments,
or as a sheet cutting across them at different angles,

--- Page Break ---
COAL AS A ROCK 31
and not infrequently may be found as a dyke or wall of
igneous rock running more or less vertically across the
stratified rocks and coal-seams.
When a layer of igneous material is found lying
parallel with the bedding of the sedimentary rocks, it
may either have been thrust along the bedding planes
or poured out over the layer of sandstone, shale, or
coal at the time this was in process of formation. In
the former case the igneous rock will be found to have
baked and hardened the beds into which it is thrust,
the layers immediately above and below it being more
or less equally affected. In the latter case only the
rocks directly below the igneous material will have
been affected, and not those lying above it.
The importance of being able to distinguish between
an igneous rock poured out during the formation of any
coal-bearing strata and one of later origin is dealt with
in a succeeding chapter. When heated igneous material,
as before stated, comes in contact with a seam of coal,
it often entirely changes the nature of the coal. The
heat of the molten material drives off the volatile con-
stituents, and in some cases, if the heat is very intense,
it may convert a coal into soot, and so render it worth-
less ; at other times it may cause a seam to be enriched
in carbon, and so enhance its value.
In the Coal-measures of Carboniferous age igneous
rocks are comparatively rare. Among the coal-bear-
ing strata of Mesozoic age in Australia, India, and
South Africa, however, later intrusions often completely
destroy seams of coal, which in areas free from such
disturbances are of great value. Coals of Cretaceous
and Tertiary ages are also much affected by igneous
intrusions.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER IV
FORMATION AND ORIGIN
IT is now universally admitted that the several varieties
of coal have resulted from the alteration of vegetable
matter, but very divergent opinions are still held as to
the method of its accumulation and conversion into
coal.
Accumulation. Extensive and often thick deposits
of vegetable material are to be found in peat-bogs and
swamps, or they result from the accumulation of drifted
wood carried from the land and laid down under water
at the mouths of large rivers.
In this country and in America, due mainly to the
teaching of Logan, de la Beche, and Principal Dawson,
a coal-seam is considered to represent an original peat-
bog ; on the Continent the opinion is almost universally
held that the majority of coal-seams have resulted from
drifted material.
Two opposing views, known as the
'
growth-in-situ
'
and 'drift' origin, are in consequence held, though
there is at present a tendency for some geologists in
this country to regard many of the British seams as
having been formed out of drifted material.
The supporters of either view do not suppose that
32

--- Page Break ---
FORMATION AND ORIGIN 33
the vegetation accumulated in deep water on the one
hand, or on elevated ground on the other. Both
theories start with a low-lying maritime morass or a
peat-bog, but, according to one view, the coal-bed and
its seat-earth represent the actual site of the swamp,
while, according to the other view, the vegetable debris
was floated out from the swamp into the neighbouring
still lagoons.
Thick seams of coal containing numerous partings of
shale, like those of India, Africa, and Australia, have
always been considered to have originated from veget-
able material drifted out into inland lakes.
The essential factors which either theory must satis-
factorily account for are : (i) The great areas often
occupied by individual seams ; (2) the absence of
foreign material, such as sand, mud, etc., from the
coals ; (3) the maintenance of a uniform thickness,
often by a thin seam, over considerable areas ; (4) the
behaviour of a coal-seam as a sedimentary rock amidst
rocks whose sedimentary origin is unquestionable.
By those upholding the
'
growth-in-situ
'
theory stress
is chiefly laid on the purity of many seams, and the
frequent, but by no means universal, occurrence of an
underclay (fire-clay), considered to be an old soil beneath
the seam, and on the occurrence of vertical stems of
fossil trees in the rock forming the roof of a coal with
their roots penetrating the underclays.
'
Seat-earths
'
are, however, often absent, and the seam lies directly
on sandstone, conglomerate, or shale, without a trace
of rootlets, while it is not certain that the seat-earths
represent ancient soils.
A strict analysis of the position of the trunks of trees
in the so-called
'
fossil forests
'
shows a greater percen-
3

--- Page Break ---
34 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
tage of prostrate or inclined trunks than those having
a vertical position.
In the case of numerous and closely contiguous seams,
separated by marine sediments, the
'
growth-*ft-sfta
'
theory demands rapid and frequent oscillatory earth-
movements. First, a land surface with the formation of
peat ; then its depression and burial, and the formation
of a fresh land surface, these operations being many
times repeated. This theory satisfactorily accounts for
the purity of many seams.
The supporters of the
'
drift
'
origin of the woody
material base their chief claim on the behaviour of a
coal-seam as a sedimentary work. Many seams, made
up of layers of coal with partings of dirt, shale, clay or
sandstone, varying from a mere film to several feet in
thickness, pass laterally into beds of almost pure coal.
According to this view, therefore, a seam of nearly
pure coal indicates a spot to which only the lightest
and finest material has access. Coal-seams would be
formed during intermittent, but downward, earth-move-
ments, during the formation of a depression which
became consecutively filled with coarse material (sand-
stone), followed by finer sediments (shales and clays),
and finally by drifted wood and plant debris the
lightest of all.
The thickness of individual seams does not receive
a satisfactory solution from the
'
growth-in-situ
'
theory.
It is calculated that it takes 10 feet of peat to form
one foot of coal. The 3O-Feet Coal of Dudley, therefore,
would represent an original thickness of 300 feet of peat,
which is far in excess of any peat at the present day.
Again, for the
'
drift
'
theory it is difficult to imagine
an area to which only the lightest material had access

--- Page Break ---
FORMATION AND ORIGIN 35
for a period represented by 30 or more feet of coal,
though there is reason to suppose that the trans-
ported decayed vegetation would reach its resting-place
in a more or less condensed and incompressible state,
so that 30 feet of pure coal, according to this view,
need not represent many times its bulk of transported
material.
In regard to the vast areas, exceeding 12,000 square
miles, over which one particular seam, such as the
Pittsburg Coal of America, extended, it is useless to
speculate in face of our ignorance of the past conditions
of climate, land configuration, and the growth and
distribution of plant life ; neither can we estimate over
how great an area a deposit of one kind, and of fairly
uniform thickness, could be laid down. The Rhaetic
bone bed and shales, among sediments, show that even
a thin layer can, under favourable conditions, be almost
uniformly laid down over an area of many thousands of
square miles.
Both these theories apply to the accumulation of
vegetable matter as awhole. The most ardent advocate
for the
'
growih-in-situ
'
origin of coal admits that some
seams, such as cannel coals, must be formed from
drifted vegetation, while supporters of the
'
drift
'
origin
do not deny that some seams of coal are probably
derived from the conversion of vegetation in situ.
For practical purposes, however, the miner has no
;casion to trouble himself with either view. A seam
)f coal behaves as any other stratified rock, and is mined
accordingly.
Conversion. The varieties of coal given inChapter II.
will be seen to differ from each other in the relative
32

--- Page Break ---
36 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
proportion of carbon to hydrogen and carbon to oxygen.
In lignite the hydrogen and oxygen ratios are relatively
high; in some bogheads we find a total elimination
of hydrogen ; and in graphite, the final stage in the
conversion, a total elimination of both hydrogen and
oxygen.
The relative proportions of hydrogen and oxygen
present in the different varieties of coal are more
clearly brought out if the amount of carbon is taken as
constant, and the proportion of the other constituents
increased in the same ratio. This will be understood
from the following table :
The increase in weight due to the conversion of
wood into coal is shown by one cubic foot of wood
weighing 30 pounds, and one cubic foot of anthracite
weighing go pounds.
It is usual to consider that all coal, from the lignitic
to graphitic varieties, once existed in a state of peat,
and that the subsequent alteration of the only partly
decayed vegetable matter proceeded by successive stages
long subsequent to burial. Recent researches, how-
ever, more especially by M. Renault, indicate that
very different degrees of alteration can be effected by

--- Page Break ---
FORMATION AND ORIGIN 37
biological action prior to entombment, while the subse-
quent mechanical and physical changesmay be relatively
trifling.
The conversion of once living vegetable matter into
the mineral coal can therefore be considered under two
headings
: (i) Changes prior to burial beneath sedi-
ments ; and (2) changes subsequent to entombment.
The chief constituent of plants consists of some
multiple of cellulose (C6H10O
r>) with some nitrogen.
Protoplasm, the living gelatinous substance, forms only
a small portion, and perishes at death. In addition,
there is a small percentage of inorganic salts of iron,
potash, silica, and sulphur, seldom exceeding 3-5 per
cent. The three main elements of vegetable tissue
occur in the proportion of C, 50 to 58 per cent. ;
O and N, 28 to 45 per cent. ; and H, 5 to 7 per cent.
This is true of the lowest plants, seaweeds, mosses,
ferns, etc., and of the highest, the flowering plants.
At the death of the plant, the cellulose, under favour-
able conditions, undergoes a partial deoxygenation and
dehydrogenation with the evolution of carbonic acid
and marsh gas. The unused portions of the carbon
and hydrogen of the cellulose enter into new combina-
tions to form humic acid and hydrocarbons. The first
is soluble in water ; the latter consist of gaseous, liquid,
or insoluble solid products.
In stagnant peat-bogs the humic products prevent
further decay, and decomposition is arrested after a
certain stage has been reached. In a free circulation
of water, however, decomposition continues, due in
great part to bacteriological fermentation, certain parts
of plants being found to present different resistances to
the action of bacteria. In the Blatter Kohle and Papier

--- Page Break ---
38 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Kohle of Toula in Russia of lower Carboniferous age
for instance, the cuticles of Bothrodendron are found
to have greatly resisted destruction. Epidermal cells,
cuticles, grains of pollen and spores, are the most
indestructible, but these ultimately become destroyed.
Prolonged maceration and bacteriological action
result, therefore, in an almost total obliteration of
organic structure, and a loss in bulk amounting to
from 10 to 30 per cent, of the original mass of vegetable
debris. The successive stages are marked by the
gradual elimination of hydrogen and oxygen, and a
consequent increase in the carbon percentage. It is
thus obvious that the chemical composition of the re-
sulting organic pulp depends upon the stage at which
decomposition was arrested. It is, therefore, possible
that an organic pulp, having the chemical composition
of a lignitic, a bituminous, or even an anthracitic coal,
may result, according to the stage at which the decom-
position of the vegetable debris was arrested.
The carbonaceous slime resulting from the decom-
position of the bodies of aquatic animals and plants
living in stagnant water is termed sapropil. When in a
sub-fossil state it forms a gelatinous substance, and is
then called saprokohl. Sapropil, when dried or in a
fossil state, is hard. Cannel coal may be regarded as
fossil sapropil.
In a previous chapter the original nature of the
vegetable debris, whether pollen grains, macrospores,
leaves, cuticles, tissue, or bark, was shown to have
played an important part in forming the composition
of the resulting coal in its earlier stages. To this we
may now add the resistance offered to bacteriological
fermentation by the different parts of a plant. It will

--- Page Break ---
FORMATION AND ORIGIN^ 39
now be understood why one coal is almost structureless,
another contains leaf-stalks and cuticles, and another
spores ; and also why vegetable tissues, the most readily
attacked of all parts of a plant by micro-organisms
and fermentations, are so rarely preserved in coal. The
easy decomposition of tissues forming the chief bulk
of plants will also in some degree account for the
fragmentary nature of the vegetable remains met with
in coal. These do not necessarily imply that they are
fragments torn away from the plants by wind and
dropped into the morass, or floated out into the neigh-
bouring lagoons, but are the remnants left of the more
indestructible elements.
It is, however, more usually considered that the
change from woody tissue into coal has for the most
part taken place subsequently to the burial beneath
sediments, and no doubt many important changes have
resulted from the pressure and heat to which the
original material has been subjected.
Heat, resulting from the thick covering of the strata,
from pressure and folding, or due to the intrusion of
igneous material, is undoubtedly an important, though
it may not be one of the chief factors in the conversion.
Bituminous coals of all ages in various parts of the
world become anthracitic when in contact with con-
temporaneous or intrusive igneous material. The
change, however, is usually local and sporadic. Anthra-
citized coals, however, in contact with igneous rocks,
possess, as might be expected, a higher percentage of
ash than those in which the cause of carbonification
is obscure, but, except locally, are certainly not due to
the heat derived from igneous intrusions, and presum-
ably, also, not to that engendered during folding.

--- Page Break ---
40 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The alteration in the character of the sediments
effected by heat evolved .during the folding and com-
pression of the strata partakes, on the other hand, of a
regional type. The Pennsylvanian and South Wales
anthracite fields are both situated in regions of intense
folding, while in the adjacent less disturbed areas the
coal assumes a more bituminous character.
In South Wales the seams in the eastern and less
disturbed areas contain a much lower percentage of
carbon than in the western highly disturbed district.
In following the lines of anthracitization from east to
west it is found as a whole, though there are some
exceptions, that the lower seams are the first to change,
while the coals along the southern outcrop retain their
bituminous character even when greatly folded.
In the intensely folded Alpine regions, the whole of
the original volatile matter of some coals has in places
been eliminated, and a bed of graphite formed. In
Russia the seams richest in carbon lie in the dis-
turbed zone bordering the Ural Mountains. Again, the
American anthracite coals of Carboniferous age are con-
fined to the folded Pennsylvanian basin, the bituminous
varieties occurring in the less disturbed Appalachian
Coalfield. The same continent shows the phenomenon
of the Cretaceous and Tertiary coals, losing their
volatile matter on approaching the folded strata of the
Rocky Mountains, and becoming converted into anthra-
cites in the most disturbed belts.
It thus appears that earth pressure results in a certain
amount of anthracitization, but the exceptions show
that other considerations, such as original composition,
must be taken into account.
Where coal-seams lie at great depths, or have once

--- Page Break ---
FORMATION AND ORIGIN 41
been covered by an immense thickness of strata, it is
evident that the lower layers must have been subjected
to a higher temperature than the upper seams.
The amount of volatile matter, it is observed,
decreases with the depth of the seam, the rate of
change being more rapid in the bituminous than in the
non-bituminous coals. This is known as Hilt's law, and
is found to be applicable to many coalfields. There
are, however, some notable exceptions. In the Saar-
brucken coalfields the more bituminous seams are the
deeper seated ; and, again, in South Wales, the bitu-
minous coals along the southern outcrop have lain
under as thick, or possibly a thicker, cover than the
anthracite fields to the north. Neither can it be
demonstrated that depth and pressure combined have
resulted in an equal loss of volatile constituents, for in
the northern coalfields of France lean, dry coals have
been thrust over gas coals, both lying at considerable
depths. Again, Hilt's law will not account for the
cannel coals of Russia of Lower Carboniferous or later
Devonian age, while pressure and depth both fail
to give a satisfactory solution to the undisturbed
anthracites of Carboniferous age in China. Many coals,
it is observed, tend to become anthracitic on exposure
to air at ordinary temperatures, and also lose some of
their volatile constituents in the proximity of open
faults or below a sandstone roof.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER V
DISTRIBUTION
Distribution in Time. The formations older than the
Cambrian, and known as the Pre-Cambrian or Archaean,
consist to a great extent of crystalline metamorphic
rocks and those of volcanic and igneous origin. Coal, as
might be expected, does not occur among strata of this
character.
The veins of graphite, however, met with in the
crystalline metamorphic rocks of Pre-Cambrian age
may possibly represent original vegetable matter, though
the absence of any signs of terrestrial plant remains in
the Pre-Cambrian shales and sandstones such as the
Torridonian Sandstone of Scotland may indicate either
the absence of land vegetation at this early period, or,
at any rate, not sufficiently abundant to form a seam of
coal. The graphitic veins may be, in part at least, of
inorganic origin. Combustible material of undoubted
vegetable origin is certainly absent in the Pre-Cambrian
rocks of any part of the world.
Coal also does not occur in the older Palaeozoic
formations Cambrian, Ordovician, Silurian though
black shales sometimes carbonaceous are abundantly
developed. In many cases the sediments of the older
42

--- Page Break ---
DISTRIBUTION 43
Palaeozoicrockspreserved to usmust have been laiddown
in deep water, but coal-seams are not known even in the
inshore and terrestrial deposits older than the Devonian
epoch. Very little of the terrestrial flora of the older
Palaeozoic rocks has been preserved, so that it is
impossible to say whether the absence of coal-seams is
to be attributed to unfavourable conditions of preserva-
tion or to insufficient vegetation.
In the Old Red Sandstone (the lacustrine equivalent
of the marine Devonian formation), the oldest of the
later Palaeozoic strata, ferns and other cryptogamic
plants occur. It is not, however, until towards the
close of the period that coal-seams appear ; and so far
they are only known in Russia, where several seams of
inferior quality, but mainly of the nature of boghead,
are interstratified between the Carboniferous Limestone
and the Devonian.
From the Carboniferous period upwards to the
Quaternary, each of the stratified formations, in one
part of the world or another, contains fossil fuel, either
as true coal or in the form of Brown coal or lignite.
The most valuable seams of coal are met with in the
Carboniferous formation, and for this reason it is found
that, in countries where coals of various ages occur,
chief attention is given to the exploitation of those of
Carboniferous age, even when they are less easily
accessible than the inferior seams in the newer
formations.
The Carboniferous strata exceed 10,000 feet in thick-
ness, and are generally separable into two divisions a
Lower Marine and an Upper Estuarine, or Freshwater
division, though in some countries the strata of both
are mainly marine.

--- Page Break ---
44 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The more important coals are met with in the strata
of the upper division, which, as a rule, occupy more
restricted areas than the Lower Carboniferous rocks, and
some countries only possess this earlier marine phase.
Succeeding the Carboniferous, the Permo-Carbo-
niferous, Permian, and Triassic formations yield the
chief coals of the Southern Hemisphere. These coals
are usually of inferior quality to those of the Car-
boniferous, and are chiefly worked in countries w
r
here
seams of Carboniferous age are either absent or but
feebly developed.
Coals of Jurassic, Cretaceous, and Tertiary ages are
generally of a lower grade than those of the earlier
Mesozoic and later Palaeozoic ages. They are also less
evenly distributed, though sometimes occurring in beds
exceeding 100 feet in thickness, and are occasionally of
superior quality to the Carboniferous coals in adjacent
areas.
Distribution of Space. The superficial extent of
the coal areas of the world has been estimated at
605,500 square miles, of which about one-third belongs
to formations newer than the Carboniferous. Coal is
met with in all latitudes, from well within the Arctic
Circle to the Straits of Magellan, and from Franz
Josef Land to the Auckland Islands.
In the Northern Hemisphere, with the exception of
India, the coals of Carboniferous age are most widely
distributed. In the Southern Hemisphere and in India
the chief seams belong either to the Mesozoic or
Tertiary period.
The Carboniferous rocks cover immense areas in
North America. The coals occur in the upper division,

--- Page Break ---
DISTRIBUTION 45
and, except those of Alaska, the coalfields lie between
the 3Oth and looth parallels of latitude.
In the Old World, the chief coalfields of Carbo-
niferous age are situated between the 4Oth and 6oth
degrees of latitude, and, with the possible exception
of the almost unknown coalfields of China, Northern
Europe possesses the largest areas and the highest
quality seams. Russia comes first as regards the area
of her coalfields, but Great Britain contains the best
quality seams, and in South Wales possesses the finest
seams of steam-coal and anthracite in the whole world.
The Permo-Carboniferous and older Mesozoic coals
attain their chief development in Australia, Tasmania,
India, South Africa, and South America.
In South Africa the Karroo formation contains the
chief coals, and is extensively developed in Cape Colony,
Natal, and the Transvaal. It is now generally agreed
that the more important coals belong to the lower beds
of the Karroo system, though these are unproductive,
if not completely barren, in Cape Colony, where they
attain a great thickness and cover large areas ; but in
the Orange River Colony, Natal, and the Transvaal
they become productive.
Rocks undoubtedly belonging to the Karroo system
are also met with north of the Zambesi, in the region
of the great lakes, and possibly underlie vast areas in
the Congo Free State ; but whether these strata belong
to the upper or lower division of the Karroo is as yet
uncertain.
Up to the present time Central and Northern Africa
have shown few signs, of containing coal in any great
quantity.
In Peninsula-India the Gondwana system represents

--- Page Break ---
46 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
TABLE OF COAL-BEARING FORMATIONS.
the Karroo formation of South Africa. It is extensively
developed, and contains many seams of coal, equal in

--- Page Break ---
DISTRIBUTION 47
quality to those of the Karroo, but much inferior to the
European coals of Carboniferous age. In surface area
and in the quality of some of the seams, however, the
Gondwana system ranks as an important coal-bearing
formation.
The older Mesozoic rocks are met with in Queens-
land, New
r
South Wales, and Tasmania. The lowest
formation agrees with the Karroo system in being coal-
bearing and containing a similar flora and fauna, but
differs in intercalation of the marine sediments. The
coalfields are extensive, but no reliable approximate
estimate of the available quantity of good coal has yet
been ascertained.
New
7
Zealand, Japan, and the Malayasian Islands are
devoid of Carboniferousand Permo-Carboniferous coals.
Japan contains good coals of Cretaceous and Tertiary
ages. The Sumatra coal is of Eocene age, and the
seams of New Zealand are either of Tertiary or later
Cretaceous age.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VI
FOSSJLS AS ZONAL INDICES
General. The various sedimentary strata comprising
the greater portion of the rock sequence, from the
oldest up to the most recently deposited, do not
materially differ either in appearance or lithological
characters one from another. Thus a limestone, sand-
stone, or shale of Cambrian, Ordovician, or Silurian
age may bear a close resemblance to one of Carboni-
ferous or later age. In the Warwickshire Coalfield, for
example, black shales, now proved to belong to the
Cambrian formation, are underlain by a hard quartzitic
sandstone, and so close is the general resemblance of
these Cambrian shales and quartzites to the overlying
quartzitic sandstones and shales of Coal-measure age
as to have led to their being included in the Carboni-
ferous system.
Again, in Pembrokeshire and North Wales the black
shales of Ordovician and Silurian ages are in appear-
ance indistinguishable from the neighbouring Carboni-
ferous shales, and shafts in search of coal have, even in
recent years, been sunk in these black shales with the
expectation of finding seams of coal.
In the attempts now being made to prove coal in the
48

--- Page Break ---
Plate I.
- Kidston.
PECOPTERIS ARBORESCENS, SCUL. SP. Reduced.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 49
south-eastern counties of England, and to a greater
extent in northern France, black shales are often
encountered in- borings, the age of which, judged by
their lithological characters alone, cannot be deter-
mined.
Red strata very often underlie and overlie the Car-
boniferous rocks of Europe the one of Devonian, the
other of Triassic age. Lithologically, it is often im-
possible to distinguish one from the other; yet the
importance of being able to do so is evident, for if the
red strata are of Triassic age, then the coal-bearing
Carboniferous rocks may be found below them ; while
if they are Devonian, the quest for coal beneath them
is useless, since, as before stated, coal makes its first
appearance in the Carboniferous formation.
The geologist has, fortunately, an infallible means of
distinguishing an older from a newer set of strata, even
though similar both in colour and mineral composition.
The means of determination lies in the distinct
character of the fossils met with in the different geo-
logical formations.
Among the pre-Carboniferous rocks Graptolites do not
occur above the Silurian, and therefore the presence of
even a fragment of a Graptolite indicates at once a
horizon far older than any of the coal-bearing forma-
tions of the world.
The Trilobites met with in the older rocks are of
species quite distinct from those which occur in rocks
of Carboniferous age. The pre-Carboniferous strata
also contain numerous other invertebrate fossils, of
which, though the genera may be similar, the species
are readily distinguishable from any met with in rocks
of later ages. The fish remains, too, in the formations
4

--- Page Break ---
50 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
older than the Carboniferous belong, as a whole, to
different types to those met with in the Carboniferous
and later periods.
The occurrence of fossils, then, or even one fossil,
such as a Graptolite, will at once determine whether
the strata in which they occur are of Carboniferous or
older age, even though lithologically the strata may be
indistinguishable.
The fauna and flora of the Secondary and Tertiary
formations, as is w
r
ell known, differ essentially from
those found in the Palaeozoic rocks.
We have next to consider the characteristic fossils
of the Carboniferous system, and how far they serve to
distinguish one part of the system from another.
The Carboniferous period was essentially the age of
cryptogamic plants that is, plants of simple organiza-
tion, such as horsetails, ferns, mosses, etc. The vegeta-
tion did not reach a higher stage than that ofrudimentary
palms Pteridophytes. The palaeobotany of the Carboni-
ferous rocks is, however, undergoing revision, and
plants formerly groupedVith the Filices are now proved
to belong to higher orders. Much is also being learned
about the habitat of the Coal-measure plants, especially
about the submerged and partially submerged species.
While the flora of the period belonged to a humble
stage in plant evolution, the fauna shows a great
advancement on the preceding forms. Bony fishes
reach a high state of development, and air-breathing
vertebrates make their first appearance. The presence
of these in association with abundance of cryptogamic
plants, and the absence of the higher orders of Phanero-
gamous plants, therefore, serves to distinguish the Car-
boniferous from any preceding formation.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
Plate II.
Photo} [R. Kidsto
SIGILLARIA RUGOSA, BRONGT. Natural Size.

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES .5 1
We have now to see how far fossil evidence is of use
in distinguishing one part of the Carboniferous forma-
tion from the other. Since this formation may, and
often does, exceed 10,000 feet in thickness, and the coal-
seams are practically restricted to one portion, it is
evidently of importance to be able to recognize the coal-
bearing from the non-coal-bearing Carboniferous strata.
The Carboniferous system of Western Europe and of
the United States can be separated into a Lower and an
Upper Division. The Lower Division rarely contains
workable coals, and the thickest and most valuable
seams are met with in the Upper Division.
Fossils of the Lower Carboniferous Rocks. The
Lower Division (Dinantian) consists usually of highly
fossiliferous limestones, fine-grained sandstones and
shales, the latter often bearing a close lithological
resemblance to the sandstones and shales of the Upper
Division.
Marine conditions prevailed generally in Europe
throughout the Lower Carboniferous, and freshwater
phases, as in the Calciferous Sandstone Series of Scot-
land, may be regarded as the exception.
A very different fauna inhabited the Dinantian seas
from those of the Upper Carboniferous period. Corals
(Syringopora reticulate, Zaphrentis, Lithostrotion basalti-
forme, Dibunophyllum) were abundant, and are not
found irregularly distributed, but arranged in sequence ;
Dibunophyllum, for instance, indicating a higher horizon
than that in which species of Zaphrentis occur. Some
of the Brachiopods, Lamellibranchs, and Cephalopods
are common to the Dinantian and Upper Carboniferous
strata ; but others, such as Productus giganteus, Posido-
42

--- Page Break ---
52 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
nomya becheri, Prolecanites compressus, are not found
above the Lower Division.
In cases where the Lower Carboniferous strata con-
sist of black shales and mudstones most of the fossils
met with in the limestone do not occur, but are
replaced by animals suited to the changed conditions
from clear and open seas to muddy water. The shells
of these animals, however, are very distinct from those
which lived on the muddy flats and in the estuaries and
shallow Upper Carboniferous seas (cf. Figs, i and 2,
pp. 59 and 63).
Plant remains are somewhat rare in the Lower Car-
boniferous rocks. Many of the genera and most of the
species are distinct from those found in the Upper
Carboniferous strata. Thus, Lepidodendron veltheimia-
num (Plate VII., p. 67) is a species confined to the
Lower Division.
Fossils of the Upper Carboniferous Rocks.
The Upper Division of the Carboniferous system con-
tains, as we have said, the chief coal-seams in Europe
and North America. The fauna indicates that the
strata were laid down partly under freshwater, estuarine
and marine conditions. Taken collectively, the strata
consist of alternating sandstones and shales, and an
occasional thin band of limestone.
The seams of coal are very unevenly distributed, often
occurring in groups, and zones rich in coals are often
separated from one another by barren strata. Many of
the better-class seams are found to occupy definite
positions in the Coal-measure sequence. It is obviously
of great use, therefore, to be able to distinguish the
horizons of the productive from the unproductive strata,

--- Page Break ---
Photo} [/;. Kidston.
NEUROPTERIS GIGANTEA, STERNB. Natural Size.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 53
and to recognize the positions of the more important
coals.
To what extent, then, does the distribution of the
fossils among the Upper Carboniferous rocks enable this
to be accomplished ?
It may at once be said that the fossils of the Upper
Carboniferous strata, whether plant or animal, do not
strictly lend themselves to what is known as the zonal
method. There are hardly any proved restrictions of
genera or species to zones of limited thickness over wide
areas, as is the case wdth the Graptolites of Ordovician
and Silurian ages; nor can it be said that any such
zones and sub-zones have been established as those
afforded by the Ammonites of the Jurassic period and
the Echinodermata of the Cretaceous period.
Viewed broadly, the fossils of the Upper Carboniferous
strata have a wide vertical range. A plant or shell
makes its appearance, attains a maximum development,
and then dies out. As one genus or species becomes
rare, another form makes its first appearance in limited
numbers, then becomes predominant, and finally passes
away.
The distribution of the plants is considered to be
governed by the law of evolution, but that of the mud-
loving mollusca seems to be dependent on local condi-
tions of sedimentation, for the majority of the species
occur at different horizons in different places according
to environment, and changes due to evolution cannot be
demonstrated.
Over limited areas a species or genus may be re-
stricted to a particular horizon, but may mark a quite
different horizon in another region. It is therefore
necessary to distinguish between those fossils which

--- Page Break ---
54 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
everywhere indicate a high or low position in the
sequence from those forms which, locally restricted to
a particular bed or group, can only be taken to possess
a local value, since in other areas they are found at
other horizons.
The Upper Carboniferous strata of Britain are divided
into two series a Lower or Millstone Grit Series, and
an Upper or Coal-measure Series. For the latter several
classifications have been suggested, the terms Upper,
Middle, and Lower Coal-measures being the best known ;
and so far as these terms are merely taken to imply a
relative position in any given sequence they can be
retained, though they may be valueless in comparing
one coalfield with another.
Plant remains are rare in the Millstone Grit Series,
and afford little help in the identification of horizons.
The fauna is almost exclusively marine, and in this
respect differs from the overlying Coal-measures. The
series may be in part recognized by the absence of the
plants and estuarine and freshwater shells, common to
the sub-divisions of the Upper, Middle, and Lower Coal-
measures.
The distribution of the various plants and mollusca
throughout the Coal-measures serves to identify the
position of certain groups of strata.
The zones formed by the vertical distribution of the
plants are of great thickness. Instances are rare where
a plant, or an assemblage of plants, defines one stratum,
and when this does happen the occurrence can only be
regarded as quite local. On the other hand, plants
form a reliable index in determining whether a group
of Coal-measure strata occupies a high or low position
in the sequence.

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 55
The Upper Coal-measure age of a series of strata is
assured by the presence of Pecopteris arborescens
(Plate I., p. 48), Pecopteris unita, and Alethopteris
serli, which are unknown in the Lower and Middle
Coal-measures. The occurrence of Sigillaria rugosa
(Plate II., p. 51), Sphenopteris obtusiloba (Plate VI., p. 61),
and Neuropteris gigantea (Plate III., p. 52) will determine
the age to be Lower or Middle Coal-measures, since
these forms are restricted to these sub - divisions.
Alethopteris lonchitica (Plate IV., opposite) is a common
form in the Middle Coal-measures, but occurs much
less profusely in the Lower Coal-measures, and is rarely
found in the Upper Coal-measures. Stigmaria ficoides
(Plate V., p. 58) is a plant common to all the sub-
divisions of the Upper Carboniferous Series, and is
therefore valueless as an index of horizon.
Palaeobotanists place reliance on the presence of
many other plants of rarer occurrence the abundance
of some forms and the exclusion of others or on a
special assemblage of certain plants. Such intimate
knowledge, however, is seldom attainable either by the
miner or field geologist.
Plants, then, as an index of horizon, are of service to
the miner only in a broad, general sense. It is other-
wise with the mollusca. These not only indicate a
relatively high or low position in the sequence, but
in many coalfields fix the horizon of a particular bed,
and can be used to identify the position of a seam of
coal from place to place.
The mollusca can be referred to two faunas, which
keep quite apart from each other, and are never found
associated together in the same zone, though the two
zones may be separated by only an inch, or even less,

--- Page Break ---
56 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
of shale or other material. One of the faunas is cer-
tainly marine, and since the two faunas never com-
mingle it is thought that the other includes the
mollusca of an estuarine or freshwater habitat.
The estuarine and freshwater faunas occur through-
out the Coal-measures, and are evenly distributed, but
may be aggregated in a bed a few feet in thickness.
The marine fauna is met with in bands, seldom exceed-
ing 10 feet in thickness, and is restricted to the Middle
and Lower divisions.
The freshwater and estuarine mollusca belong to the
order Lamellibranchiata, the chief forms being Car-
bonicola (Anthracosia), Anthracomya, and Naiadites.
These have a wide distribution, and are the commonest
shells met with in the Coal-measures throughout the
world. Fluviatile and lacustrine Gasteropoda are much
rarer, and are confined to a few coalfields, and not
generally distributed like the Lamellibranchiata.
In the coalfields of Central England the various
species of Carbonicola, Anthracomya, and Naiadites occur
in a definite sequence. Most of the species have a
wide vertical range, but a few are considered to be con-
fined to particular bands. To what extent the vertical
range of a species in the coalfields of Central England
coincides with that in other British and foreign coal-
fields has not been as yet ascertained, but the available
evidence seems to show that the succession of the
freshwater and estuarine Lamellibranchiata of Central
England does not apply to foreign coalfields.
It has been before stated that the occurrence of a
certain species at any one place was largely governed
by local conditions, and that the different species of
Lamellibranchiata do not demonstrate anv marked

--- Page Break ---
OSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 57
evolutionary change. The mollusca followed the sedi-
ments brought down, and the food these contained.
Under varying conditions, the animals would conse-
quently migrate backwards and forwards from one
district to another, and accommodate themselves to
the food-supply. This does not necessarily invalidate
their use in the determination of a local sequence, or
over a broad area like the coal-basin of Central England,
which, though subject to fluctuations, certainly existed
as an area of continuous deposition throughout the
Coal-measure period.
The succession of the Lamellibranchiate fauna estab-
lished for the Midland coal-basin may not, therefore,
hold good for other districts. It is, indeed, more likely
that each separated area will present its own individual
order of life forms, as deposition, and consequent food-
supply, may have been arrested at one stage in one
area and at another stage in a separate area.
In the Midland coal-basin of Central England the
species of Carbonicola, Anthracomya, and Naiadites
appear in the following order from the base of the
Coal-measures upwards
:
Carbonicola robusta (Fig. i). This fossil is found in
great numbers in the strata containing the chief seams
of coal, and occurs in many of the so-called mussel
bands. Isolated specimens are met with low down in
the Coal-measure sequence, but the species dies out in
the Middle Coal-measures. It may be safely regarded
as indicative of the lower seams of the Middle Coal-
measures.
Carbonicola inrgida (Fig. i). Like the last-mentioned
fossil, this species is associated with the chief seams of
coal, and does not ascend into the Upper Coal-measures.

--- Page Break ---
58 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
It is found singly or in association with Carbonicola
subrotunda and Carbonicola gibbosa.
Carbonicola subconstricta (Fig. i). This form is also
confined to the Middle or productive series (p. 178).
Carbonicola acuta and Carbonicola aquilina (Fig. i).
Both these species have a wide range throughout the
Lower and Middle Coal-measures. Though they are
among the commonest fossils found in the Coal-
measures, they cannot be assigned to any distinct
zones. Carbonicola acuta is common in the so-called
mussel-beds, where it occurs in association with the
species above mentioned.
This genus, it will be seen, does not occur in the
Upper Coal-measures.
Naiadites quadrata (Fig. i). This is also a common
fossil in the Middle Coal-measures, either occurring
alone or in association with Naiadites carinata and
Naiadites modiolaris (Fig. i). It is unknown in the
Upper and very rare or absent in the Lower Coal-
measures.
Anthracomya williamsoni (Fig. i) and Anthracomya
modiolaris. Both these species are confined to the
Middle Coal-measures, and are of much less common
occurrence than the species of Carbonicola and Naiadites.
Anthracomya adamsi (Fig. i). This has a very re-
stricted range in the Middle Coal-measures (p. 178).
All these fossils are confined to the Coal-measure
strata situated between the top of the Millstone Grit
and the base of the Upper Coal-measures, and may
certainly be regarded as representing the estuarine
development of the Lamellibranchiata at this period.
We shall now consider the fossils of the Upper
Coal-measures, taking this term to include the barren

--- Page Break ---
A. arte:nsi A-modiolaris
FIG. i. CARBONICOLA (C.) ; ANTHRACOMYA (A.); NAIADITES (N.)
FROM THE ENGLISH COAL-MFASURES.

--- Page Break ---
60 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
strata overlying the Middle Coal-measures of the Mid-
land Province and the measures above the Pennant rock
in the Southern Province (p. 144).
The commonest fossil met with is Anthracomya
phillipsi (Fig. i), and throughout the Midland coal-
basin it indicates a high position in the Coal-measures,
for it first appears towards the top of the Middle Coal-
measures, and becomes abundant only in the lower part
of the Upper Coal-measures.
The last survivor of the freshwater Lamellibran-
chiata is Anthracomya calcifera, a small shell met with
high up in the Upper Coal-measures, but having a
limited vertical distribution.
We have now traced the vertical distribution of the
Coal-measure Lamellibranchiata in the order in which
they occur in the Midland coal-basin. To what extent
this order holds good for other British coalfields has
not been determined.
In the north of England and in South Wales Carboni-
cola robusta appears to be restricted to low horizons,
whileAnthracomya phillipsi indicates a high position. It
does not, however, appear safe at present to rely upon
these or other species as a definite means of determina-
tion, though locally
'
a species or several species may
always be found in a particular bed for a considerable
distance, and so serve as a useful mark of identification
of much local value.
The marine mollusca are more varied both in genera
and species than the estuarine and freshwater forms.
Not only the Lamellibranchiata, but also the orders of
the Gasteropoda and Cephalopoda, are represented by
many genera and species. Few of the forms, however,
are peculiar to the Coal-measures, and the majority are

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 61
identical with, or have a close affinity to, the marine
mollusca of the Lower Carboniferous rocks and the Mill-
stone Grits.
The chief mollusca common to both divisions are:
Brachiopoda.
Lingula mytiloides (Sow.).
Orbiculoidea (Discina)
nitida (PhilL). _
Productus (scabriculocos-
tate form).
Productus scabriculus
(Mart.).
Spirifer bisulcatus (Sow.).
Lamellibranchiata.
Ctenodonta laevirostris
(Port!.).
Leiopteria longirostris
(Hind).
Nucula gibbosa (Flem.).
Nucula aequalis (Sow.).
Nuculana sharmani (R.
Eth. fjL).
Posidoniella laevis
(Brown).
Posidoniella minor
(Brown).
Pseudamusium fibrillosum
(Salter).
Pterinopecten carbonarius
(Hind).
Pterinopecten papyraceus
(Sow.).
Syncyclonema carboni-
ferum (Hind).
Gasteropoda.
Euphemus urei.
Raphistoma radians (de
Ron.).
Cephalopoda.
Coelonautilus, cf. subsul-
catus (PhilL).
Conularia quadrisulcata
(Sow.).
Dimorphoceras gilbertsoni
(PhilL).
Dimorphoceras loonyi
(PhilL).
Gastrioceras coronatum
(Foord and Crick).
Glyphioceras micronotum
(PhilL).
Glyphioceras phillipsi
(Foord and Crick).
Glyphioceras reticulatum
(PhilL).
Nomismoceras ornatum
(Foord and Crick).
Pleuronautilus armatus
(Sow,).
Pleuronautilus falcatus
(Sow.).
Pleuronautilus rotifer
(Salter).
The occurrence of these fossils alone would therefore
only determine the sandstones and shales in which they
occur to be of Carboniferous age. The presence of the

--- Page Break ---
62 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
following fossils would, however, clearly demonstrate
the Upper Carboniferous age of the beds, since, so far
as is known, they are only met with in this division of
the Coal-measures, both in British and continental
coalfields.
Some of these marine fossils, now thought to be con-
fined to the Lower Carboniferous, may ultimately be
found in the marine bands of the Upper Carboniferous
rocks ; others, again, given in the following list, and at
present known only to occur in later Carboniferous
times, may have made their appearance during the
deposition of the Lower Carboniferous strata.
Brachiopoda. Naticopsis brevispira (de
Ambocoelia carbonaria. /c
,1-
Chonetes aff. laguessiana
Turbonellma formosa (de
(de Kon.).
Kon ')'
Productus anthrax. Cephalopoda.
Ephippioceras costatum
Lamellibranchiata. (Foord).
Ctenodonta undulata Gastrioceras carbonarium
(Phill).
<L - von Buch-)-
Nucula oblonga (M'Coy.). Gastrioceras listen
Nuculana acuta (Sow.). ^AM*fW-
Posidoniella sulcata Glyphioceras paucilobum
(Hind). (Phill.).
Pleuronautilus costatus.
Temnocheilus carbonarius
Gasteropoda. (Foord).
Loxonema acutum (de Temnocheilus concavus
Kon.). (Sow.).
The material in which the fossils are contained is
invariably a shale, either dark blue in colour and of
greasy appearance or jet black but non-carbonaceous.
Sandy light grey shales or black highly carbonaceous
shales seldom, if ever, contain marine organisms. The

--- Page Break ---
Kyalina compressa
r1 T.
Glypkoc
FIG, 2. MARINE FOSSILS FROM THE COAL-MEASURES OF
CENTRAL ENGLAND.

--- Page Break ---
64 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
fossils are more frequently preserved in iron pyrites
than is the case with the freshwater and estuarine
Lamellibranchiata. Argillaceo
-calcareous ironstones
in nodules or in thin bands are common, and usually
contain the best-preserved specimens. The greasy blue
shales (soapy binds of the English miner) contain the
richest and most varied fauna, while that of the black
shales is usually restricted to species of Goniatites,
Pterinopecten papyraceus, Lingula, and Discina.
The marine bands vary from a few inches to over
30 feet in thickness, the thickest beds being those
formed of the greasy blue shales with ironstone nodules.
Excluding such bands as have so far been recognized,
only over very limited areas and the beds yielding
Lingula and Discina only, the marine horizons in the
Coal-measures do not exceed four or five in number in
Central England, where they have been most system-
atically investigated. Of these, two only have proved
to be of wide distribution.
Thelowest band,containingGoniatitesandPterinopecten
papyraceus, is only a few feet in thickness, and forms
the roof of the lowest seam of coal in the Lower Coal-
measures throughout the Midland Province.
The other marine horizon, lying high up in the
Middle Coal-measures, contains the fauna given in the
list (pp. 61-62). This band has been met with in North
Staffordshire, and traced over a wide area on the east of
the Pennine Chain, from the vicinity of Nottingham to
the neighbourhood of Doncaster and Pontefract. It
always occupies the same relative position to the Top
Hard Coal of Nottinghamshire and its equivalent, the
Barnsley Coal of the Yorkshire Coalfield.
Between these two generally recognized bands, and

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 65
again higher up in the sequence, other marine beds are
recorded from several coalfields, but it remains to be
proved whether these occupy definite positions, or if
they merely represent local marine incursions in a
sequence mainly estuarine or freshwater, as determined
by the character of its fossil contents.
Thin bands of shale, containing Lingula and Discina
or only the former, are of more common occurrence in
the Midland Coal-measures than is usually thought to be
the case. The zones are seldom more than a few inches
thick, and seem to be only of local character, unless
their existence has escaped notice owing to the thinness
of the bands and the smallness of the fossils, though
theymay be easily recognized bythe glistening scale-like
character of the horny shells. Some fish scales and the
smaller forms of Anthracomya might be mistaken for a
Lingula, but the usually ornamented character of the
fish scales and the calcareous shell of Anthracomya will
distinguish these fossils from the plain chitinous shell
of the small Brachiopods.
In tracing a band containing Lingula it is frequently
found to pass laterally into a band containing Goniatites
and Pterinopecten. The Brachiopod then becomes rare
or absent, as if the presence of this animal marked a
change from a purely marine phase to one less favour-
able to the existence of marine organisms.
In Great Britain the highest Coal-measures do not
contain workable seams. In the United States the
Dunkard formation, placed by some geologists in the
Carboniferous and by others in the Permian, is likewise
practically barren of coals. In Central France and
Germany, however, a group of strata (Stephanian) of
lacustrine origin contains many valuable seams. The
5

--- Page Break ---
66 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
flora is distinctive of the highest Coal-measures in
England, but is associated with many other plants not
found in the Upper Coal-measures of this country.
Fossils of the Later Formations. In the Southern
Hemisphere Australia, India, South Africa, and South
America the chief coal-bearing formations are of
Permo-Carboniferous, Permian, and Triassic ages. The
flora of the Permo-Carboniferous is peculiar, and is
easily recognizable from that of the later formations by
the presence of the fossil plants Glossopteris browniana
(Plate VII., p. 67) and Sigillaria brardi (Plate VIII. ,
p. 290).
Position among the Permo-Carboniferous rocks can
also be roughly determined by the vertical distribution
of the Reptilia.
The question of determining the age of the coal
formations of the Mesozoic and Tertiary periods by
means of the fossils does not at present particularly
attract the attention of the miner, since in most
countries, especially in Europe, coal-mining enterprise
is chiefly directed to the exploitation of the more im-
portant Carboniferous coals, while the Mesozoic and
Tertiary coals, besides being of inferior value, lie at
shallow depths, and are readily exploited.
In Alaska good coals of Carboniferous age exist side
by side with important seams of Mesozoic or Tertiary
ages; but the great distinction between the lowly
organized flora of the Carboniferous and the higher
Cycadaceous and Dicotyledonous flora of the Mesozoic
and Tertiary formations will readily determine the age
of any coal-bearing strata in which these fossils occur.
Concluding Remarks. The most valuable coals
belong, as before stated, to the Carboniferous system,

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 67
and in the past coal-mining has been chiefly carried on
in those regions where the Coal-measures lie at the
surface. Now, however, explorations are being ex-
tended into areas where the character, or even the
existence, of coal-bearing strata is often a matter of
considerable speculation.
As we have shown, the fossils afford a reliable guide
in determining positions in the sequence. Since, how-
ever, the Coal-measure strata are so similar in appear-
ance, it is useful in the case of a boring or shaft
passing through several hundred feet of such strata
to know in what kind of rocks the fossils distinctive
of definite horizons may be expected to occur.
Beds containing marine fossils should be looked for
among the blue-grey shales, and in the calcareous clay-
ironstones commonly associated with them, and not in
the more arenaceous rocks or in the black carbonaceous
shales. Plants, on the other hand, should be searched
for in these sandy shales, while the estuarine Lamelli-
branchiate fauna may be expected in the jet-black
shales, and in the ironstones that almost invariably
accompany them.
The use of fossils to fix horizons among the strata
of the Coal-measures may be as much abused, and lead
to as many mistakes as the old, and for a long time
only, practice of taking the bed next-in-order, which
makes use of a sandstone, clay band, seam of coal, or
a series of sandstones and coals, as an indication of
position in a local sequence.
The determination of an horizon on the occurrence
of a single fossil, whether plant or animal, is a fatal
error,and has frequently led to very false interpretations.
In the Upper Coal-measures, for instance, a profusion
52

--- Page Break ---
68 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
of Alethopteris serli, in association with Pecopteris arbo-
rescens and P. unita, and the absence of many common
Middle Coal-measure plants, may be relied upon in
assigning the strata in which they occur to the Upper
Coal-measures. In the same way the occurrence of
Alethopteris lonchitica in association with Middle and
Lower Coal-measure plants indicates an horizon below
the Upper Measures. But the plants of the Upper
series make their appearance towards the summit of
the Middle series, and further research may discover
them in the Lower series.
As our knowledge of the vertical distribution of the
plants increases, a form for a long time considered to
be confined to a low horizon is found to occur, though
not in profusion, at a higher horizon, just as a high
zonal plant may be found, though not abundantly, at a
much lower level. Conclusions, therefore, based solely
on the occurrence of a single fossil would in these
cases be quite misleading; the field of observation
must be sufficiently large, the fossil plants sufficiently
abundant, and the knowledge of a particular district
sufficiently extensive. It must be ascertained whether
the absence of certain plants is due to the small amount
of material examined, or whether the local conditions
were not favourable to their preservation, before it is
safe to conclude that certain forms did not exist side
by side with those found in a fossil state.
The same precaution is necessary in using the
mollusca, whether marine, estuarine, or freshwater, as
zonal indices. In the absence of low zonal forms of
Carbonicola and Anthracomya, the presence of Anthra-
comya phillipsi can be relied on in this country as a
safe index of a high position in the Coal-measure

--- Page Break ---
LEPIDODENDRON VELTHEIMIANUM, STERNB. Natural Size.
\_E. A. N. Arber.
GLOSSOPTERIS BROWNIANA, BRONGT. Slightly Reduced.

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 69
sequence, since in those coalfields in which extensive
collecting has been done, the general absence of this
fossil has been proved in the measures in which forms
like Carbonicola turgida and C. robusta are present. But
it would not be safe to assume that this rule holds
good in other countries ; and, indeed, on the Continent
Anthracomya phillipsi occurs below the zone of Car-
bonicola robusta and C. turgida, but even here we are not
aware that it is found in association with these fossils.
Fresh information on the distribution of fossils tends
as a rule to lessen the number of forms originally
considered to be restricted to definite horizons, and to
show that each district has its own peculiar floral and
faunal distribution, dependent upon local conditions or
the accident of preservation, though each geological
province may possess distinctive palseontological char-
acters useful as a whole in extended correlation, but of
little service to the miner.
The determination of horizons in the Coal-measures
by means of fossils, whether plant or animal, may
perhaps still be regarded as on trial, since the amount of
material to be dealt with is so great and active research
in many districts is not common. In numerous sinkings
and underground explorations, indeed, the material has
not even been examined, or, at any rate, only partially
examined, for fossils. This being the case, it were as
unwise at present to consider the value of fossils as
zonal indices in the Carboniferous rocks to be firmly
established as to cast entire discredit on the whole
method.
Fossiliferous bands are certainly of great importance
where one valuable coal lies among a thick mass of
strata in which there are often no well -
developed

--- Page Break ---
70 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
coal-seams or rock bands. This is the case in the East
Yorkshire Coalfield, where the Barnsley Coal lies at the
base of about 1,100 feet of strata containing many thin
seams, but none of them of sufficient importance or suffi-
ciently distinctive in character to have received special
notice in the records of old pit sinkings. Towards the
middle of the strataabove the Barnsley Coal abed occurs
containing fossils peculiar to this band, and not met
with in any other beds above the Barnsley Coal. While,
therefore, the strata above this coal possess no very
distinctive lithological characters, this band can be
recognized by the peculiar assemblage of fossils. It
therefore serves as an index of position among a great
thickness of strata of which one portion is very similar
to another.
The Bullion Coal of Lancashire, the Crabtree Coal of
North Staffordshire, and the Pecten Bed and Alton Coal
of Yorkshire and Derbyshire, afford another example of
a coal lying amidst a considerable thickness of barren
strata, but readily identifiable by the fossils met with
in the roof shales.
These fossiliferous bands, used merely as indices of
position, cannot be regarded as of more value than a
known seam of coal possessing marked characters, a
bed of sandstone or a local development of one par-
ticular kind of rock ; but they certainly do afford con-
firmatory evidence, and sometimes constitute the only
reliable index, of position in a local sequence. The
practical miner can seldom be expected to recognize
the species of a fossil, but he can scarcely fail to
discriminate between the fossils of a marine band
(Fig. 2, p. 63) and those of an estuarine bed ; nor
can the fossil assemblage of a rich zone like that above

--- Page Break ---
FOSSILS AS ZONAL INDICES 71
the Gin Mine be mistaken for the one above the
Crabtree Coal of North Staffordshire or for that above
the Deep Hard Coal of Derbyshire (p. 198). These
three separate horizons contain several fossils in
common, but in the higher (Gin Mine) several species
and genera of peculiar and easily recognizable char-
acters, and unknown in the lower zones, are always
met with.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VII
PROSPECTING AND BORING
FOSSIL evidence will in most cases correctly determine
whether a formation is or is not likely to contain coal.
In Europe and North America strata containing Upper
Carboniferous plants may be reasonably expected to be
coal-bearing, while in the Southern Hemisphere, strata
yielding the fossil plants Glossopteris and Sigillaria may
be searched for coal. The probability of coal existing
in formations newer than the Carboniferous or newer
than those containing Glossopteris will depend upon the
character of the sediments. Since coal has been
formed out of vegetable material growing on the spot
now occupied by a seam of coal or from vegetable
debris floated out and deposited in water in near
proximity to land, coals will not be expected to occur
in sediments whose deep-sea origin is evident from the
nature of the fossils. Thus, among the later Mesozoic
and Tertiary formations coal does not usually occur
in the essentially marine sediments of these formations,
but in the strata of estuarine and freshwater origin.
Coal rapidly perishes at the surface. It is, therefore,
seldom seen in natural sections, except in sea-cliffs, as
along the Durham, Fifeshire, Pembrokeshire, and Nova
72

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 73
Scotia coasts ; in New South Wales, near Sydney, and
in New Zealand, near Dunedin, where it attracted the
attention of the early settlers. Even where deep
valleys have intersected seams of coal the outcrops are
seldom visible, as rain-wash and vegetation commonly
conceal them. Coal-seams are sometimes visible in
the rocky sides and beds of rapid streams and along
the faces of recent landslips.
As before stated, a coal-seam is commonly overlain
by a water-bearing sandstone, and underlain by an im-
pervious layer of shale or clay. The outcrop, or
*
basset
edge.' of a coal-seam is in consequence often indicated
by a line of wet ground, on which rushes and other
marsh plants grow.
Coal-seams and the closely associated shales and
clays usually contain iron pyrites, which is readily
decomposed, and gives rise to protoxide of iron, which
is soluble in water. The water containing these soluble
iron salts, when exposed to the atmosphere, deposits
the insoluble sesquioxide of iron. If, then, in an area
known to be coal-bearing a line of chalybeate springs
be followed along a valley-side, it not infrequently
happens that a spot is reached affording a section of
a seam.
Sea-cliffs, the beds of streams having a rapid fall,
cascades and waterfalls, the scarred faces of recent
landslips, etc., afford, as a rule, the only, and certainly
the best, sections of coal at the surface. Fragments of
the harder varieties, such as anthracite and cannel, may
occur in the alluvial deposits of streams and main
waterways, and by following the stream towards its
source the outcrop of the coal, from which the frag-
ments have come, may be detected.

--- Page Break ---
74 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Such natural exposures of coal are, however, rare,
and a stream or river bed may not afford any reliable
indication whether the rocks which crop out along their
course are coal-bearing or otherwise. In South Africa
prospecting along the spruits and valleys would not in
many cases afford any indication that the strata com-
posing the district were coal-bearing, owing to the
wasting away of the coal for considerable distances
along the outcrop (Fig. 32, p. 291).
In the Northern Hemisphere, within the zone of
glaciation belonging to the Quaternary period, the
surface clays and sands not infrequently contain frag-
ments of coal or coal-shale. Such fragments may not
indicate the near proximity of coal-bearing strata ; but
if the direction from which the ice travelled be known,
the trail formed of the glacial detritus may be followed
to its source. The gravels, sands, and boulder clays of
the Vale of York, along the path of the Stainmoor
glacier and those of the Midland Triassic plain, on
which the Welsh glacier debouched, contain numerous
coal fragments derived from seams cropping out in
those regions over which these glaciers passed ; but the
rocks at the surface on which the glacial deposits rest
are many miles distant from the outcrop of coal strata.
Sometimes a considerable mass of coal and coal-bearing
strata have been carried far from their source by
glaciers, and this occurrence has been erroneously taken
as evidence for the existence of a coalfield.
The presence of coal-bearing strata being suspected,
the means employed to prove the number and thick-
nesses of the seams of coal will naturally vary according
to circumstances. Where the strata lie almost hori-
zontal and the country is but little dissected by valleys,

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 75
a trial-shaft or boring will give the most satisfactory
results. Where, as in South Africa, the coal perishes
along the valleys and in the hollows or pans (Fig. 32,
p. 291), the trial-shaft or boring preferably a shaft
where the thickness of strata to be penetrated is not
great, and the general character of the rocks to be sunk
through is known should be placed on the higher
ground. Where intrusive igneous material is developed
on a large scale, and is known to have a deleterious
effect on the quality of the coals, a site for the experi-
mental trial is chosen removed as far as possible from
the neighbourhood of the igneous rock. If the strata
thought to be coal-bearing are very steeply inclined,
then a trench cut at right angles to the strike of the
beds will afford a good chance of proving any seams
of coal.
In areas close to existing workings, or where the
certainty of finding coal at workable depths admits of
little doubt, it is usual to commence sinking a shaft of
the required diameter without any preliminary trials.
In more remote districts, however, where the depth to
the coal, its quality, or even its existence, are more or
less speculative, attempts are generally made to prove
the value of the unknown ground by sinking a trial-
shaft or by boring.
A trial-shaft undoubtedly gives the more satisfactory
results, but, owing to the expense necessarily involved,
this method is only adopted in areas where the proba-
bility of finding coal is practically assured, though the
quality, thickness, and number of the seams are more
or less unknown factors. Where the risk is greater,
boring is usually resorted to.
Boring for coal is not so simple an operation as it

--- Page Break ---
76 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
appears to be, and requires much more care and super-
vision than is generally thought to be the case. The
system of drilling adopted must be one capable of
producing cores of reasonable diameter say, not less
than 4 inches of the strata passed through, and,
what is a more difficult task, the drill is required to
draw a core of coal from which its quality, thickness,
and component parts can be satisfactorily determined.
A considerable measure of success has been achieved
in obtaining cores of rock between 4 and 6 inches in
diameter at depths exceeding 2,000 feet, but, with the
exception of the harder varieties of coal, a system of
drilling capable of producing good cores has as yet to
be invented, though better results may be expected
when the difficulties of the operation are more clearly
understood.
Many borings have been successful in proving the
position of numerous seams and their thicknesses to
within a few inches, but have failed to produce a core
of coal, and have practically resulted in commercial
failure. A case is also known where a seam, subse-
quently proved to be 4 feet in thickness, passed notice
altogether in the drill-men's record, but was met with
in the shaft that followed the experimental boring.
Obviously, the detection of the occurrence of a coal
and the determination of its thickness depend to a
great extent on the acuteness of the man in charge at
the time the drill is passing through a coal which is
not of sufficient hardness to yield a sound core.
As regards the depth obtainable by the diamond
drill, the maximum of 6,572 feet bored in Upper Silesia
far exceeds the limits at which coal-mining is at present
considered practicable on the Continent, where the

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 77
limit is generally placed at 4,900 feet depth. In Fife-
shire a boring has already reached 4,000 feet, the limit
of depth considered practicable for working coal in
this country.
While, then, drills can far exceed the depth at present
fixed upon as the limit of profitable working, the pro-
duction of a complete core of coal which would justify
the necessary expenditure in sinking shafts to any great
depths has not as yet been successfully accomplished,
so that comparatively few borings have been followed
by shaft-sinkings.
The object of any boring for coal is to obtain cores
of the different strata passed through. The rotatory
type of drill is, therefore, alone admissible.
A description of the mechanism of the different types
of this kind of drill will not be attempted here, but
the general principles will be explained.
The actual cutting is performed by a crown set with
diamonds, or by means of chisels placed at an angle
round the crown, or by the rasping action of chilled
shot washed down to the bottom of the hole, where
they find their way beneath the crown. Usually a com-
bination of both methods is resorted to, chisel cutters
being used for the softer strata, and diamonds or chilled
shot for the harder rocks. The core is retained in a
hollow inflexible cylinder, from 8 to 20 feet in length,
termed the core-barrel,
In the Calyx drill the hydraulic cylinder forms an
important feature. By means of a gauge connected by
a high-pressure hose to the water in the cylinder, the
foreman in charge can usually obtain a good idea of
the kind of rock being bored through. In boring
through a hard rock like sandstone, the pressure in-

--- Page Break ---
78 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
dicated by the gauge is much lower than in going
through a soft substance like coal. It is obvious, how-
ever, that the gauge will not differentiate between a
coal-seam and any rock offering a similar resistance to
the passage of the drill.
The existence of a hard or soft bed is thus indicated
by the gauge, but without stopping the drill and draw-
ing the core, the composition of the particular strata
being bored through can only be ascertained by the
fragments or washings brought to the surface and
issuing with the stream of water at the top of the
hole. A great deal is, therefore, left to the foreman.
In the case of a soft coal which is readily ground
into powder by the action of the drill, much of the fine
material, it is thought, escapes capture, and, ascending
through the borehole, reaches the surface in the water
continually flushing the hole. This escape water, with
any sediment it may contain, flows through a series of
troughs conveniently arranged at the surface and sup-
posed to catch the sediments brought up. The coal-
dust or pieces of coal escaping capture in the core-barrel
and chip-cup should theoretically be retained here, and it
is supposed that the fragments of coal which the core-
barrel or chip-cup fail to retain will be found in the
slimes of the settling troughs. Since, however, the
stream of water entering the troughs ultimately escapes
into a sluice or neighbouring stream, it seems quite
possible for very finely divided coal to pass out of the
troughs, and thus escape notice altogether. It is, how-
ever, denied that any loss of core occurs in this way.
The choice of a site for a boring depends largely on
the royalty it is intended to prove, of which the extent
is determined beforehand on both commercial and

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 79
geological considerations. A good supply of water is
essential both for the engines and to keep the borehole
continually flushed, and this must be taken into account
in choosing the site.
The most suitable spot for the borehole having been
chosen, it is then necessary to decide upon the initial
diameter of the hole. This depends, neglecting the
cost, chiefly upon the nature of the strata to be
penetrated.
The rocks forming the cover of most coal-bearing
formations are generally favourable for drilling. Most
of the coal-bearing strata, and especially the Coal-
measure strata of Carboniferous age, consist of marls
and clays, and strata of this character swell up and
have a tendency to close in on the hole. To obviate
this, it is necessary to case off these rocks by iron
piping, and this repeated casing and lining of the hole
naturally necessitates a diminution in its diameter.
Under ordinary conditions, if it is desired to draw a
core of from 4 to 6 inches in diameter at a depth
exceeding 2,000 feet, the initial size of the hole should
not be less than 18 inches across. Borings have been
put down in which, the diameter at the commencement
being much too small, the diameter in the final stages
was under one inch, and therefore practically useless.
On nearing the horizon at which a seam of coal is
expected, it is preferable, whenever possible, to discon-
tinue drilling at night-time, though in the case of deep
holes this method adds considerably to the cost, and
may sometimes be impracticable.
It is assumed that a hole starting straight proceeds
vertically downwards to the bottom ; but few borings
achieve this desideratum, unexpected turnings from

--- Page Break ---
8o GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
the perpendicular being of frequent occurrence. Abso-
lute proofs of the amount of deviation have not, in
many cases, been ascertained, and in some borings no
allowance has been made for possible deviations from
the vertical. In South Africa a deviation of 2,185 feet
in a depth of 4,802 feet has been recorded, and in
Germany as much as 47 degrees departure from the
vertical at a depth of 750 feet has been notified.
Various methods for determining the amount and
direction of the deviation have been tried, but most of
them are open to criticism, though in some cases satis-
factory results have been obtained. One of the com-
monest, but certainly one of the least reliable, is to
lower down the hole a tube containing liquid gelatine
or cement, and to note the angle at which it sets. In
shallow holes this method may give a satisfactory result,
but in deep holes the liquid may set owing to the cool-
ing effect of the water used to flush the hole long before
it reaches the stage where the deviation is to be ascer-
tained. The plan of using the effect of a solution of
hydrofluoric acid in etching a glass tube low
r
ered
down the hole is also resorted to, and may give a
reliable result, since a solution of sufficient weakness
can be used which does not act until the glass tube
lowered down has reached the spot where the deviation
is supposed to have taken place. Another method is
to employ electricity in fusing solid paraffin, or other
liquefiable substances, after the tube has been placed
in the required position in the hole.
The effect of a boring ceasing to be plumb is to give
an exaggerated dip and thickness to the strata, the
actual depth attained by the boring being improved,
unless the amount of deviation can be correctly ascer-

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 81
tained. Whenever feasible, therefore, it is essential
that careful tests should be made to find out whether
the boring has turned from the vertical.
The preservation of the cores and the correct descrip-
tion of the strata passed through ranks of considerable
importance. The notification of any fossils met with
is also most desirable, as these may in many cases
afford the only true index of position.
The most satisfactory method of keeping the cores
so that they can be readily examined at intervals is to
place them in a galvanized iron shed. In the case of
deep borings, this shed should be from 50 to 100 feet
in length, and of sufficient width to allow the cores to
be arranged on the ground in a single tier, each length,
say, of 100 feet being separated from the next by
match-boarding.
The frequent practice of arranging the cores in
layers one above the other is greatly to be deprecated.
The depths from which the cores are obtained should
be inserted on them at frequent intervals by means
of labels, affixed by some adhesive not affected by
damp.
A careful record of the boring as it proceeds is
essential. This is usually left to the foreman, who states
the depth bored, the amount of core drawn, and the
amount lost. He is not, however, as a rule, sufficiently
acquainted with the rock sequence of the district to be
able to put in writing a correct description of the strata
passed through. Instances occur where a bed, impor-
tant from the evidence it affords of the position
attained in a coal-bearing sequence, is described in
terms quite misleading as to its character. It is
advisable, therefore, to have the cores so arranged that
6

--- Page Break ---
82 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
they are readily accessible. The foreman's record can
then be checked from time to time, and any necessary
alteration and additions can be made with little
trouble.
On the completion of a boring a thorough survey of
the borehole should be made, and lengths of core of
important horizons not merely chips, as is frequently
the case should be placed in boxes for future reference.
If the entire length of cores can be preserved so much
the better, and where a boring is put down in an area
where the rock sequence is comparatively unknown, it
is certainly advisable that the whole of the cores should
be kept, since an horizon thought to be of little
importance at the time may ultimately prove of
value.
We have before stated that the production of a core
of coal sufficient to identify the seam is seldom achieved,
while to obtain rock-cores is a comparatively simple
matter. Though borings may therefore be unsuccessful
in respect to the chief object that of securing a core
of coal they seldom fail to produce cores of other
rocks, from which important conclusions may be drawn
as to the structure of the area, the depths to the seams,
and the nature of the strata, whether water-bearing or
not. In the case of mining royalties of considerable
area, boring may be discontinued at a stage when
sufficient information has been attained as to the thick-
ness and nature of the cover, whether likely to be water-
bearing or not, and when the productive Coal-measures
have been proved to be present over the entire royalty,
or when the same bed has been found in three or more
of the borings from which the general dip of the strata

--- Page Break ---
PROSPECTING AND BORING 83
may be approximately obtained, and, in consequence,
the position can be determined where the winning
shafts can be most advantageously placed. The quality
of the coal, its thickness and character, can, as a general
rule, only be determined by experience obtained in
mining.
62

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER VIII
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD
THE term
'
coalfield
'
is applied to any area over or
under which coal has been proved to exist, or is
expected to occur at workable depths. When the coal-
bearing strata are exposed at the surface, as is the case
in all the more important coalfields of the world, the
tract is called a
'
visible coalfield '; if the coal strata are
hidden beneath a formation differing in age from the
one in which the coal occurs the area is termed a
'
con-
cealed coalfield,' such as that of Dover. In many
instances a coalfield is partly exposed and partly
concealed.
Those coalfields in which the coal-bearing strata
appear at the surface have naturally been the first to
be explored for coal, and it is from the examination of
these coalfields that conclusions are drawn as to the
probable character of the concealed areas.
In every visible coalfield it is essential to determine
(i) the boundaries of the field ; (2) the sequence
exhibited by the coal-bearing strata ; (3) the geological
structure ; (4) the total available quantity of coal.
Shape. The boundaries of a coalfield may be
formed by rocks newer or older than the strata in
which the coal occurs.
84

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 85
When a coalfield is surrounded by newer formations,
the relation of these to the coal-bearing strata, whether
conformable or unconformable, must be ascertained.
If conformable, then the coal-bearing sequence may be
continued beneath them ; but if unconformable, a part,
or even the whole, of the productive measures may be
absent.
The coalfield of South Staffordshire, for instance, is
surrounded by two thick deposits of red strata, both
barren of seams of coal. The one, so-called Permian,
is conformable to the Coal-measures ; the other, Trias,
is unconformable. Beneath the so-called Permian the
Coal-measure sequence is intact, while the Triassic
rocks rest at one place on a productive zone, and at
another on an unproductive zone. In a strict sense,
the visible coalfield may be said to terminate at the
outcrop of the Permian ; but the so-called Permian
may, as is now frequently done, be grouped with the
coal-bearing strata, and thus considered as a part of
the visible coalfield.
Similar instances can be given from many other
coalfields where a coal-bearing formation is overlaid
by two groups of rocks very similar in character, the
one resting conformably, the other unconformably, on
the productive measures. The determination of the
relationship is evidently of vital importance to the coal-
miner, and will be further exemplified in dealing with
a concealed coalfield in a succeeding chapter.
Many coalfields are bordered by rocks which can
at once be recognized as older than the coal-bearing
formation. In Central France and South Africa the
strata containing the coal are surrounded by crystalline
rocks or by strata of such different types from those in

--- Page Break ---
86 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
which the coal occurs that they cannot possibly be
mistaken for them. The boundaries of the coalfield
in such cases are clearly defined by the outcrop of these
very different rocks.
In other coalfields the older strata possess many
characters in common with the coal-bearing formation,
and a closer examination is necessary to distinguish
between them. For example, in the Warwickshire
Coalfield black shales and sandstones of Carboniferous
age rest on black shales and sandstones of Cambrian
age, the lithological characters of the two being very
similar indeed, so similar are they that geologists
were misled as to the difference in age, and it was
only on fossil evidence that the disparity in age between
the two formations was recognized.
A study of the fossilsand the stratigraphical relation-
ship of the individual strata will, however, generally
determine the age. Thus, the presence of fossils only
found in rocks older than the Carboniferous will at
once show that the measures in which they occur ante-
date any coal-bearing strata (p. 49). The difference in
age may also be determined if one set of beds contains
pebbles of the underlying rocks, or if one group rests
on the eroded and upturned edges of another group.
The shape of the coalfields, surrounded by rocks
older than the Carboniferous, has been largely deter-
mined by that of the eroded hollow in which the coal
strata were laid down.
We now come to those coalfields whose configuration
has been caused by pressure exerted subsequent to the
deposition of the measures.
The shape and size of the Carboniferous coalfields
in the Northern Hemisphere have been to a large extent

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 87
determined by the great earth-movement which super-
vened at the end of the Carboniferous period. During
this period of disturbance the strata were folded in
two directions at right angles to each other, with the
result that the Carboniferous rocks occur mainly in
basins. Since, as before stated, the productive portion
of the Carboniferous formation is for the most part
confined to the Middle, or Coal-measure, stage, it
happens that the chief coal strata of the Northern
Hemisphere occupy the centre of these basins, the
lower Carboniferous strata generally unproductive
forming the margins.
The shape of the individual basins has been deter-
mined by the direction of the major folding. Most
coalfields have either a longitudinal or latitudinal
extension, according as the maximum pressure was
exerted from the east and west or from the north and
south, the direction of folding being naturally at right
angles to the direction from which the pressure came.
The coalfields of South Wales, Southern England,
Northern France, and Belgium, for instance, extend
latitudinally, since the chief pressure came from the
south. The coalfields of Central and Northern England
and of the United States have their longest diameters
arranged longitudinally, or at right angles to the
pressure which was exerted from the east. Within
these major folds minor crumplings occur, and though
a coalfield as a whole may possess a longitudinal
direction, parts of it may extend at right angles to the
general direction of folding.
In some cases the tangential pressure affected the
narrow depression in which the coal-bearing strata 'had
been deposited, with the result that the original shape

--- Page Break ---
88 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
of the hollows has been wholly or in part obliterated
or their outlines have been accentuated, thus giving a
general orientation to several small basins, like the
coalfields along the line of disturbance traversing the
central plateau of France, those following the line of
the Alpine disturbance, and the Tertiary and Cretaceous
coalfields of the Rocky Mountain region.
The result of pressure acting on any extensive
deposits of coal-bearing rocks is to buckle them up into
a number of anticlinal and synclinal folds. Subsequent
denuding agencies, by removing large masses of strata
from off the anticlines, have led to the formation of
separated synclines or basins of Coal-measures, rimmed
round by older formations, which have been laid bare
by denudation. In this manner a once continuous
sheet of coal-bearing strata has been broken up into
distinct coalfields. The present disunited, but at one
time connected, Yorkshire and Lancashire coalfields
afford an excellent example of this arrangement.
Some coalfields, then, are bounded by newer rocks,
others lie in the eroded hollows of older strata, and
some owe their separate existence to earth-movements.
Not infrequently, however, the delineation of a coal-
field has resulted from the combination of all three
factors. Thus, the Coal-measures of Coalbrookdale,
Forest of Wyre, were deposited in hollows of the older
rocks ; the newer Triassic strata cover them on the
east ; while their north and south orientation was, for
the most part, outlined by post-Carboniferous earth-
movements.
Again, in Central England we find at least five
distinct coalfields. There is little doubt that the
Carboniferous rocks composing them were once more

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 89
or less continuous, and were deposited in a very irregular
hollow, carved by denudation in strata older than the
Carboniferous. By post-Carboniferous earth-move-
ments this once-continuous but irregular sheet of strata
was bent up into a number of folds, trending generally
north and south. Subsequent to or during the process
of folding, large masses of strata were removed, and one
portion of the area was separated from another. The
Triassic deposits were afterwards laid down on these
folded and denuded strata, and further tend to disguise
the original connexion of the coalfields. These factors
in the delineation of the coalfields of Central England
also apply to many other coal-bearing regions. In
describing the general outlines of several coalfields, dis-
tinctions must be made between those of which the
boundaries represent the original margins of deposition
and those of which the boundaries are the result of
earth-movements, supervening at a later date to the
deposition of the coal strata, and those in which the
margins are composed of newer strata.
Sequence. From dealing with the general form and
outline of a coalfield, we now pass to a study of the
individual members which build it up that is, to the
character and arrangement of the strata associated with
the seams of coal.
The strata of one coal-bearing formation may be
similar to or differ from those of another. The same
formation also frequently presents different phases of
development from place to place, but generally a
definite sequence can be established which may be
taken as a type for a considerable area containing
several coalfields, or the sequence may be quite local.

--- Page Break ---
90 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Thus, the development of the Carboniferous rocks of
the coalfields of South Wales and Somersetshire
differs from the succession met with in the coalfields
of Central England, and this again departs in many
respects from the Carboniferous sequence in Northum-
berland and Scotland.
These three coal-bearing regions, however, possess a
common individuality they are all of Carboniferous
age, and may be regarded as representing one genus,
each region being a separate species, including several
varieties.
The framework of the genus is in each case the same,
being made up of limestones, conglomerates, sand-
stones, shales, clays, and seams of coal ; but these are
differently arranged, and possess individual characters
for each of the three regions.
The methods employed to determine the individuality
of a coal region can be illustrated by the succession
and character of the Coal-measure strata of the North
Staffordshire Coalfield, a type species of the coalfields
of Central England. This coalfield belongs to the
Coal-measure division of the Carboniferous formation.
The Coal-measures rest conformably on a coarse pebbly
sandstone in the north-east, but are unconformably
overlain by or faulted against the newer Triassic forma-
tion. While, therefore, the base of the Coal-measures
is clearly defined by the coarse pebbly sandstone, the
summit lies concealed beneath the cover of red Triassic
rocks.
The thickness of the Coal-measure strata capable of
investigationamounts to over7,000 feet, clearly divisible,
by the difference in character of the strata, into two
divisions a lower series, 5,000 feet thick, consist-

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 91
ing of repeated alternations of grey sandstones and
grey and black shales with numerous coal-seams and
fireclays ; and an upper series, consisting mainly of
red sandstones and marls without coal-seams. The
lower series can be further sub-divided into an inferior
sub-group with few coals, and a superior sub-group
with numerous seams of coal.
Neglecting the coal-seams, the strata belong to two
very different types the arenaceous group, including
the sandstones and grits, and the argillaceous group
of shales and clays. Owing to their superior hardness,
the arenaceous strata generally occupy the elevated
ground and give rise to conspicuous ridges, while the
soft shales and clays form the gentle slopes or lie in
the bottom of the valleys. The distinct surface contour
of the sandstone ridges enables them to be picked out
at the surface and followed for considerable distances.
These features, indeed, are the chief landmarks of the
geological surveyor mapping a coalfield. By laying
down the position of these on his maps he is generally
able to arrive at a fairly accurate knowledge of the
main structure of any coalfield.
Variability both in thickness and lithological and
physical characters is the salient feature of the Coal-
measure sandstones of the North Staffordshire Coal-
field, as, indeed, it is of the sandstones of all ages
associated with seams of coal. Some of the sand-
stones, however, maintain a nearly uniform thickness
for considerable distances ; others increase or diminish
in certain definite directions (p. 25). In North Stafford-
shire the tendency of the arenaceous rocks in the lower
group is to increase in thickness northwards, and to
dwindle away, or even die out entirely, to the south.

--- Page Break ---
92 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Their character changes both laterally and vertically.
The lateral change often takes place abruptly, a homo-
geneous sandstone at one spot passing in a short distance
into a group of sandstones, shaly sandstones, and
shales, and then reverting back again to an undivided
sandstone. Generally speaking, the beds of sandstone
become coarser in texture in the direction in which
they increase in thickness that is, to the north. In a
vertical direction it is observed that the sandstones
towards the base of the lower group are coarser in
texture than those higher up in the sequence. An
increased coarseness in texture among sandstones is
commonly taken to indicate that they were laid down
in the proximity of land, but many marked exceptions
are known.
The shales and clays are less liable to change in
character and thickness than the sandstones. Three
varieties ofshales are met with. Thecommonest is a pale-
bluish grey, laminated shale, more persistentlydeveloped
in the upper part of the lower group. A jet black, closely-
laminated variety also occurs in the lower portion, with
or without an associated seam of coal. These shales
are rare in the upper part, except in close association
with seams of coal. Occasionally, and generally at
definite horizons, though of no great lateral extension,
bands of purple or reddish shales are developed in the
lower series.
Like the shales, the clays vary in colour from black
to grey, the latter being the most prevalent colour
towards the summit of the lower group, where, however,
certain bands assume a purple or reddish tinge.
From generalities we now pass to details, describing
the character of any individual beds, from below

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 93
upwards, which are of service to the miner or the
geological surveyor.
The lower sub-group includes the strata between the
coarse pebbly sandstone (First Grit or Farewell Rock
of the miner) at the base of the Coal-measures and a
coal known as the Winpenny. The general sequence
in descending order is given in the following table :
THICKNESS.
Feet. Inches.
WINPENNY COAL
Sandy beds -
170 o
BRICKKILN Row COAL -
Sandy beds, pottery marl at base - 20 o
SILVER MINE COAL 3 o
Sandy beds and shale 90 o
CANNEL Row COAL -
3 o
Sandy beds and shale 90 o
THIN COALS
Sandstones, gannister and dark
shales - -
520 o
Thin coal - i 8
Shales (marine fossils at base)
-
130 o
CRABTREE OR FOUR-FEET COAL 4 o
Pebbly grit and shale 61 o
Small coal - i o
Dark shales 59 o
LITTLE Row OR TWO-FEET COAL - 2 3
Purple sandy shales 47 o
Dark shales 100 o
COAL - - i o
Purple shales 5 o
Coarse pebbly sandstone (First Grit).
The diagnostic characters of this sequence are the
purple shales below the Little Row Coal, the pebbly
grit below the Crabtree Coal, and the shales with
marine fossils above it, the barren measures between
this coal and the Cannel Row and the sandy beds form-

--- Page Break ---
94 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
ing the floor of the Winpenny Coal. This sequence
holds good for some of the other Midland coalfields
where the group is developed and a sufficient examina-
tion is made, while throughout the Midlands the roof
shale of a coal similar in position and character to
the Crabtree Coal invariably contains a marine fauna
(p. 64).
The upper sub-group includes the strata between the
Winpenny Coal and the red marls at the base of the
upper division. A sub-division, based on the character
of the coals, and to some extent on the nature of the
strata and fossils, has been made at the horizon of the
Ash Coal. Owing to a gradual increase in the collective
thickness of the measures northwards, and a rapid
diminution to the east, the thicknesses given in the
following table represent only an approximate average
thickness throughout the coalfield.
THICKNESS.
Feet. Inches.
Shales, sandstones, and thin coals - 150 o
GIN MINE, OR TWIST COAL -
3 o
Shales, sandstones, thin coals, and
ironstones -
540 o
MOSS, OR MOSSFIELD COAL -
5 O
Shales and sandstone (Yard Coal
Rock)
- - 220 o
YARD COAL 6 o
Shales and sandstones (Ten-Feet
Rock).
TEN-FEET COAL 7 o
Shales and sandstones -
300 o
BOWLING ALLEY COAL -
40
Shales, and some sandstone 80 o
HOLLY LANE COAL 4 o
Shales 75 o
HARD MINE COAL -
40
Shale, sandstone (Bambury Rock)
-
350 o

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 95
THICKNESS.
Feet. Inches.
SEVEN-FEET BAMBURY COAL -
46
Shale and sandstone (Cockshead
Rock)
-
150 o
EIGHT-FEET BAMBURY OR COCKSHEAD
COAL - 8 o
Sandstone, shales, and thin coals - 260 o
BULLHURST COAL 5 o
The chief components of this sub-group are the coals,
but their character and development at any one horizon
must, for the present, be regarded as varietal and
not specific that is to say, the coals belong to the
North Staffordshire variety, though it may be found
that some of them are correlative with coals occupying
approximately the same position in the Midland
sequence, for the best and most persistent coals
throughout the Midlands are found to occur at about
this horizon in the Upper Division of the Carboniferous
rocks.
In the same manner the sandstone members are
variable, though they are more persistently developed
than in the upper sub-groups, as in other Midland coal-
fields. The Ten-Feet Rock can be traced regularly
throughout the district, but is apt to become split up
by shale bands in some places. The two Bambury
Rocks and the Yard Rock, though less conspicuous at
the surface, are recognizable by the miner in most
shaft sections. Each of these sandstones may rest
directly on the coal from which it takes its name, or
may be separated from it by several feet of shale and
clay.
The beds of shale unquestionably form the truest
index of horizons, but this arises, not from any distinc-

--- Page Break ---
96 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
tive lithological characters or the development of one
kind of shale at any definite horizon, but from the fossils
found in them (pp. 57-64).
The sequence of the strata in the upper sub-group
that is, between the Ash Coal and Bassey Mine Coal is
given in the following table :
THICKNESS.
Feet. Inches.
Shales, thin limestones, and Black
Band ironstones - -
360 o
BASSEY MINE COAL - - 2 to 6 o
Shales and clays
-
45 o
PEACOCK COAL - 2 10
Grey shales, sandstones, and thin
coals -
105 o
GREAT Row COAL 8 o
Clay, shales, ironstones, and thin
coals 66 o
CANNEL Row COAL -
5 o
Sandstones, shales, clays, and iron-
stones -
390 o
BAY COAL 2 i
Rock 21 o
Shales and ironstones 30 o
KNOWLES OR WINGHAY COAL - 6 o
Shale, clay, and sandstone - -
300 o
ASH OR ROWHURST COAL - 6 to 10 o
Varietal rather than specific characters predominate
in this sub-group. Thus, the number and value of the
Black Band ironstones above the Bassey Mine dis-
tinguishes the North Staffordshire Coalfield from any
other in the Midland Province, where they are either
altogether absent or but feebly developed. The thin
beds of limestone, again, though prevalent in the other
coalfields towards the summit of the sub-group, are
not always present. Below the Bassey Mine Coal the

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 97
absence of thick-bedded and persistent sandstones may
be noted.
Reviewing the lithological characters of the upper
group as a whole, it will be seen that they are ill-defined
and form uncertain, though locally useful, guides to the
miner or geologist. The variability in the lithological
character, thickness, and development of the sandstones
and shales of the Pottery Coalfield is also characteristic
of other coalfields, and has always to be taken into
account. The correct identification of the local variety
presented by the sequence is of much greater practical
value than broad generalizations, based on what for the
present must be regarded as imperfect knowledge.
Upper Division. Three very distinct groups of
strata, known in descending order as the Keele, New-
castle, and Etruria Marl groups, succeed the Lower
Division. These three groups are typically developed
in the North Staffordshire Coalfield, and, where not
denuded, are met with in the other Midland coalfields,
but are absent in the Southern and Northern coalfields.
We have therefore to deal with specific and not generic
characters.
The Etruria Marl Group consists of a great thickness
of purple and red unstratified marls. Especially char-
acteristic are some bands of green grit occurring at
several horizons. These green grits are found to be
largely made up of fragments of igneous material set
in a matrix of the same nature, and containing pieces
of other rocks. The Newcastle Group consists of grey
sandstones and grey shales, with three or four thin
seams of coal, while the Keele Group is composed of
red sandstones and red marls, without any bands of
7

--- Page Break ---
98 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
green grit. Thin limestones with Spirorbis arecommon
to the three groups.
Geological Structure. The strata associated with
the seams of coal were laid down approximately
horizontal, but there are few coalfields in which the
original position of the strata has been maintained.
On the contrary, they are found lying at all angles,
often nearly vertical, and in some cases the beds have
been completely overturned, and the order in which
they were originally deposited is reversed, the oldest
being at the top and the newest at the bottom.
Earth pressure, and more rarely igneous intrusions,
have been the chief cause in effecting the change from
the original position.
In accommodating themselves to the pressure the
beds were folded on each other, were fractured (faulted),
and one portion depressed or elevated relatively to
another.
Many coalfields, as we have stated, owe their shape
to pressure exerted in one or more directions. The
same pressure has a powerful effect on the internal
structure of a coalfield by throwing the strata into
folds, or causing them to break across and become
faulted. Folding and faulting are sometimes beneficial,
but more often adverse to coal-mining. They may, for
instance, bring a seam of coal nearer to the surface than
it would otherwise have been, or in other cases may
have depressed a whole number of seams beyond reach.
It is thus evident that a knowledge of the amount of
folding and faulting to which a coalfield has been
subjected is of great importance to the coal-miner.
Folds, As an example Of the general principles

--- Page Break ---
A.B
FIG. 3. MAP TO ILLUSTRATE THE STRUCTURE OF AN EXPOSED
COALFIELD.
In N.E., lower measures are line-stippled ; chief coal-bearing strata
shown by curved thick lines ; newer formations by open stipple.
Arrows indicate the direction of dip.
72

--- Page Break ---
ioo GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
included in the study of the folding and faulting of
a coalfield, the North Staffordshire Coalfield repre-
sented, to some extent, diagrammatically in Fig. 3
will be taken, since a knowledge of the strata involved
is essential.
If the bed of coarse, hard, pebbly sandstone
(A, Fig. 3) be followed from the south-east to the
north-west, it is found to be highly inclined to the west.
Crossing the outcrop and going eastwards, the same
sandstone crops out again, but now dips at a high angle
to the east, reappearing again at the surface a little
further east, with again a westerly dip. We have here
an example of a narrow trough, or syncline, formed by
the band of pebbly sandstone and enclosing the strata
of the Lower Division of the Coal-measures in the
centre of the trough. By tracing the sandstone round
the trough the axis is found to trend west of north,
and the western side of the basin is found to be more
highly inclined than the eastern side.
Employing the same methods, but, in this case,
taking the outcrop of the Bassey Mine Coal (B, Fig. 3)
as a guide, it is found that the Coal-measures of this
coalfield are thrown into two easily recognized folds.
In the centre of the coalfield the Bassey Mine Coal
lies in a trough, as indicated by the dip arrows. The
axis of the syncline trends nearly north and south. On
tracing the outcrop of the lower coals and their
associated sandstones round the trough, it will be
found that the fold widens out in the south and comes
together in the north, the seams rising one after another
to the surface until the pebbly sandstone (A) lies at
the surface. In the south, on the contrary, the seams
get deeper and deeper.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 101
North-east of Silverdale the Bassey Mine Coal, as
shown by the arrows on the map, dips to the south-
east ; but inclines south-west, a little to the north-west
of the same locality. This is an example of a ridge fold
or anticline, as opposed to the trough fold or syncline,
assumed by the Coal-measures in the central parts of
the coalfield. The axis of the anticline trends a little
north of east and rises to the north, so that lower and
lower measures come to the surface in this direction, as
they did in the syncline. Mining on the anticline
shows that the seams are highly inclined near the
surface, but flatten out after a certain depth on the
FIG. 4. SECTION BETWEEN E F ON FIG. 3, P. 99.
east and west flanks. The fold has thus the shape of
an inverted vase.
The direction in which coal workings are carried on
is greatly influenced by the foldings to which the strata
have been subjected. Mining has naturally proceeded
along or near the outcrop of the seams round the
central syncline and western anticline, the deeper seams
still remaining untouched towards the centre of the
syncline, where the Keele Group is at the surface. In
the anticlinal region, on the other hand, mining neces-
sarily proceeds outwards to the east, south, and west,
since the core of the fold is only occupied by the
lowest measures, the Seven Feet Bambury Rock occupy-
ing the crest. The determination of the position of a

--- Page Break ---
102 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
bed, whether occupying the crest of an anticline or the
centre of a syncline, is therefore of great importance.
The open folding in the coalfield described is common
in the coalfields of Great Britain generally.
In Pembrokeshire, Pennsylvania, and Northern
France earth-movement has resulted in far more
complex crumpling of the strata, and surface observa-
tions may be altogether misleading as to the under-
ground structure. A number of higher seams, for
instance, may be greatly contorted at the centre of a
compressed syncline of the vase-shaped structure, and
be almost horizontal at great depths ; on the other
hand, in an inverted vase-shaped anticline, in a region
of intense folding, the upper strata will be less crumpled
and compressed than the lower, the amount of com-
pression depending upon the restricted space to which
the rocks had to accommodate themselves.
After the nature and amount of folding have been
determined, the next point to be settled is the period
or periods at which it took place.
In North Staffordshire there are some grounds for
supposing that earth-movement was taking place during
the deposition of the Coal-measures, since, to whatever
extent the great variability in the thickness of the
individual strata may be attributed to excess of material
and the power of the transporting agency, there must
have been depression to allow the sediments to ac-
cumulate. As there is no reason to suppose that the
strata immediately below had been eroded into irregular
hollows in fact, the evidence rather points the other
way the irregular deposition of the sediments can
reasonably be attributed, at least in part, to contem-
poraneous and local earth-movement.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 103
To what extent such contemporaneous depression and
elevation took place is unknown, but it is certain that
the chief folding occurred after the deposition of the
highest strata of the Keele Group, and that the crests
of the folds were extensively denuded before the deposi-
tion of the succeeding rocks (Trias).
These newer strata lie almost horizontal, but in the
south-east and south-west there is evidence that they
were folded along the same lines as the Carboniferous
rocks.
A later fold superimposed on an earlier one is known
as a posthumous fold.
Faults. Relief from pressure may be attained by
folding alone, but is usually accompanied or followed
by faulting.
Faults (' heaves,'
'
troubles ') may be normal or re-
verse normal when newer beds have been depressed
relatively to the older strata, and reverse when older
beds have been thrust over newer. In a normal fault
newer strata, in a reverse fault older strata, are found
on the side to which the fault is inclined. Normal
faulting occurs when strata have to accommodate them-
selves to increased space, reverse faulting when strata
are compressed into a space less than their original
horizontal extension.
North Staffordshire affords an excellent field for the
study of normal faulting. The direction of the main
or
'
master
'
faults can be easily determined at the
surface, and their throw approximately made out ; but
there are many small faults, the existence of which has
only been made known by mining.
The type region, however, affords few examples of

--- Page Break ---
104 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
reverse faults, but they are of frequent occurrence
in the Pembrokeshire Coalfield, in the coalfields of
Northern France (p. 241), and in the anthracite fields
of Pennsylvania (p. 270), and, in fact, in all regions
where earth-movement has been excessive. They are
common in many coalfields of Carboniferous age, and
also in the Tertiary coalfields of America, Japan, and in
other countries along the lines of maximum disturbance.
A fault may be often detected at the surface by its
bringing together beds of different horizons in the
sequence. Sometimes, though not frequently, the
actual fracture is visible. The existence of a fault may
also often be suspected from an abrupt discontinuity
in the surface features.
The chief points to determine about a fault are the
direction, the inclination, the amount of throw, and
the age.
The fault shown to the east of Silverdale (Fig. 3,
p. 99) brings a high horizon of the Keele Group on the
east within a short distance of a much lower horizon of
the same group on the west. Again, a little farther to
the north, Keele beds are in contact with the Newcastle
Group, and to thewest of Stoke the Keele Group almost
comes in contact with the Bassey Mine Coal. By
connecting the various points at which these abnormal
junctions of strata are seen, we obtain the north to
south direction of the fault. This method of deter-
mining the direction of a fault requires that the points
of observation shall not be far apart, as the same
juxtaposition of beds may be brought about by another
fault having a different direction.
The inclination of a fault plane from the vertical is
termed the
'
hade
'
or
'
underlie.' Hade is, therefore,

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 105
the complement of dip which is measured from the
horizontal. Strictly speaking, a low hade fault is one
highly inclined from the horizontal, while a vertical
fault possesses no hade. Not infrequently, however, the
term
'
low-hading fault
'
is incorrectly applied to one
which makes a high angle with the vertical, and should
be called a high-hading fault. In coal-mining the general
practice is to speak of a fault plane as being highly
inclined or as having a high dip when the hade is low,
and as being gently inclined or as having a low dip when
the hade is great. The term
'
hade
'
is seldom used by
coal-miners, and it would be better to restrict it to
'
a a' aa'
a-a' 'wantof faulf. b-b'throw offault:
FIG. 5. To ILLUSTRATE VARIOUS HADES IN FAULTS.
metalliferous mining, and in coal-mining to state the
amount of inclination in degrees measured from the
horizontal, since this is the idea generally meant to be
conveyed. The hade in the upper workings of a mine
may differ from that in the lower workings (Fig. 5).
Fault planes are frequently curved, and if a distinct
inclination of the fault in the direction of the working
face were observable, the fault encountered may still
be a downthrow with respect to the seam being worked,
and the seam sought for lie at a lower level on the
other side of the fault.
The amount of 'throw,' either downthrow or up-
throw, is the vertical distance that a bed has been dis-
placed. It may vary from a few inches to several

--- Page Break ---
io6 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
hundred feet. Underground the amount of throw can
be accurately measured, but at the surface an approxi-
mate estimate is usually all that can be attained.
The apparent horizontal displacement of beds by a
fault as seen on the surface of the ground is termed the
'
lateral shift
'
or
'
shift/ the intervening space (a a1
,
Fig. 5) being known as the barren ground, or
'
want
'
of the fault. The width of the barren ground varies
with the hade and amount of throw. Many geological
plans give the width of the
*
want
'
by showing in
separate colour the surface position, its position on the
upthrow side, and on the downthrow side, as in the
illustration on p. 105.
To the west of Stoke the fault previously mentioned
as bringing Keele beds against the Bassey Mine Coal
can be estimated at over 400 yards, while the fault
shown to the west of Silverdale possesses a throw of
over 700 yards in one locality.
In mine workings the amount of throw is usually
proved by driving or boring across a fault until the
seam is met with on the other side. The limited
space for observation underground frequently renders
it difficult to decide whether a fault is an upthrow or
a downthrow, and an intimate knowledge of the local
sequence is often needed to decide. For instance, a
colliery working the Great Row Coal (p. 96), and
following it under ground to the west of Stoke,
encounters a fault bringing red marls against the coal.
Boring up and down in these red marls proves them to
be the red marls associated with the Red Mine Iron-
stone some distance above the Bassey Mine Coal. The
fault is therefore a downthrow to the west.
In another case a fault met with in the workings in

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 107
the Ash Coal (p. 96) brings this seam against shales
containing the peculiar marine organisms only met with
in the shales a few feet below the Gin Mine Coal. The
approximate throw and its direction can therefore thus
be determined.
After driving a short distance across a fault, a bed
may be met with containing fossils, occurring in a band
known in the proved coalfield to lie 300 feet above
the seam being worked. Further, this fossiliferous
band lies a few feet below a bed of sandstone. If,
therefore, on continuing the cross-cut in the direction
of dip this sandstone is met with, there is the strongest
evidence for regarding the fault as being a downthrow
in respect to the coal being worked, and that the throw
approaches 300 feet. The seam sought for will in this
case be found 300 feet below the level of the same seam
at the working face where the fault was encountered.
A fossiliferous bed containing very distinctive fossils
must be regarded as of rare occurrence. There may,
however, be two beds, one above and one below a seam
of coal, or they may both be above or both below the
coal, the fossils of both being identical. These two
fossiliferous bands will, however, afford good evidence
of position in the sequence. If, for example, on
crossing a fault a coal-seam is met with, and then by
boring up and down, the coal is found to occupy a
position between these two fossiliferous beds, or if both
lie above or both below the coal, then the identity of
the seam receives strong confirmation.
A distinctive fossiliferous bed in an area of normal
or reverse faulting will satisfactorily prove both the
character and amount of throw of a fault. Where two
or more fossiliferous bands containing similar fossils are

--- Page Break ---
io8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
present, caution must be exercised in the determination
of the amount of throw of a fault where both normal
and reverse faults occur. In this case other beds will
have to be taken into account, and their relative order
of occurrence noted.
Joints. The divisional planes called 'joints,' traver-
sing a seam of coal and the associated strata at right
angles to the bedding, are the result of mechanical
strain due to pressure exerted subsequently to the
deposition. They may be well developed in districts
where folding and faulting are slight, and are in-
variably present in disturbed regions.
Joints in coal can be recognized by the bright glisten-
ing planes traversing the dull layers (' mineral char-
coal ') at right angles. A coal may be broken by two
or more sets of joint planes, as in the Dicey Coal, but
usually two sets of joints are more perfectly developed
than the others. One set of joint planes, known as
the
'
face
'
or
'
cleat,' is generally more prominently
developed than the other plane, known as the
'
end,'
and extends for greater distances, as well as maintaining
a general direction in any particular coalfield. In the
North of England, for instance, the cleat runs approxi-
mately north and south.
The working of a coal is largely determined by the
direction of the jointing. Main roads run parallel to the
cleat, while
'
bords
'
are driven at right angles to the
cleat. In working coal on the
'
long-wall
'
system, the
face, when paralled to the cleat, is said to be
'
on the
end
'
; when perpendicular to the cleat,
*
on the face
'
;
and, when in another direction, the face is termed
'
half-on.'

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 109
Fault Systems. From dealing with individual faults
we now pass to the study of faults as members of one
or more systems.
In the type region two systems are displayed
: in one
system the faults have a meridional trend, in the other
a latitudinal trend. In this region the two systems
have been formed simultaneously, and since their throw
is greatest in the strata of the Carboniferous formation,
they must be mainly regarded as pre-Triassic in age,
though displacement along both lines has taken place
subsequently to the deposition of the unconformable
covering strata.
In other coalfields it is possible to definitely prove
that one system of faulting is older than the other, as
in the Cumberland Coalfield.
Taking the Carboniferous coalfields of Europe as a
whole, it may be said that the chief faults crossing
them were formed, and had attained their maximum
development, before the deposition of the Secondary
formations, though subsequent movement has in some
cases taken place along thesame lines. Thus, in thetype
region the fault of 700 yards downthrow to the west,
bounding the coalfield on the west, has nothing like
the same amount of throw in the Trias. If it did
possess this amount of throw, the upper and not the
lower members of the system would be in contact with
the Coal-measures. The east-and-west fault south of
Stoke, with a downthrow south of nearly go yards,
does not much exceed 50 yards throw in the Trias.
Many more striking examples of the difference in the
amount of throw of faults in the older rocks and in the
overlying newer strata may be cited from other coal-
fields. Generally speaking, the throw in the newer

--- Page Break ---
no GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
formations is less than in the older, but it may be equal
in amount, and is sometimes greater.
Faulting, like folding, has in many cases been com-
pleted before the deposition of the newer strata, and
because the younger formations are but little fractured,
it does not hold that the older rocks upon which they
rest will be found equally undisturbed. As a general
rule, however, if the newer strata forming the surface
formations are very much faulted, the older strata below
will, in most cases, be found disturbed to a much
greater extent.
Unconformity. The geological structure of a coal-
field may have been formed during the deposition of
the coal-bearing strata, or it may have resulted from
subsequent disturbance which has modified the original
structure. It is often of importance to determine
whether a period of movement and contemporaneous
erosion on an extensive scale took place while the coal-
bearing strata were being laid down, or whether the
disturbance is of later date.
In North Staffordshire the Keele Group has been
considered to be unconformable to the grey productive
strata and to be of Permian age. Along the western
boundary of the coalfield it was thought that in one
locality the whole of the Newcastle Group, Etruria
Marl Group, and the grey productive measures down
to the Great Row Coal, had been denuded away
before the Keele Group of sandstones and marls was
deposited. In other words, considerably over 1,500 feet
of Carboniferous stratawere denuded before the deposi-
tion of the Keele Group commenced (p. 176).
A detailed survey of the coalfield shows, however,

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD in
that the Keele Group invariably succeeds the Newcastle
sandstones and marls, and whenever the Keele beds
are in juxtaposition with any lower strata, they are
found to have been brought into this position by fault-
ing. The apparent unconformity along the western
boundary would therefore be anomalous, and it appears
still more striking when it is found that a short distance
away the normal succession is present. Either the red
strata along the western margin do not belong to the
Keele Group, or if they do, then their present position
is due to faulting, a conclusion strengthened by the
knowledge that throughout the Midlands the Keele
Group is invariably conformable to the Newcastle
sandstones or their equivalent. Local knowledge and
detailed mapping could alone have settled the con-
formable relationship of the Keele Group to the Coal-
measures in North Staffordshire.
On dealing with concealed coalfields in a subsequent
chapter, the determination of the relationship of the
different divisions and groups of the Coal-measures will
be seen to be of great practical importance. In several
coalfields geologists are still debating as to what extent
intercarboniferousmovement anddenudation have taken
place.
Supply. Estimates of the amount of available coal
contained in a visible coalfield, only partially worked,
must be regarded as merely approximations at the best.
Allowances have to be made for the waste in working,
the coal left to maintain shafts, for the support of
buildings, railways, canals, and rivers, and for the
barriers between royalties and properties. Again, in
many coalfields the best seams lie towards the bottom

--- Page Break ---
ii2 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
of a great thickness of strata, and, except near their
outcrops, lie beyond the depth at which it is at present
considered practical to work them. In this country the
maximum depth at which coal is considered workable
is fixed at 4,000 feet, and on the Continent at about
4,900 feet.
The minimum thickness of a coal-seam that it will
pay to work depends upon local circumstances, such as
demand, price, and cost in working. In this country
one foot is the minimum thickness adopted by the Royal
Commissioners in their calculations in the Report on
Coal Supply for 1905, and this is adopted in the
description of the different British coalfields in succeed-
ing chapters.
Many of the problems connected with the determina-
tion of the total available supply of any coalfield belong
essentially to the province of the mining engineer, but
the geologist may be called upon to estimate the depths
of seams, and the direction and amount of throw of
faults in unproved ground, together with other essen-
tially geological problems.
In North Staffordshire, for example, the centre of
the major syncline is occupied by the upper barren
division of the Coal-measures. If the thickness of the
groups making up this division can be ascertained and
their outcrops laid down on a map, it will be possible
to estimate the approximate depths to the workable
seams under the area occupied by each of these groups.
Mining has not proved the thickness of the groups, but
this can be ascertained by an examination of the surface
outcrops. Thus, a shaft commencing towards the
summit of the Etruria Marl Group would reach the
Bassey Mine Coal at a depth between 1,100 and 1,500

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 115
feet, and the Ash Coal between 1,800 and 2,400 feet.
The same seams would be reached from 300 to 400 feet
lower by a shaft starting near the summit of the New-
castle Group, while at least 700 feet must be added for
the depths to these seams where the Keele Group
parses under the Trias, as it does along the southern
boundary of the coalfield. Many of the lower and best
seams below the Ash Coal would therefore here exceed
the limit of workable depth of 4,000 feet. In their
estimation for 1905 the Royal Commissioners regarded
the North Staffordshire coals to exist at workable
depths half-way across the outcrop of the Keele Group.
Cover. Where the Coal-measures of North Stafford-
shire sink below or are faulted against the Triassic
strata, the visible coalfield passes into the category
of a concealed coalfield. It is, however, convenient to
discuss here the relation of the Triassic cover to the
underlying Coal-measures.
As previously stated, this relationship is one of com-
plete unconformity. At one place on the east of the
coalfield the practically horizontal Triassic rocks rest
on the folded, highly inclined, and greatly denuded
Lower Carboniferous strata, at another place on the
lower division of the Coal-measures, and at another on
the Keele Group.
The red rocks were evidently deposited in hollows
worn in the Carboniferous strata, thus levelling up
the older inequalities, and in other cases were banked
against the steep slopes of the highly inclined Car-
boniferous strata. In such cases as this the junction
of the two sets of strata has the appearance of a fault.
This is especially deceptive where the red marls of the
8

--- Page Break ---
ii4 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Upper Trias overlap and successively hide up the sub-
divisions of the Lower Trias until they abut against
the Carboniferous strata. When in contact with the
harder members of the Carboniferous rocks, the red
marls, partly owing to slip, appear crumpled, and it
may be erroneously considered that the junction of the
newer and older strata is a fault having a throw equal
in amount to the thickness of the Lower Trias.
When newer unconformable strata are faulted against
older rocks, it is often impossible to calculate the
amount of throw, since it is not always practicable to
determine to what extent the juxtaposition is due to
unconformity or to faulting. Thus, along the western
margin of the North Staffordshire Coalfield the Trias
at one spot is faulted against Middle Coal-measures
and at another against the Keele Group, but this does
not necessarily imply that the fault possesses a greater
throw in the first case than in the latter. By neglecting
to make allowances for unconformity faults bringing
newer strata against the Carboniferous rocks have often
been assigned a great magnitude of throw.
Calculations have often to be made as to the thick-
ness of the Triassic rocks based on their inclination
observable at the surface. This can be more or less
satisfactorily done in the case of the Keuper Marls,
in which bedding planes are on the whole clearly
developed. In ascertaining the amount and direction
of dip in the red sandstones and conglomerates which
form the greater part of the Lower Trias, and which
are usually met with around the margins of the English
coalfields, care is necessary to distinguish between
*
true
'
and
'
false
'
bedding.
Irregular bedding, where the individual laminae are

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF AN EXPOSED COALFIELD 115
not parallel to the surfaces of the greater bed in which
they occur, but where the laminae in one bed slope at
very different angles, or in different directions, to those in
the bed above or below, is a common characteristic of
Triassic sandstones. False bedding on a larger scale
occurswhere one bed has been deposited on the sloping
and worn surface of another.
Rough approximations as to the thickness of the
Trias sandstones are all that can be usually made, and
these are frequently very wide of the mark.
Geological Maps. The outcrops of the more im-
portant strata, seams of coal, faults,and other geological
information of use to the miner, are generally shown
on the geological maps issued by most Governments.
In this country these maps are drawn to a scale of
one inch and six inches to the mile, but in foreign
countries maps on the larger scale are rarely available.
In many of the Colonies the scale adopted is usually
less than one inch to the mile.
In the case of the one-inch maps of the Geological
Survey of the United Kingdom, two editions are pub-
lished for many of the coalfields. One of these shows
the superficial deposits, and the other the solid rocks
only. On a drift map the lines of visible outcrop of
the solid formations are continued under the superficial
deposits. The accuracy of these lines depends upon
the amount of evidence available for determining the
approximate position of the hidden strata.
82

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER IX
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD
IN Europe the visible coalfields have been to some
extent worked out, and it is necessary for collieries of
long standing to seek fresh areas outside the visible
coalfields in which most of the coal has been leased.
Explorations in search of coal are in consequence being
extended into regions where coal-bearing strata are
thought to exist beneath the newer formations.
Such explorations are to a great extent confined to
the margins of the visible coalfields, but several
attempts have been made, or are now
7
in progress, to
prove the existence of buried coalfields remote from
any known workings. Especially is this the case in
Central England, and also in the south-eastern counties.
In Northern France, Belgium, and along the Franco-
German border in Alsace-Lorraine, these experimental
trials are also being conducted on a considerable scale.
In an exposed coalfield many of the geological
problems to be solved are of a comparatively simple
nature. From observations made at the surface with
the help of the knowledge obtained in mining, the
general structure of an exposed coalfield and many of
its details can be satisfactorily determined.
116

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 117
In the choice of a site for a new sinking or boring in
a concealed coalfield, and in the interpretation to be
placed on the result obtained, the miner needs a wider
knowledge of geology than in the case of an exposed
coalfield.
FKJ. 6. MAP TO ILLUSTRATE A CONCEALED COALFIELD.
An anticline of newer rocks overlying Coal-measures traverses the
central area from north to south, coal-bearing strata crop
out to the east and west.
As an example of a buried coalfield we take the area
figured in Fig. 6. This represents, in diagrammatic
and simplified form, the south-eastern half of the Mid-
land coal-basin of Central England at a time when the

--- Page Break ---
n8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Coal-measures on the east and west were exposed at
the surface much as they are now, but when denudation
had not stripped the Triassic cover from off the South
Staffordshire Coalfield.
Observations made at the surface and underground
over the visible coalfields on the east and west in-
dicate that the coal strata, consisting of the Middle and
Upper Coal-measures (p. 172), slope inwards towards
the centre of the region occupied by the newer forma-
tions. The inference is, therefore, drawn that the coal-
seams cropping out in the east are prolonged under-
ground, and rise again to the surface in the western
coalfield.
In choosing the locality where it is best to commence
an experimental boring or sinking, the miner will be
guided by his experience gained in the marginal coal-
fields and on the geological structure of the district as
a whole, including in this case an acquaintance with
the formations newer than those bearing the coal.
The chief points to be ascertained before exploration
work is commenced in an unknown area are : (i) The
sequence of the Coal-measures in the neighbouring
visible coal-tracts ; (2) the relation of the Coal-measures
to the older formations ; (3) the character and thickness
of the covering strata and their relation to the produc-
tive measures.
Sequence. The Coal-measure sequence in the ex-
posed coalfields consists essentially of a lower division
of grey strata (Middle Coal-measures) containing several
workable seams of coal, and of an upper division of
red strata with no workable seams. In this sequence
definite positions can be fixed by the presence of thin

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 119
bands or groups of strata possessing distinctive litho-
logical or palseontological characters, which are found
to be similar to those appertaining to the type region
of North Staffordshire (p. 176), though the individual
groups may differ to some extent from the type region.
The relation of the red upper division of the Coal-
measures to the lower grey division is found to be
one of strict conformity. The grey measures are
succeeded by the Etruria Marls, these by the repre-
sentative of the Newcastle Group, and this in turn by
the Keele Group. In no instance do the Keele or New-
castle beds rest directly on the grey measures, and
when apparently found to do so the juxtaposition can
be demonstrated to be a fault.
In tracing the Coal-measure strata from north to
south, however, it is found that first the lower division
ends off against rocks older than the Coal-measures ;
and again, farther south, that one group after another
of the upper division terminates against a bank or
ridge of older rocks, until, along the southern margins
of the exposed coalfields, the Keele Group rests directly
on strata of Cambrian age. This relation to the older
strata must not be confounded with an unconformity
within the Coal-measures sequence, but as an example
of overlap, though, as is well known, there is a very
great unconformity between the Coal-measures and the
older rocks.
The covering up of a lower member of the Coal-
measures by a higher may, in the same way, be re-
garded as an illustration of progressive overlap in the
direction of an old shore line, and as indicating the
gradual sinking of the basin and its successive infilling
with the various Coal-measure sediments. In this case

--- Page Break ---
120 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
the uselessness of exploring for coal along the southern
margins is obvious, since the latest strata deposited do
not contain workable coals and the lower members will
be absent.
The general sequence of the Coal-measures, as before
stated, conforms to the North Staffordshire type ; but
while, except in thickness, there is the closest similarity
between the three groups of the upper red division,
the lower grey division presents several local varia-
tions, and that of the eastern coalfields is somewhat
different to that of the western fields.
The Coal-measures in the three coalfields figured
show a considerable diminution in thickness in com-
parison with the type region, and it is doubtful to what
extent the lowest measures are developed, if they
occur at all. In the north-eastern field the thickness
of the Coal-measures amounts to about 1,500 feet,
which has decreased to under 1,000 feet in the south-
eastern field. In the western field the total thickness
of productive measures does not amount to more than
500 feet.
The change in the thickness of the strata is accom-
panied by a change in the thickness and number of the
seams. Thus in the north-eastern field the seams
rarely exceed 7 feet in thickness, and about a dozen
are workable. In the south two or more of these seams
unite to form one bed of coal between 15 and 16 feet
in thickness, but both this thick seam and the others
rapidly deteriorate and become valueless towards the
southern extremity of the coalfield. No thick seams
occur in the western field.
One portion of the productive measures is scarcely
recognizable from another by the lithological characters.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 121
A group of red marls is commonly present above a per-
sistent seam about 100 feet above the thick seam. A
band of shale and ironstone with marine fossils occurs
a short distance above a thin seam of coal in the west.
We shall, however, consider that the information col-
lected about these marine beds is too indefinite to
enable them to be absolutely reliable guides, other than
indicating the presence of the productive measures.
Associated with the grey measures in the north-
eastern and western coalfields, a crystalline rock re-
cognized as a basalt lies parallel with the bedding
planes in the east and cuts across them in the west
Fig. 7, p. 125). In the latter case there can be no
doubt that the igneous rock is of later date than the
Coal-measures, but the age of the igneous rock in the
north-eastern coalfield must be determined by observa-
tion of its effect on the beds immediately above and
below it. If it alters or bakes the beds above and
those below, the intrusion is obviously of newer date ;
but if it only alters the underlying bed, it might be
regarded as contemporaneous with the deposition of the
strata. In many cases, however, it is difficult to detect
any signs of alteration either by contemporaneous or
intrusive igneous rocks. When the igneous rock is
found in contact with a coal-seam, it may cause the
coal to become anthracitized, coked, and in many cases
render the seam worthless. It is of importance to the
miner in this area to be able to distinguish between an
igneous rock contemporaneous with or intrusive into
the Coal-measures from one of much older date than
the Carboniferous formations. Examples occur in the
south-eastern coalfield where igneous rocks penetrate
the pre-Carboniferous rocks, but had obviously con-

--- Page Break ---
122 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
solidated and been denuded before the Coal-measures
were deposited.
Carboniferous and post-Carboniferous igneous rocks
generally present, except near their selvedge margins,
crystals of felspar, augite, and olivine, in a more or
less fresh state. In the pre-Carboniferous igneous rocks
the olivine will be found to be much serpentinized, and
several minerals chlorite, calcite, and epidote result-
ing from decomposition, are developed.
The central portions of an igneous rock will be, as a
rule, less decomposed than the margins, and in the
determination of the age by mineral composition com-
parisons should be made between the undecomposed
portions.
In the eastern coalfield an igneous rock, termed
diorite, perceptibly alters the Cambrian shales and
quartzites when in contact with them ; but while the
Coal-measures rest on its eroded edges, they contain
rounded pebbles of the igneous rock, and are not in the
slightest degree disturbed or altered, even when in
actual contact. This is clearly, then, an igneous rock
of later date than the Cambrian, but older than the
Coal-measures, or than the igneous material occa-
sionally met with in the Coal-measures, and to which
these vastly older igneous rocks bear some resemblance.
Igneous dykes may be nearly vertical, or they may
cut across the strata at an oblique angle. In the former
case it is obvious that a boring may give a very exag-
gerated thickness to a dyke, and also make a seam of
coal beneath it appear to lie at a much greater depth
from the surface than it really does.
Igneous material, when not a contemporaneous flow,
may have come up along fissures as dykes or as necks.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 123
The latter are vertical pipes filled with volcanic material,
often descending to great depths, but are absent in the
area under description, and in many other coalfields
have been found to be far less common than is generally
supposed. Indeed, they are rarely met with in the
majority of European and American coalfields of Car-
boniferous age.
Relation to Older Formations. In the type region
of North Staffordshire the productive measures rest
conformably on the sedimentary rocks belonging to the
Lower Carboniferous formation. Wherever the base of
the Coal-measures can be seen the bed immediately
below is found to be a coarse pebbly sandstone, which
can be proved by fossil evidence to belong to the Car-
boniferous formation that is, to the same formation
as that in which the coal occurs but to have been
deposited at an earlier stage of the Carboniferous period
than that in which the coal-beds were formed.
The Coal-measures shown on the map (Fig. 6, p. 117)
rest on very different rocks : those of the south-eastern
coalfield lie on strata consisting of quartzitic grits,
black shales, or igneous rocks, and those of the western
coalfield on red sandstone. In the former case the
fossils prove that the black shales and quartzites,
though in some respects resembling the overlying Coal-
measures, are of Cambrian age ; in the western coalfield
the fossils of the red sandstones show them to be of
Devonian (or Old Red Sandstone) age (see table, p. 46).
At another place the Coal-measures rest on limestones
and shales containing Silurian fossils.
The older rocks appear either as promontories or
as bays round which the sediments were unevenly

--- Page Break ---
124 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
deposited during the Coal-measure period. The surface
of the older rocks when in contact with the Coal-
measures is very irregular, but on the whole may be
regarded as forming two uneven platforms an eastern
and a western one on which the Coal-measure strata
were accumulated. These platforms descend some-
what abruptly, to the east and west respectively, into
the hollows now occupied by strata newer than the
Coal-measures.
On examining the relation of these older to the
newer strata, it will be found that, though in some
cases the inclination of the older rocks may be the
same as that of the Coal-measures, the older rocks
have been greatly denuded and worn into hollows
before the coal-bearing strata were deposited.
The exact underground configuration is indetermin-
able, but it will be observed that the strike of these
older ridges trends roughly a little west of north.
Along their margins underground explorations show
that the coals deteriorate both in thickness and quality,
and often become a worthless mixture of shale and
coal. This deterioration is not, however, due to the
character of the older rocks, but to their forming the
margins of the basin in which the Coal-measures were
deposited.
An examination of the older rock masses in the
visible coalfields shows them to occur as irregular
bosses, greatly denuded and worn into hollows before
the deposition of the coal-bearing strata, but with a
general trend a little west of north.
Cover. From a consideration of the floor on which
the coal-bearing strata were deposited we now pass to

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
126 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
a study of the formations which cover them and con-
ceal them from view.
The red rocks forming the first cover of the Coal-
measures bear some resemblance to the Keele beds,
the highest strata of the Coal-measures, with which, in
fact, they were formerly grouped, but in North Stafford-
shire they are seen to be strongly unconformable to the
Keele Seriesand to the Carboniferous generally (p. 113).
This unconformity is still more marked in the southern
coalfields of the Midland Province, where the Triassic
rocks are found resting on the folded and eroded edges
of the Cambrian strata and Silurian formation, or on
members of the Carboniferous series. Not infrequently
they rest directly on a seam of coal, an occurrence
demanding some attention, for if it is intended to work
this seam of coal beneath the red rock covering, a
great quantity of water may be expected, unless shut
off from the seam by a layer of impermeable marl or
shale belonging to the newer formation. In a colliery
in Nottinghamshire, for instance, the valuableTop Hard
Coal cannot be worked owing to its being close to the
water-bearing Bunter Pebble Beds.
The cover of newer strata falls into two divisions
a lower sandstone and conglomerate series attaining
a maximum thickness of 1,200 feet, and an upper sand-
stone and marl series over 1,000 feet thick. These
thicknesses are, however, liable to sudden and unex-
pected variation. The lower sandstone and con-
glomerate series can be roughly subdivided into an
inferior group of red sandstones, a middle conglomerate
subdivision, and an upper red sandstone series. In
the upper sandstone and marl series the sandstones
occur below the marls.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 127
The upper division as a whole overlaps the con-
glomerates and sandstones of the lower division, and
in many places along the southern margin of the basin
the marls of the upper division bury up by overlap the
sandstones at the base. We have here an instance of
the infilling of a basin during gradual depression, as
in the case of the Upper Coal-measures, but with a
totally different class of rocks. The juxtaposition of
the upper marls with the sandstones and conglomerates
of the lower division does not, therefore, necessarily
imply the existence of a fault; neither does the junc-
tion of the marls with the Coal-measures or the older
rocks, since the newer rocks may, as before mentioned
(p. 113), have been banked against cliffs or deposited
in hollows of the older rocks.
The red covering strata, it will be observed, are
crossed by a number of curving faults trending nearly
north, or a little east or west of north that is, roughly,
parallel to the trend of the older ridges.
The basin between the eastern and western coalfields
is crossed by a gentle anticline, faintly but still dis-
cernible in the red rocks, and having a general north
and south direction.
In the type region it was seen that the red rocks,
newer than the Carboniferous, were similarly thrown
into gentle folds, superimposed upon folds of greater
intensity in the Coal-measures beneath, but having the
same general direction.
A trough fold (syncline) or a ridge fold (anticline) in
newer rocks may be based vertically on an older fold
affecting the older strata beneath, no matter what
amount of denudation the older strata may have been
subjected to prior to the deposition of the younger

--- Page Break ---
128 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
strata. Posthumous folding, as this is called, may
show itself by a corresponding arch or trough in the
newer rocks, or by a thinning of the newer strata as
they approach the axis of the fold. Sometimes,
though rarely, a crest fold may be superimposed
on a trough fold, or vice versa, or the axes of the newer
folds may not exactly coincide in position or direction
with the older folding, but may nevertheless indicate
the general direction of the folding in the older ridges.
In taking the direction of folding in the newer strata as
FIG . g. POSTHUMOUS FOLDING. FOLDS IN NEWER ROCKS (b) ;
SUPERIMPOSED ON THE DENUDED FOLDS OF OLDER
ROCKS (a).
an indication of that probably to be found in the older
rocks, these differences must be kept in mind.
Folds, too, of small intensity and of open character
often overlie folds of great complexity, of which the
newer strata show no signs, especially in those cases
where a long period of great earth -movement and
denudation has supervened between the older and the
superimposed but gentler crust movement.
In a greatly folded region, for instance, the structure
may consist, on the whole, of a number of broad anti-
clines and synclines, but each broad anticline may be
composed of smaller anticlines and synclines, the com-
posite anticline forming what is called an anticlinorium ;

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 129
similarly a broad syncline is frequently built up of
lesser synclines and anticlines, the name synclinorium
being applied to the composite synclinal fold. A simple
anticline in the newer strata often overlies an anticli-
norium, or a simple syncline overlies a synclinorium. A
syncline in newer rocks may also overlie an anticlinorium
in older strata, and vice versa. In all these cases folding
in the newer strata, while it may outline that in the
subjacent older rocks, may convey no signs of the
complexity in the latter. For instance, the almost
_ 6
w
FIG. 9. FOLDING IN NEWER ROCKS () CONTEMPORANEOUS
WITH OLDER ROCKS (a).
horizontal Secondary rocks of the Somersetshire Coal-
field rest on the much disturbed Coal-measures and
older formations. Again, in northern France the
Secondary rocks, but little disturbed, overlie intensely
folded and over-thrusted Carboniferous strata.
On the other hand, folding seen at the surface in
newer rocks may correspond with the folding of the
rocks beneath, but the folding of both may be the
result of one earth-movement.
Applying the doctrine, that folds in the newer strata
roughly indicate the folds in the underlying older rocks
to the area under discussion, we may regard the ridge-
fold traversing the centre of the basin either as a
posthumous fold of a simple character moulded on
another and more ancient one of greater intensity, or
9

--- Page Break ---
I3o GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
as a recent fold in which the supposed Coal-measures
below and the newer rocks have equally anticipated.
In the first case, the older rocks may have been greatly
denuded before the newer strata were laid down on
them, and may exhibit much complexity of structure ;
in the latter case, the structure of the newer rocks will
approximate that of the older strata.
Experience gained in the type region and in the
visible coalfields on the east and west of the basin leads
us to expect that the folding faintly discernible in the
newer strata is of the posthumous type, and that the
Coal-measures, if they exist at all beneath the red rocks,
will be greatly denuded, and will display a considerable
complexity in structure.
A consideration of general principles, therefore, fixes
the most suitable site for an experimental trial some-
where in the area, between the two lines of structural
faults H-H' and K-K' (Fig. 6, p. 117). A site directly
on a line with the strike of the older rocks forming
the ridge north of K' will be avoided ; nor will one be
chosen towards the southern extremity of the fold, as
experience in the exposed coalfields shows a marked
deterioration in the quality of the seams to the south.
We may expect the coal-bearing strata to have been
in places greatly denuded, or even completely removed
before the deposition of the newer rocks.
Exploration Work. Suppose a site is chosen at
A, towards the middle of the central ridge, where
boring operations may be conveniently and advantage-
ously commenced, and that the initial size of the hole
is fixed according to the character of the strata it is
expected will be found, and the depth to which it is
intended to bore.

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 131
The boring starts in the lower red sandstones of the
covering strata, which are found to be 300 feet in
thickness. Grey measures are then entered, very
similar in character to those of the productive series,
but containing the fossil plant Pecopteris arborescens,
unknown in the grey measures of the lower productive
division, but characteristic of the Newcastle beds in the
type region, and in the neighbouring exposed coalfields.
The district, however, being little known, too much
reliance will not be placed on this scanty palaeonto-
logical evidence.
Beneath these grey measures red marls are met
with containing the characteristic bands of green grits
(Espley Rocks). There can now therefore be little
hesitation in considering that the boring enters the
Upper Coal-measures beneath the red rocks at the
horizon of the Newcastle Group, and that the red
marls and Espley Rocks represent the Etruria Marl
Group of the type region. These are known to be
conformable to the grey productive measures which
are apparently entered at 800 feet from the surface.
A crystalline rock, evidently of igneous origin, is
encountered after a few feet of grey measures have been
penetrated. This rock agrees in the freshness of its
minerals with the intrusive or contemporaneous rocks
met with in the exposed coalfields. Moreover, slight,
though perceptible, alteration of the beds with which
it is in contact may be detected by the naked eye, and
becomes still more obvious w
r
hen the contact rocks are
sliced and examined under the microscope.
The conclusion, therefore, is drawn that the boring
tool has struck an igneous sheet or dyke contem-
poraneous with the Coal-measures or intrusive into
92

--- Page Break ---
i 3 2 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
them, and not one of the igneous rocks associated with
the strata of pre-Carboniferous age. The boring is
then continued through the igneous rocks, and again
meets with Coal-measures and indications of coal-seams,
and a coal 27 feet thick is found at a depth of goo feet
below the base of the red cover, and 300 feet below sea-
level, the surface of the ground being 600 feet above OD.
The Coal-measure strata passed through consist, in
descending order, of Newcastle beds (100 feet), Etruria
Marls (400 feet), productive measures down to the top
of the thick coal (100 feet). Besides the thick coal, a
seam from 4 to 6 feet in thickness is met with a few
feet below the red Etruria Marls, or at 200 feet below
sea-level.
The direction of inclination of the strata was not
satisfactorily determined.
At another boring at B, to the north of A, the
Triassic cover is proved to be 400 feet thick, the New-
castle Group is absent, and the Etruria Marls only
300 feet thick. The pre-Triassic denudation is there-
fore more excessive here than at the borehole A. The
thin coal noticed in the boring at A as lying 100 feet
above the thick coal was recognized at 700 feet from
the surface or 100 feet below sea-level, again taking the
surface elevation at 600 feet above OD. The strata
evidently rise between A and B, or a fault with a down-
throw between the two intervenes. Instead of the
thick coal, four or five coals from 4 to 7 feet are met
with, so that the region of the thick coal has been
passed, and the boring thus shows the same splitting
up northwards of the thick coal as takes place in the
exposed coalfield.
In a boring at C, to the west of B, the surface of the

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 133
ground is 800 feet above OD. The red Triassic sand-
stones prove to be 500 feet thick, and the Etruria Marls
down to the first seam prove to be the same thickness
as at B, and lying almost horizontally. The first coal,
then, lies at sea-level, and unless there is faulting a
fall of 100 feet must take place between C and B.
We will now suppose an attempt to be made to prove
whether the thick coal extends as far west of A as the
point D.
Beneath the Trias a few feet of Etruria Marls are
met with, and below these the first thin seam of coal in
the grey productive measures ; then almost immediately
pale grey shales, not unlike Coal-measures, are entered,
but found to contain fragments of trilobites and other
Silurian fossils. A few thin bands of limestone also,
with Silurian fossils, are interstratified with the
shales.
The site D, therefore, indicates the position of the
underground continuation of the ridge of older rocks.
Supposing boring explorations had commenced at D
instead of at A, a check to future explorations in the
district would doubtless have ensued, unless the know-
ledge obtainable in the visible coalfield on the east,
where valuable seams are seen to lie within a few
hundred yards of the older ridges, had been taken into
account.
Several explorations in the Midlands have met with
the fate of borehole D, and adverse conclusions have
in many cases been drawn as to the value of consider-
able areas from the results obtained in a single un-
successful boring.
The geologist cannot always be sure of choosing a
successful site, but he can, in many instances, determine

--- Page Break ---
i34 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
beforehand the difficulties to be faced, and indicate the
areas in which exploration would be fruitless.
Suppose, for instance, it is resolved to prove the
ground to the east of the fault K K'. A site will be
selected some distance to the east of the fault, for not
only may the coals be expected to be broken up near
the fault, but these boundary faults are observed to
correspond, both at the surface and in the boring at D,
with the position of the older ridges. A site is there-
fore selected at E, at which it is expected the thick coal
lies concealed.
The amount of throw of the fault K K' is unknown,
but the measures are known to dip eastwards, and at E
a considerable thickness of the Upper Coal-measures
may be expected to occur above the productive strata.
The Triassic cover is known to be about 600 feet
thick, and, as the boring is situated towards the centre
of the syncline between the anticlinal region and the
exposed eastern coalfield, the amount of pre-Triassic
denudation will not be so great as over the anticline.
A considerable thickness of the upper barren measures
may therefore be expected. In addition to the Trias
covering, it would be advisable to allow for at least 600
feet of Keele strata, 300 feet of Newcastle beds, 400 feet
of Etruria Marls, and about 100 feet more for the grey
measures above the thick coal. Estimates must there-
fore be formed for a borehole of over 2,000 feet in
depth, and, in choosing the initial size of the hole, due
allowance made for the frequent casing that will be
found necessary in passing through the great thickness
of bad drilling ground to be expected in the Keele and
Etruria Marl groups. The first 600 to 800 feet, being
chiefly sandstones, will afford good drilling ground and

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 135
need little casing, and this may be taken into account
when fixing the original size of the hole. In a modern
boring the size of the hole to begin with would not be
less than 18 inches in diameter.
Red marls and sandstones with indeterminable plant
remains and beds of conglomerate are met with beneath
the Trias, and below these comemore red marls contain-
ing a thin band of black limestone with Spirorbis. The
sequence evidently agrees with the upper part of the
Keele Group (Fig. 14, p. 181), and, unless there is fault-
ing, some 700 feet of these rocks may be expected.
Another band of limestone with Spirorbis is entered
lower down, and the marls here contain several speci-
mens of Pecopteris arborescens. At 670 feet below the
base of the Trias, grey measures are entered, with a
band of blue limestone containing Spirorbis in abund-
ance, and evidently the band at the summit of the
Newcastle Group.
It may now be calculated, assuming the complete
absence of faults cutting out some of the measures,
that a position about 700 feet above the grey productive
strata has been reached, and that about 300 feet of good
drilling ground, formed by the sandstones of the New-
castle Group, lie immediately ahead.
Below the Newcastle Group drilling can be confi-
dently carried on until a considerable thickness of the
Etruria Marls has been penetrated. On passing from
the red ground of the Etruria Marls into grey strata,
extra care will be taken to look for indications of the
first thin seam of coal of the productive measures,
and after that for the thick coal. If practicable,
drilling operations will be conducted only during
daylight.

--- Page Break ---
136 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
A few borings put down along the margins of the
known Midland coalfields will afford concrete examples
of explorations in search of coal in unproved ground.
In South Staffordshire and Warwickshire the pre-
Carboniferous floor consists of deep, broad hollows and
narrow ridges. Post-Carboniferous denudation has
removed a great thickness of the coal-bearing strata off
the ridges, but has left them in various stages of denu-
dation in the intervening hollows.
The pre-Carboniferous floor of the Leicestershire
Coalfield presents a broad platform of Archaean rocks,
with here and there rocky prominences and shallow
depressions, with some deeper hollows. Denudation
at the close of the Carboniferous period has unequally
affected the Coal-measures and Lower Carboniferous
strata deposited on this platform. In some cases
denudation has removed all the Carboniferous rocks
that were laid down ; in others it has stripped off the
Upper Carboniferous rocks, while in other places it has
left them more or less intact.
Since the red rock cover in Leicestershire is generally
at its thinnest and never at its maximum, the thick-
ness of barren strata is seldom great enough to make
the Coal-measures lie at an unprofitable depth beneath
them. Many explorations have been made to prove
the extent of the productive strata under the Trias, and
are likely to be still further carried on. It is evident
that no very clear forecast can be made as to whether
Upper or Lower Carboniferous strata will be en-
countered, or if both divisions will be absent ; but the
two divisions of the Carboniferous system in the Mid-
lands are as a whole so distinct (p. 51) that there
should be no doubt as to whether a boring reaches an

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 137
horizon high up or low down in the Carboniferous
sequence.
One instance may be cited of a boring put down
between Leicester and the exposed coalfield.
A colliery not far removed from the site of the pro-
posed boring finds the Leicestershire coals of good
quality and at shallow depths. It is therefore thought
feasible that they may exist to the west under an area
not far distant from the workings.
The boring is started in the red rocks of the Trias,
and beneath these enters some red shales and sandstones
containing marine fossils, but otherwise similar to the
Etruria Marl Group. The marine fossils show that the
Carboniferous strata do not belong to the Upper barren
series, but whether they are part of the Lower Carboni-
ferous, or are marine beds stained red but belonging
to the productive measures, cannot be decided until the
boring has been carried down a few feet lower. When
this is done, strata containing Carboniferous Limestone
fossils in abundance are encountered, and it is evident
that the productive strata were either never deposited
or have been completely denuded away.
Attempts to reach coal-seams in the neighbourhood
of the Leicestershire Coalfield have been made along
the valley of the Soar, where the proximity of a direct
railway route to London naturally encourages explora-
tion. In some of these borings igneous and sedimentary
rocks older than the Carboniferous, in others Lower
Carboniferous strata, have been met with.
Examples have now been given as to how the
measures of a concealed coalfield in an anticlinal and
synclinal region can be recognized. The Coal-measure
sequence in its upper portion is of a clearly defined

--- Page Break ---
138 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
type, and the productive strata of no great thickness.
The chief risk lies in the uncertainty of the position
of the buried ridges of older rocks and the extent to
which the productive measures have been denuded.
Instances will now be taken from the concealed coal-
field lying to the east of the Pennine Chain, and where
new pits in unknown ground have been or are being
sunk.
Here the risk of meeting older rocks does not exist,
but travelling eastwards from the exposed coalfield an
ever-increasing thickness of cover has to be contem-
plated. Moreover, the grey productive measures here
exceed 5,000 feet in thickness, and the Barnsley Coal,
one of the most valuable seams, and therefore chiefly
sought for, lies over 1,600 feet from the summit. Since
the cover (at Haxey, Scarle, Selby, etc., p. 202) may
exceed 1,600 feet, it is obviously of importance to be
able to determine what horizon in the productive strata
is met with immediately below the unconformable cover
of newer rocks.
At Scarle boring, for instance, the red measures
beneath 2,019 feet of Permian, Trias, Lias, and Super-
ficial rocks have been considered to belong to the Upper
barren measures, which are known to be conformable
to the productive strata as in the type region. Sup-
posing, therefore, that these red strata lie at the base
of the Etruria Marls, then the Barnsley Coal can be
calculated to be well over 3,000 feet below the surface.
Over large areas in the concealed coalfield the
Etruria Marls have been denuded away, and a shaft or
boring enters the productive measures immediately
beneath the Permian strata. Again the question arises
as to the horizon encountered, whether close to the

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 139
Barnsley Coal or a considerable distance above it.
Estimates based on the inclination or depth to a par-
ticular seam in the nearest workings are apt to be mis-
leading. In a recent case, for instance, a coal was
calculated to be 2,700 feet below the surface, but was
met with under 1,800 feet.
The productive strata above the Barnsley Coal con-
tain few distinctive bands, though certain groups of
strata can be recognized, and thick sandstones are better
developed at one horizon than another, though litho-
logically similar to each other. These rocks serve as
indicators of position when viewed on a general scale,
but it is necessary for a considerable thickness of
strata to be proved before a position can be safely
decided upon.
In the Mansfield district a thick band of blue shale
lying 650 feet above the Barnsley Coal (here recognized
under the name of Top Hard) contains a rich and
peculiar marine fauna (p. 63). Many of the fossils do
not occur in any of the other marine beds above or
below the Barnsley Coal. Here, then, we have a
reliable index of position in a thick series of grey
measures of peculiar lithological sameness through-
out.
Attempts are now being made to prove the existence
of a concealed coalfield beneath the Secondary rocks
at Louth, in Lincolnshire, partly on the assumption
that the generally easterly dip of the measures along
the western margins of the proved Yorkshire Coalfield
changes into an easterly rise in the neighbourhood of
the Louth anticline visible in the Secondary formations,
in which case the great thickness of cover may be
counterbalanced by the chief seams of the productive

--- Page Break ---
140 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
measures being brought within workable depth by the
easterly rise.
Here, again, it is of importance to be able to identify
the horizon reached beneath the unconformable cover.
The upper barren strata may be expected to retain
their individuality, since they do so over the whole
Midland province. A few feet of red strata without
any fossil evidence would not, however, be a sufficient
guide, since the grey productive measures at many
horizons are stained red for a few feet by percolating
water charged with iron salts derived from the over-
lying Permian and Triassic strata.
The Mansfield marine band would distinguish the
strata above the Barnsley Coal, and may be expected
to occur here, unless the measures have been denuded
below this level, since there is good evidence to show
that the marine incursion at this horizon has a wide
distribution over the Midland Province. The bed, how-
ever, must not be confounded with one about 600 feet
below the Barnsley Coal, and which bears a close
resemblance to it, as well as containing some fossils in
common, though not the peculiar forms. Fossils in the
strata associated with the two bands are also not the
same, and there is some difference in the lithological
character of the strata above the Barnsley Coal from
that below it. Possibly the lower part of the Coal-
measure sequence, the Millstone Grits, or even the
Lower Carboniferous rocks, may lie directly beneath
the Secondary formations at Louth. The identification
of these horizons will rest in part on fossil evidence
and in part on lithological characters.
Explorations in search of Carboniferous coals now
in progress in the south-eastern counties of England

--- Page Break ---
STUDY OF A CONCEALED COALFIELD 141
afford more complex problems. The probable structure
of the buried coalfields is here based on the assumption
that the east and west Mendip folding (p. 158) is con-
tinued beneath the Secondary rocks towards Dover,
and thence undersea, to reappear at the surface in
northern France. On the eastern or French side of
the south-eastern coalfields the structure of the Car-
boniferous coal areas is one of great complexity. On
the western or Somersetshire side, the proved coalfields
also possess a somewhat intricate structure, and the
several distinct coalfields are separated from each other
by strata older than the coal-bearing rocks, and for the
most part concealed under newer formations.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER X
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN
Introduction. The coalfields of Great Britain range
themselves in three separated areas, which may be
termed the Southern, Midland, and Northern provinces.
Each possesses distinctive structural and lithological
features.
The Southern Province includes the coal-basins of
South Wales, Forest of Dean, Somersetshire, and that
of the concealed Dover Coalfield. East-and-west folds
predominate ; the chief lithological characteristic is the
development of a thick massive sandstone (Pennant
Sandstone) in the midst of the Coal-measures. Besides
house and gas coals, one part of the province yields
the highest class of steam coal, that of South Wales
meeting with no rival in any part of the world.
The Midland Province contains the coalfields of
Central England, in which a north-and-south fold the
Pennine Anticlinal becomes the dominant structural
feature, while the development of red Coal-measures
overlying the chief coal-bearing strata forms the main
lithological characteristic. The Midland Province
furnishes best house coal, and also gas and steam coal.
In the Northern Province, which includes the coal-
42

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 143
fields of Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, and
Scotland, sheets and dykes of igneous material are of
general occurrence, and numerous workable seams of
coal, not found in the Midland and Southern pro-
vinces, make their appearance in the Carboniferous
Limestone Series. The Northern Province is an area
of gas coals, but also furnishes best house and steam
coal.
Southern Province.
The east-and-west folds visible in the exposed coal-
fields of South Wales and Somerset, and partly proved
to exist in the concealed coalfield in the south-east of
England, belong to a system prevailing in the coalfields
of Belgium and northern France, and known as the
Hercynian. The folds of this system are the result
of a powerful thrust, acting from the south, which
buckled the Carboniferous strata into a number of
crest and basin folds with their longer axes directed
latitudinally.
Formationsolderthan theCarboniferouswere involved
in the folding, and occur in the centres of the crest
ridges ; but the areas occupied by these older rocks, and
the number and continuity of the folds formed, have
not been determined owing to their lying concealed
beneath the Secondary formations to the east of Somer-
setshire. The Hercynian folding was mainly completed
before the deposition of the Trias, but movement in
the same direction took place in early Mesozoic times,
and there is reason to believe that some of the dis-
turbances in South Wales were in operation at a late
geological period.
The general succession of the Carboniferous forma-
tion for the Southern Province is as follows :
'

--- Page Break ---
144 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN THE SOUTH-WEST.
Somerset and Bristol. South Wales.
T j /Radstock Series. Supra-Pennant Series
Uppei ^parrmgton Series. (Swansea Measures).
fPennant Sandstone Pennant Series.
T (New Rock Series. Lower or Steam CoalLower |yobster Series. Series.
Millstone Grit Series.
Carboniferous Limestone Series.
One of the characteristic features of the Coal-
measure sequence in each district is the thick mass,
seldom less than 1,000 feet, of the practically barren
sandstones of the Pennant Series which separates a
lower productive from an upper productive series.
South Wales Coalfield. The Carboniferous strata
of South Wales certainly lie in one of the elongated
trough folds of the Hercynian earth-movement. For-
mations older than the Carboniferous form a nearlycom-
plete girdle round the coalfield, being only interrupted
on the south by the sea of Carmarthen and Swansea
Bays, and by rocks belonging to the Secondary system
in South Glamorganshire.
The Carboniferous and older strata rise up to the
south at very high angles, and frequently reach a
vertical position ; but they rapidly flatten towards the
centre of the trough, and then rise again to the north
at a gentle angle.
The basin is interrupted towards the south by a sharp
anticlinal fold running east and west, accompanied,
along a portion of its course, by a fault (Moelgilau
Fault), considered to possess a downthrow to the north

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 145
of over 1,000 yards. At the Vale of Neath a fault
trending north-east and south-west, and having a con-
siderable downthrow to the north, towards the head of
the valley, separates the north part of the coalfield into
an eastern half, without anthracites, from a western
half containing chiefly anthracite coals. West of the
Neath Valley the main dislocations have a north-east
and south-west trend, and thrust faults, increasing in
number and intensity westwards, make their appearance
and disguise the sequence of the strata. East of the
Neath Valley the faults are normal, with a general
north-west and south-east direction, excepting the east-
and-west Moelgilau Fault.
Denudation, besides removing a vast amount of
strata, has carved the Coal-measures into a series of
deep valleys, along the sides of which the coal-seams
crop out, and were formerly won by
'
day levels.'
These valleys either trend north-east and south-west,
or else longitudinally.
The Carboniferous sequence has been divided as
follows :
1. Coal-measures.
2. Millstone Grits.
3. Carboniferous Limestone.
The Coal-measures fall naturally into an Upper Coal
Series, a Middle or Pennant Sandstone Series, and a
Lower or Steam-coal Series. The Upper Series extends
down to the Mynyddislwyn Seam in Monmouthshire,
and to the Wernffraith and Swansea Four Feet Coal in
Glamorganshire. The Middle Series, mainly massive
sandstones, has the Brithdir Seam at its base in Mon-
mouthshire, and the Rhondda No. 2, Ynysarwed or
10

--- Page Break ---
146 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Garn Swilt Seam in Glamorgan and Carmarthen. The
Millstone Grit forms the base of the Lower Series.
This threefold subdivision is most marked in Mon-
mouthshire, where the massive Pennant Sandstone
separates a lower shale series from an upper shale
and sandstone series. On proceeding to the west
Pennant-like sandstones make their appearance towards
the summit of the lower series, and attain a great
thickness in western Glamorganshire and Carmarthen-
shire. At the same time the upper part of the Pennant
Series includes several bands of shale and workable
seams of coal west of the Vale of Neath. It therefore
happens that a considerable diversity of opinion has
arisen as to the precise correlation of the seams occur-
ring east of the Neath trough with those on the west.
Much confusion has been caused by the different
application of the terms Upper and Lower Pennant.
In the Swansea and Neath districts the Upper Pennant
Series is sometimes taken to include the measures above
a seam known as the Wenallt, Esgryn, or Hughes Vein,
lying towards the middle of the thick sandstones and
shales between the Ynysarwed (Rhondda No. 2) Coal
and the Wernffraith (Mynyddislwyn) Coal ; while the
term Lower Pennant is given to the sandstones and
shales lying between the Wenallt and the Ynysarwed
coals. Others restrict the use of the name Lower
Pennant to the thick sandstones (Llynfi or Tormynydd
rock) at the summit of the Lower or Steam Coal
Series, while others, again, place these lower sandstones,
together with the main mass of the Pennant Series
up to the Wernffraith, in the Lower Pennant Group,
including only the measures above the Wernffraith in
the Upper Pennant Series.

--- Page Break ---
10 2

--- Page Break ---
148 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The Lower or Steam Coal Series is sometimes sub-
divided into a Lower or White Ash Series, and an Upper
or Red Ash Series. In Monmouthshire the line of
demarcation occurs about the horizon of the Elled Coal ;
in Glamorganshire, the base of the Red Ash Series
is taken at the horizon of the Gorlwllyn Coal.
While the Coal-measure strata have received a three-
fold grouping, it is not generally admitted that these
divisions correspond to the Upper, Middle, and Lower
Coal-measures of other British coalfields. By Mr.
Kidston, the Upper Series, on the plant evidence, is
grouped with the lower portion of the highest measures
of the Bristol and the Midland coalfields ; the Lower
Pennant Sandstone he regards as a transitional series
between the Upper and Middle Coal-measures, the
latter term being equivalent to the White Ash Series
as defined above. The Lower Coal-measures he con-
siders to be absent in South Wales.
The correlation of the South Welsh Coal-measures
with those of other coalfields possesses little practical
value.
The following fossil plants are abundant in the Upper
Pennant Series (taking the Wernffraith Coal as the
base) :
Sphenopteris neuropteroides, A lethopteris serli, Sigil-
laria tesselata. Associated with these are A lethopteris
lonchitica and Pecopteris miltoni. The same plants occur
in the Lower Pennant Series, but with a greater pre-
ponderance of Middle Coal-measure forms. In the
lower part of the Steam Coal or White Ash Series
Sphenopteris neuropteroides and A lethopteris serli are
absent, and there is a mixture of Middle Coal-measure
and Lower Coal-measure plants.
The Upper Series is chiefly distinguished by the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 149
presence of A lethopteris serli and Sphenopteris neuropter-
oides, but also by the occurrence of Anthracomya phillipsi,
which, though rarely found low down in the Middle
Series, is never met with in the Lower Coal Series
between the Millstone Grit and Rhondda No. 2 Seam.
A band containing marine fossils occurs above the
Bydyllog Coal in Monmouthshire, but no attempt has
been made to trace this marine band over the coalfield.
A marine band associated with the Rosser Veins of
East Monmouthshire belongs in reality to the Mill-
stone Grit Series.
Carbonicola robusta has been found only in connexion
with the lowest seam (Gnapiog or Garw Coal). The
roof of the Ras Las Coal contains Naiadites carinata,
N. modiolaris, N. quadrata, Anthracomya modiolaris, and
A. williamsoni.
Anthracomya adamsi has been recorded from the
measures above the Big Coal of Rhymney, and above
the Black Pins and Soap veins of Ebbw Vale. The
zonal value of these fossils in South Wales remains to
be proved, and the palaeontology of the coalfield requires
much further investigation before it can be said to
possess much practical value.
The coals rarely exceed 10 feet in thickness, except
when over-thrusting or folding locally brings two or
more seams together.
In Pembrokeshire ten seams give a thickness of28 feet
of coal ; in Carmarthen eighteen to thirty-four seams
give from 47 to 83 feet of coal ; in Glamorgan twenty-
six to forty-eight seams give from 70 to 124 feet of
coal ; while in Monmouth eleven to twenty-one seams
give 38 to 47 feet of coal.
The coals range in quality from bituminous to steam

--- Page Break ---
150 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
and anthracitic. The first-class Steam Coals that
is, coals used in the Royal Navy and obtained from
collieries included in the Admiralty list are, as is
well known, of unrivalled quality. The net available
quantity of steam coal is estimated at 8,013,082,381
tons, and of anthracite 6,310,292,214 tons, contained
in seams exceeding one foot in thickness, and lying at a
depth not exceeding 4,000 feet. The bituminous coals
constitute 31 per cent., anthracites 22 per cent., and
steam coals of all classes 47 per cent, of the total coal-
supply of this field.
In following the seams across the coalfield, the
carbon percentage shows a general progressive increase
from east to west, and on crossing the Neath disturb-
ance this anthracitization, or the reduction in volatile
matter, proceeds westwards at a somewhat rapid pace,
except along the southern outcrop, where the coals
remain of a bituminous character, and the anthracitiza-
tion takes place from south to north.
West of the Neath River the bituminous coals cover
an area of 94 square miles in the south ; to the north a
belt of 61 square miles in extent contains steam coals ;
north of this, again, in an area of 77 square miles the
upper seams are steam coals, and the lower seams
anthracites, while yet farther north is an area of about
133 square miles, in which all the seams are anthracites.
As in other coalfields, the seams change their names
from place to place, and in the more disturbed regions
in Carmarthen and Pembroke the same coals are often
known under one set of names on one side of a fault and
under different names on the other side. In Monmouth-
shire the chief seams in the Lower Series, commencing
at the lowest, are : Old (Lower Four Feet), Yard, Nine

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 151
Feet (Ras Las), Six Feet, Upper Four Feet, and Elled
coals. In Glamorganshire, east of the Neath disturb-
ance, the same seams "are represented, but locally receive
different names.
Crossing the Neath disturbance, the chief seams in
the Lower Series on the north crop are known at
Ystradgynlais and in the Aman Valley in descending
order as : Pinchin, Red Vein, Stwrain, White Vein?
Pancraig, Big or Stanllyd, and Brass. In the Gwen-
draeth Valley the seams receive different names, but
the Gwendraeth Stanllyd is probably the same seam
as the Aman Stanllyd or Big, and the Carway of
Gwendraeth appears to represent the Red Vein of
Ammanford.
On the south crop in Gower the seams receive
names so different from those on the north crop and
in East Glamorganshire that a comparison is at present
impossible.
In Pembrokeshire the Timber Vein an anthracite
of the Lower Series ranges from 2 to 10 feet in
thickness.
In Monmouthshire the seam at the base of the Pen-
nant Series is known as the Tillery Vein, and, excepting
this coal, the Pennant contains no workable seams.
In eastern Glamorganshire this seam is known as
Rhondda No. 2, and continues under this name up to
the Vale of Neath. West of this it is known as the
Ynysarwed or Garn Swilt Vein. Seams of little im-
portance in the Pennant to the east of the Vale of
Neath increase in thickness to the west of this valley,
and in ascending order are known as :
Hughes, Graigola,
Victoria, and Three Feet coals, and the other Swansea
seams.

--- Page Break ---
152 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
In the Upper Series of Monmouthshire the Mynyd-
dislwyn Vein, a highly bituminous coal, has alone been
worked. In eastern Glamorganshire seams known as
the Llantwit coals make their appearance, while west
of the Neath disturbance the Upper Series, with the
Wernffraith (Four Feet or Church) Vein at the base,
contains a workable seam known as Drews or Bryncoch
Vein.
In Monmouthshire and eastern Glamorganshire the
Pennant Sandstone, though a massive and water-
bearing formation, does not assume the proportions it
does on approaching the Vale of Neath and to the
west, where sorne 4,500 feet of measures separate the
Wernffraith from the more valuable seams of the Steam
Coal Series. The following table shows the approxi-
mate thickness in feet of the strata separating the seams
above the Hughes Vein :
The thickness of the Pennant below the Hughes
Vein down to the Ynysarwed amounts to about
JjSSO feet. As a consequence of this great thickness
of strata above the Steam Coal Series, the workings

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 153
are at present divided between those of the Pennant
and supra-Pennant seams of the Neath, Swansea, and
Llanelly basins and those of the Steam Coal Series on
the north and south of these basins. Attempts to
reach the lower seams beneath the Pennant are now
under contemplation, and it is on the winning of these
deeper-seated coals in Glamorganshire and Carmarthen-
shire that the future extension of the coalfield greatly
depends.
It will be seen from the map (Fig. 10, p. 147) that the
newer rocks which border the coalfield to the west
of Cardiff surround ridges of rocks older than Coal-
measures, and it is therefore fruitless to search for
coal-seams under these newer formations.
In St. Bride's Bay the quantity of undersea coal is
estimated at 53,360,000 tons, and that in Carmarthen
Bay at 329,664,000 tons. These amounts represent the
estimated available supply under areas of which at
present nothing is known.
Forest of Dean Coalfield. This coalfield is con-
sidered to be an outlier of the South Wales Coalfield,
from which it is separated by a broad expanse of Old
Red Sandstone, broken through by the Silurian anti-
clinal inlier of Usk.
The Dean Forest Coalfield forms an example of a
perfect coal-basin, with its margins completely defined
by the massive conglomerate termed Millstone Grit,
which succeeds the Carboniferous Limestone Series.
The Coal-measures occupy an area of thirty-four
square miles, and are separated into three divisions
known in descending order as: (i) Upper or Woor-
greens Series, with two thin workable coals ; (2) Middle

--- Page Break ---
154 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Series, containing eight seams overone foot in thickness ;
and (3) Lower Series, with six seams over one foot in
thickness, containing the well-known Coleford High-
delf Coal. A sandstone
'
horse,' two miles in length
and from 170 to 340 yards wide, breaks the continuity
of this seam.
The total thickness of measures amounts to 2,765 feet.
A thick mass of sandstone, comparable with the
Pennant Sandstone of South Wales, lies between the
Coleford Highdelf and a seam known as the Church-
way Highdelf. It contains large quantities of water,
and forms one of the chief obstacles in pits sunk to
the
'
deep.'
The Coal-measures of this coalfield are noted for the
number and excellent preservation of the fossil plants,
specimens of Pecopteris arborescens and A lethopteris serli
being particularly abundant. The whole assemblage
of plants is considered to indicate a somewhat high
position in the Coal-measure sequence of the Southern
Province.
The seams at present worked are applicable to house-
hold, manufacturing and gas-making purposes, but it is
expected that the undeveloped seams to the
'
deep
'
will
furnish second-class steam coal.
Deducting loss in working, etc., the total available
supply remaining unworked is estimated at 258,533,447
tons. The average output amounts to a little under one
million tons per annum.
Somerset and Gloucestershire Coalfields. The
detached areas constituting these coalfields differ
essentially from those of South Wales and the Forest
of Dean, of which the latter'.forms an outlier of the

--- Page Break ---
Coal-bearing strata
at foe Surface.
Scale. 4 f$ miles to one inch.
ii. GEOLOGICAL MAP' OF THE EXPOSED AND CONCEALED
COALFIELDS OF GLOUCESTERSHIRE AND SOMERSETSHIRE
(AFTER G. E. J. MCMURTRIE).

--- Page Break ---
156 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
larger South Wales coal-basin. The limits of the
Welsh basin and those of the Forest of Dean are
formed by older rocks ; the boundaries of the exposed
areas of the Somersetshire and Gloucestershire coalfields
are surrounded entirely, or almost entirely, by strata
newer than the Carboniferous ; indeed, mining is being
chiefly carried on under these newer formations, and
four-fifths of the coalfields belong to the concealed
class.
Including the exposed and concealed areas, these
detached coal-basins may be grouped as : (i) The
southern or Nailsea area, with twelve seams, giving a
total thickness of 23 feet of coal ; (2) the central area,
containing thirty-five seams, yielding an average of
65 feet of coal ; (3) the northern area, with seven seams,
giving 10 feet of coal. The total available quantity of
coal from all three, at depths not exceeding 4,000 feet,
is estimated at 4,198,301,099 tons.
The Coal-measures are divided into two portions by
a thick bedded sandstone termed Pennant Rock, which
is considered to be the equivalent of the Pennant Sand-
stone of South Wales.
The measures above the Pennant Rock are further
subdivided into two groups. The upper or Radstock
Group contains in ascending order the Bull, Little
Slyving, Slyving, Middle and Great seams, averaging
from i foot 2 inches to 2 feet 2 inches in thickness;
the group attains a thickness of 1,000 feet, and is
separated by about 150 feet of red shale from the lower
group. The lower or Farrington Group, about 700 feet
in thickness, contains about six or eight seams, but
usually not more than four or five are workable, these
in ascending order being the Church-Close, Middle,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 157
Farrington Top, and Cathedral seams, varying in thick-
ness from 2 feet to 3 feet 10 inches.
The Pennant Rock, from 2,000 to 2,500 feet thick,
contains a few thin seams averaging a total of 5 feet of
coal. One of these, known as the Graces Coal (3 feet
thick), has been worked in the Nailsea area, but on the
whole the Pennant must be regarded as barren and
heavily watered ground.
The strata below the Pennant are divided into an
upper Kingswood or New Rock Series, and a lower
Vobster Series. They attain a thickness of from 3,000
to 3,500 feet in the Nettle Bridge Valley, and about
2,000 feet in the Bristol area. The New Rock Series
is by some regarded as the equivalent of the Lower
Pennant of South Wales that is, of the strata lying
between the base of the main mass of Pennant Sand-
stone in Glamorgan and Monmouth, and the top of the
White Ash Series. This correlation makes the Vobster
Series equivalent to the White Ash or the lower portion
of the Steam Coal Series of South Wales. This com-
parison is based on the distribution of fossil plants.
The New Rock Series contains several seams from
6 inches to 5 feet in thickness, but a considerable
number are unworkable. The coals of the Vobster
Series are the best, and have been extensively worked,
some of them yielding smithy and coking coals of
great purity.
Owing to the isolation of the various coal areas, and
to the adoption of different names for the same seam,
it is impossible to correlate the coals of one district
with those of another. In the southern coalfield the
seams of the New Rock Series correspond to those
of Kingswood and Bitton, and those of the Ashton

--- Page Break ---
158 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Vale of the Bristol coalfields to those of the Vobster
Series of Somersetshire. In the northern coalfield the
seams appear to rapidly diminish in number, until at
Yate and near Cromhall twenty-nine seams of the
Kingswood Colliery are represented by only four seams
at Yate and by two seams at Cromhall.
The coals of the Radstock Series belong to the bitu-
minous class, and are suitable for household use and
also for gas manufacture. The Farrington Series con-
tains some bituminous coals, while others are adapted
for steam raising. In the Kingswood and Vobster
Series the Ashton Great Seam gives a very hard and
good coke ; the Kingswood or Bedminster Great Seam
furnishes a good house coal, and to a great extent
supplies the Bristol market.
In 1906 the output for the entire area amounted to
2,532,266 tons, that from the Gloucestershire Coalfield
being over 400,000 tons in excess of the yield from
Somersetshire, but an increased output from the Somer-
setshire Coalfield for use on ocean-going steamers is
expected.
The Somersetshire and Gloucestershire coalfields may
be collectively regarded as an isolated basin surrounded
by an uprise of Lower Carboniferous and Devonian
rocks, the outcrops of which are mainly concealed
beneath the Secondary formations. At Kingswood an
anticline, accompanied by an east -and -west overlap
fault, separates the Somersetshire Coalfield on the
south from the Bristol and Gloucestershire coalfields
on the north. On the south and south-west the east-
and-west Mendip anticline or, more strictly speaking,
anticlinorium, for the anticline is in reality built up of
several folds terminates the known coalfield by raising

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 159 1
to the surface rocks of Lower Carboniferous and
Devonian ages.
In the northern coalfield the chief dislocations are four
longitudinal faults traversing the district from north to
south, and throwing up the measures to the west. In
the southern or Somersetshire coalfields faults are
more numerous, and on approaching the Mendip Hills
the strata become overfolded and faulted to such an
extent that the same seams may be passed through two
or three times in succession in a single shaft. Along
the Nettle Bridge Valley the Lower Coal-measures are
completely inverted. Overthrust faults, with hades
CLANDON BRAYSDOWN
FIG. 12. SECTION ACROSS THE RADSTOCK COALFIELD SHOWING
THE RADSTOCK OVERLAP FAULT (ON THE RIGHT) AND THE
UNCONFORMABLE MESOZOIC COVER.
approaching horizontality, are also met with in the
Radstock coal-basin four miles north of the Mendip
Hills. The overlap of one of these faults, known as
the Radstock overlap fault, amounts to 140 yards in
the Great Vein Coal and to 300 yards in the Bull Vein
Coal, 30 yards below the Great Vein.
The thickness of a seam of coal may be thus doubled
or trebled by a series of overlap faults piling up the
coal.
Most of the folding and faulting in this district was
completed before the deposition of the Secondary rocks,
which rest almost horizontally on the tilted, dislocated,
and denuded edges of the Carboniferous strata (Fig. 12,

--- Page Break ---
160 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
p. 159). The Secondary rocks, therefore, betray few or
no signs of the complicated structure found in the Coal-
measures, bearing in this respect a close analogy to the
coalfields of northern France (Fig. 20, p. 241). By
some authorities the lateral movement of the Radstock
overlap fault is considered to have commenced before
the deposition of the upper seams, and to be in part of
inter-Carboniferous age.
Fossils prove of little service in the determination
of exact horizons in this area. Mollusca are of rare
occurrence in the Coal-measures, though a marine band,
rich in these fossils, is known to occur at the base of
the Lower Coal-measures in one locality. Marine bands
have been found in other areas, though the horizons
have not as yet been determined. The plants, on the
other hand, are extremely abundant, and have received
much attention. In the Radstock Series some of the
commonest plants are Pecopteris arborescens, P. miltoni,
P. oreopteridea, P. unita, Alethopteris serli, Sigillaria
tesselata. All these forms are found in the Farrington
Series, and are also met with below the Pennant Rock,
but in much less abundance. Alethopteris serli occurs in
great profusion in the Radstock measures, but appears
to be absent in the Vobster Series. On the other
hand, Alethopteris lonchitica is abundant in the Vobster
Series, but is unknown in the Radstock Series.
Colliery operations and the general disposition of
the visible coalfields show that the Carboniferous rocks
of Gloucestershire and Somersetshire occur in isolated
basins formed by earth-movements later in age than "the
Carboniferous formation, but newer than the Trias.
The Secondary formations, as stated, bury up, and
in many cases conceal, the extent of the separate

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 161
basins, though mining has to a considerable degree
revealed the structure, and more or less accurately
determined their hidden boundaries. The overlying
newer foundations do not attain to any great thickness
within the coal-basins, but outside the basins the
different members ol the Mesozoic formation are esti-
mated to reach a united maximum thickness of
3,420 feet, distributed as follows : Trias, 2,000 feet ;
Rhaetic, 50 feet ; Lias, 1,200 feet ; Inferior Oolite, 170
feet.
Of the partially exposed coalfields, that of the
Nailsea coal-basin has an unknown extension to the
south under the Triassic red marls and alluvial marshes,
but, as the seams in the Nailsea district vary in quality
from place to place, the value of this unproved area
remains problematical. A buried coalfield also lies
beneath the Severn River.
Since the Mendip anticline was raised after the
deposition of the Coal-measures, it is deemed probable
that a coalfield lies to the south and south-east under
the Secondary rocks. A boring at Witham passed
through 287 feet of Oxford Clay (considered by some
to be Lias), and 29 feet of strata doubtfully referred
to the Cornbrash, and was continued to a depth of
600 feet without meeting any signs of Coal-measures.
Another boring was put down in the early part of last
century at Compton Dundon. It commenced in Keuper
Marl, and was continued without success down to a
depth of 519 feet.
Objections to the suggested existence of coal to the
south of the Mendips have been brought forward. On
the southern slopes of the Mendip Hills the newer
formations rest directly on Lower Carboniferous or
ii

--- Page Break ---
162 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
older strata, and it is therefore inferred that the same
relation will be found farther south. This argument
is based on an erroneous conception of the great un-
conformity between the Coal-measures and newer
formations, the latter being often in direct contact
with the Carboniferous Limestone or older strata in
the near neighbourhood of the rich coal-bearing strata
in the proved coal-basins to the north of the Mendips.
Adverse opinions on the existence of coal to the south
have also been based on the supposition that the unpro-
ductive Culm measures of Devonshire are the southern
equivalent of the Somersetshire productive strata.
These opinions receive considerable support from the
discovery in theCulm measures of Devon and Cornwall
of such distinctly Upper Carboniferous plants as
Alethopteris serli, A. lonchitica, Mariopteris muricata,
Lepidodendron obovatum, and Sigillaria tesselata. The
occurrence of these fossils favours the opinion that the
upper barren Culm measures are equivalent to the
Middle Coal-measures of other coalfields, and that
they do not, as for a long time believed, represent the
Lower Carboniferous. The Upper Carboniferous age
of the Culm measures does not, however, preclude the
existence to the south of the Mendips of the Farrington
and Radstock series, which, on plant evidence, are con-
sidered to be of Upper Coal-measure age.
Besides plants, the Upper Carboniferous rocks of
Devon and Cornwall contain Gastrioceras carbonarium,
G. listen, Dimorphoceras gilbertsoni, and Pterinopecten
papyraceus, but two of these fossils have a wide vertical
range among the Carboniferous rocks (p. 61).
Some geologists consider that the cover of the coal-
bearing strata will in many places be too thick to

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 163
allow the coals beneath to be at workable depths, but
positive data on this subject are not available, and
possibly the maximum thickness of 3,420 feet, as
previously given (p. 161), may be found excessive.
Because the upper Culm measures in Cornwall and
Devonshire are barren of workable seams, it does not
necessarily follow that the northerly extension of these
measures into Somersetshire, south of the Mendip Hills,
will also be barren.
There remains the possibility of hidden coalfields to
the west of the Bristol area. At Burford a boring
proved 226 feet of Coal-measures under a cover of
i,i8j feet of Secondary rocks, including Trias (467 feet),
Lias (627 feet), and Oolite (go feet). Coal-measures
have also been proved at Batsford. Again, farther
south at Swindon, a boring, 736 feet in depth, ended in
the Forest Marble, while another at Wytham, 633 feet
deep, was finished in Lias, after passing through 185 feet
of this formation. Borings near Northampton, to the
north-east of Batsford, prove the absence of Coal-
measures, since the Secondary rocks were found resting
on the Lower Carboniferous strata.
If the irregular pre-Carboniferous floor of the Mid-
land Province (p. 136) and the denuded and consequent
isolated character of the Gloucestershire and Somerset-
shire coalfields be kept in mind, it is evident that these
few borings, situated at wide intervals, do not permit of
any definite conclusions being drawn as to the existence
of concealed coalfields to the north of the prolongation
of the Mendip anticline, or to the south of the Stafford-
shire and Warwickshire axes. This broad region indeed
affords an illustration of a possibly concealed coalfield,
where the methods adopted to prove its existence, given
II 2

--- Page Break ---
164 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
in a previous chapter, may be applied. The failure of
two or three borings to prove productive measures does
not imply that these do not exist even at a short
distance from a boring, in which rocks older than the
coal-bearing strata are found immediately beneath
newer rocks.
South-Eastern England. The Hercynian folds in
the Palaeozoic rocks cease to be visible in the southern
counties owing to the on-coming of the Secondary
and Tertiary formations. These, however, have been
affected by folding later than the Hercynian, but having
the same general direction. According to Godwin
Austen's theory it might therefore be reasonably ex-
pected that folded Carboniferous rocks lay beneath
the Secondary formations between Somerset and
Kent.
The first attempt to demonstrate the correctness of
Godwin Austen's view was by a boring commenced in
1872 at Netherneld, near Battle. The boring finished
in Oxford Clay at a depth of 1,905 feet, the formations
passed through being Purbeck (177 feet), Portland
(115 feet), Kimmeridge Clay (1,273 feet), Corallian
(241 feet), and Oxford Clay (99 feet).
A subsequent boring at Meux's Brewery, in the
Tottenham Court Road, proved that the Secondary
rocks here rested on the Devonian. It is generally
assumed that in the borings at Streatham and Rich-
mond rocks older than the Carboniferous were entered.
These three borings therefore proved that no buried
coalfields underlie the Thames basin in Middlesex and
this part of Surrey.
In 1886 a boring was commenced at Shakespeare's

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 165
Cliff, Dover, and was successful in striking Coal-
measures at a depth of 1,100 feet 6 inches. The boring
was continued to a depth of 2,330 feet, passing through
thirteen coal-seams calculated to be from 15 inches to
4 feet in thickness.
The plants obtained between 1,819 feet and 2,274
feet depth are such as have a wide range in the Coal-
measures, consisting of Ncuropteris rarinervis, N. teniii-
folia, Lepidodendron aculeatum, L. lycopodioides, Stigmaria
ficoides, Carpolithes corculuin, and Lepidostrobus variabilis.
From the absence of Pecopteris arborescens it may, how-
ever, be concluded that the Upper Coal-measures are
absent.
Following the successful trial at Dover, other attempts
to prove the extent of the coalfield have been made or
are in progress. At Ropersole, eight miles north-
west of Dover, a boring reached Coal-measures under
a thickness of 1,580 feet of Secondary rocks; another
boring at Ellinge, four miles north-west of Dover, also
entered Coal-measures under 1,685 ^eet f Secondary
rocks ; while a third boring at Brabourne met with
rocks older than the Coal-measures, and so limits the
coalfield in a south-westerly direction.
The coals are considered to belong to the Somerset
type, and are of a bituminous character.
The nearest proved coalfields to Kent occur in
Belgium and northern France. In Belgium three
synclinal folds trending east-and-west contain Carbon-
iferous rocks. Bordering the Ardennes on the south
lies the basin of Dinant, occupied by Lower Carbon-
iferous rocks. The Dinant syncline is succeeded to
the north by the Crete du Condros, an anticline com-
posed of Devonian and Silurian. To this there succeeds

--- Page Break ---
166 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
the syncline of the Liege Coalfield, which has been traced
westwards into the Pas de Calais and Bas Boulonnais.
The Liege syncline is again succeeded to the north
by a buried ridge of older rocks, forming the southern
boundary of the recently discovered coalfield of the
Dutch Limburg.
The Kent Coalfield is considered to be a prolongation
eastward of the middle or Liege basin, of which the
structure has been proved to be even more complex
than that of the Pembroke Coalfield. Whether the
Kent Coalfield possesses a similar intricate structure
will be shortly proved at Dover Colliery, where the
shafts have now reached coal-seams.
The question of the possibility of there being con-
cealed coalfields north of the Thames Valley has been
partly answered by the results of borings at Harwich,
Culford, Stutton, Ware, and Turnford, in all of which
the Secondary formations rest directly on rocks older
than the Carboniferous ; but it is considered that at
Gayton, in Northamptonshire, Lower Carboniferous
rocks immediately underlie the newer formations ;
while at Burford and Batsford, in Gloucestershire, the
Secondary rocks rest on Coal-measures.
In south-eastern England the problems not as yet
definitely solved are: (i) the horizons attained in the
present explorations ; (2) the thickness of cover at
various points ; (3) the probable areas of the concealed
coal-basins and their structure.
Borings and shaft -
sinkings have certainly proved
the existence of a buried coalfield in the south-eastern
counties. Some of the recent experimental borings
have to some extent fixed the probable boundaries of
one of the coal-basins. If, however, the illustration

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 167
showing the exposed and concealed Somersetshire and
Gloucestershire Coalfield be studied, it will be readily
understood that a considerable number of borings and
shaft-sinkings were necessary before even the approxi-
mate boundaries of the concealed areas could be
determined. If the whole of the Carboniferous, in-
cluding the productive portions, had been concealed,
how much greater would have been the task of fixing
the boundaries of the concealed and separate coal-
basins. Explorations in this case would give very
divergent results, and it might be a long time before
it would be understood that the chief coal-basin lay
to the east and not to the west of Bristol.
From information obtained in a series of borings in
the south-west it might be supposed that the Bristol
and Somersetshire Coalfield stretched east and west
instead of north and south. Not only would the
general structure of the concealed area remain for a
long time in doubt, but it is reasonable to expect that
the complexity of individual areas would only be proved
by actual underground workings. General inferences
might be drawn from a comparison with the South
Wales Coalfield or that of the Forest of Dean, sup-
posing these to be exposed, but this would involve a
considerable knowledge of the structure of these coal-
fields and an acquaintance with the succession and the
means, palaeontological, stratigraphical, and lithological,
by which one portion of the sequence could be distin-
guished from another.
Exploration work in these known but concealed coal-
fields affords therefore an object-lesson on the structure
of the later coal-bearing Palaeozoic formations where
these are concealed under the Secondary rocks.

--- Page Break ---
168 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Realizing the difficulties in delineating the boundaries
of the concealed coal areas in the south-eastern counties,
the recent Royal Commission on Coal Supplies did
not include this area in the estimates of future avail-
able supply.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XI
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN, MIDLAND
PROVINCE
Introduction. It is generally accepted that over an
area exceeding 10,000 square miles in the Midland
Counties the Coal-measures were laid down in an
almost continuous sheet extending from the Welsh
hills and Irish Sea on the west, to the borders of the
German Ocean on the east, and possibly beyond. It is
also agreed that this area was originally connected on
the north with the Durham coal-basin, and that on the
south the minimum of deposition was reached along
the borders of a tract of elevated land of which the
Malvern and Lickey Hills, the Nuneaton Ridge, and
Charnwood Forest form visible peaks.
As a whole, this area was undergoing depression
throughout Carboniferous times. At its close a period
of active earth-movement ensued, and the recently
formed sediments were bent into alternating elevations
(ridge folds) and depressions (basin folds).
These tectonic movements proceeded along two lines.
A thrust from the east buckled the Carboniferous strata
into a number of folds having their axes directed north
and south or north-east and south-west. Of these folds
169

--- Page Break ---
170 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
those forming the composite Pennine Anticlinal re-
sulted in the most important change, since they caused
the separation of the eastern (Nottinghamshire and
Yorkshire) basin from the western (Cheshire) basin.
Simultaneously, or possibly in part successively, a
series of east-and-west transverse folds were produced
by a thrust from the south ; one of these, stretching
from Pendle Hill, in Lancashire, eastwards along the
valley of the Wharfe, divided off the coal-basin of the
northern counties from the Midland basin on the south.
Another east-and-west anticlinal ridge in the latitude
of Stone, Castle-Donnington, and Ruddington divides
the eastern Midland basin into two unequal portions
a northern half containing the coalfields of the York-
shire, Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire basin, and a
southern half containing the coalfields of the Leicester-
shire platform.
The term
'
Midland Coal-basin
'
is applied to the
area of Carboniferous strata defined by these post-
Carboniferous movements.
During the period of earth-movement an immense
quantity of material was swept away from the crests of
the ridge folds, amounting to as much as 8,000 feet of
Carboniferous strata near Harrogate. On the other
hand, the strata in the basin folds were preserved from
denudation : and it is these that now constitute the
concealed and partly concealed coalfields.
At a much later period the Midland area became
covered by the deposits of the Permian and Triassic
formations, and subsequently by the later Mesozoic
sediments, which buried up the highly inclined and
eroded edges of the Carboniferous rocks.
The Mesoz.oic cover waa ia tura deauded off the.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 171
crests of the anticlines, but has to a great extent
escaped destruction over the synclines.
IInch - about 25Miles
FIG. 13. THE COALFIELDS OF THE MIDLAND BASIN.
In this way the discontinuity of the Carboniferous
areas caused by pre-Permian folding and denudation

--- Page Break ---
172 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
has been accentuated, and the present outlines of the
visible coalfields determined.
The separated coalfields group themselves in relation
to the Pennine, Stone and Castle-Donnington anti-
clinals.
North of the Stone-Castle-Donnington anticline we
have on the east of the Pennine Anticlinal the large
coalfields of Derbyshire, Nottinghamshire, and York-
shire ; on the west side of the anticline we meet with
the coalfields of North Staffordshire, Lancashire, and
North Wales.
South of the Stone-Castle-Donnington anticline lie
the coalfields of Coalbrookdale, South Staffordshire,
Warwickshire, and Leicestershire.
The general Carboniferous sequence met with in the
Midland basin is given in the table opposite, com-
mencing with the newest strata.
Geologists are as yet far from agreed as to the
nomenclature to be adopted for the different sub-
divisions. Among miners the Keele, Newcastle, and
Etruria Marl groups are termed Upper Coal-measures,
but Mr. Kidston, from palaeobotanical evidence, con-
siders that the Keele Group alone represents the Upper
Coal-measures of continental geologists, and for the
two remaining groups he has suggested the term
*
Staffordian.' He also adopts the term
'
Westphalian
'
for the Middle Coal-measures, and
'
Lanarkian
'
for the
Lower Coal-measures.
In the following pages the terminology in general
local use will be adopted, and the distinguishing char-
acters of the divisions and subdivisions mentioned for
each coalfield.
From the Millstone Grits upwards each break in the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 173
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN THE MIDLAND BASIN.
regular continuity of the sequence which may occur is
only local. The Keele Group (so-called Permian) has
not been determined in all the coalfields, and some of
the so-called Permian of the Warwickshire and Shrop-
shire areas may be of post-Carboniferous age, and
therefore unconformable to the Coal-measures.
The Lower Carboniferous rocks and Millstone Grits,
with a few exceptions, do not contain workable seams.
The chief coals are universally met with in the Middle
Coal-measures. The Etruria Marl, Newcastle, and
Keele groups are without workable seams. The cover-

--- Page Break ---
174 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
ing formations newer than the Carboniferous occur in
fullest sequence in the Yorkshire basin, but the Triassic
strata are thickest over the Cheshire and Staffordshire
basins.
The following table gives the sequence and maxi-
mum thickness of the Secondary rocks :
SECONDARY FORMATIONS OF THE MIDLAND BASIN.
Formations.
Cretaceous -
Jurassic: (a) Oolitic; (b) Liassic -
Trias and Rhaetic
Permian (Magnesian Limestone Series)
Thickness in Feet.
North-West
and Central.
Absent 2,000
Absent 3,300
4,000 1,100
300 to 2,000Absent
South-
East.
The thickness of cover of newer formations in the
north-west and central regions, therefore, amounts to
much the same as in the south-east. In the Yorkshire
basin the attenuation of the Triassic strata is counter-
balanced by the presence of the later Secondary
formations (Jurassic and Cretaceous), while the absence
of these over the Cheshire basin is equalized by the
greater thickness of the Permo-Triassic formations.
In the study of each coalfield it is evidently essential
to investigate
: (i) The Carboniferous sequence, the
occurrence of the chief seams of coal, and the means
of determining definite horizons ; (2) the structure
resulting from the post-Carboniferous but pre-Permian

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 175
earth-movements ; (3) the thickness and nature of the
secondary rocks surrounding the exposed coalfields.
Attention will be given to general stratigraphical and
palaeontological principles rather than to details.
North Staffordshire or Potteries Coalfield. This
triangular-shaped coalfield includes an area of about
100 square miles, and affords the type region for the
coalfields of the Midland basin, in which it occupies a
central position.
On the west, south-west, and south the Coal-
measures sink beneath the unconformable Triassic
covering. To the north and east the coalfield is
limited by the uprise of the Millstone Grits and
Lower Carboniferous rocks.
The structure of the main coalfield consists of a
shallow syncline to the east and a sharp anticline to
the west, the axes of the folds rising to the north,
and thereby causing the subdivisions of the Coal-
measures to crop out one after the other in this
direction, and to sink deeper and deeper to the
south.
Of the numerous faults traversing the coalfield, one
trending north-north-east and south-south-west, with a
throw to the west exceeding 700 yards, bounds the
anticline on the west. On the east the anticline is
limited by a fault having about the same amount of
throw, but in the opposite direction.
The chief seams of the Middle Coal-measures, which
crop out in the anticline, are in consequence depressed
to great depths on both sides of it.
The Carboniferous sequence is complete, and may be
subdivided as follows :

--- Page Break ---
176 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN NORTH STAFFORDSHIRE.
Divisions and Subdivisions.
(Keele Group
Remand-grey Newcastle Group^oi-ioc
1 rSeries. Etruria Marl Group
Thickness
Feet.in
700+
35
1,100
j
Black Band Group (Bassey Mine
Grey chief
j
Coal at base)
-
400
coal-bearing
-
Middle Coal -measure Series i
Series. /
(Winpenny Coal at base)
|
4.000
( Lower Coal-measure Series 1,200
Millstone Grit Series
Carboniferous
(Pendleside(Yoredale) Series
Series 1 Carboniferous Limestone
Other classifications, chiefly affecting the grouping
and nomenclature of the Grey chief coal-bearing Series
and the Red-and-grey Series, have been suggested, but
no uniformity has been arrived at.
The Lower Carboniferous rocks contain no workable
seams. In the Low
r
er Coal-measures two seams near
the base corresponding in position to the Mountain
Mines of Lancashire have been worked along the
eastern boundary.
The Middle Coal-measures contain the chief seams
in the following descending order : Great Row, Ash,
Moss, Yard, Four Feet, Five Feet, Ten Feet, Bowling
Alley, Holly Lane, Hard Mine, Seven Feet Bambury,
Eight Feet Bambury or Cockshead, Bullhurst, and
Winpenny.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 177
The Great Row Coal lies about 300 feet below the
summit of the Middle Coal-measures, and the Win-
penny between 3,000 and 4,000 feet below the summit
of the Middle Coal-measures, and about 1,200 feet above
the Millstone Grits.
Most of the seams average 6 feet in thickness, but
rarely attain a greater thickness than 8 feet. In the
Black Band Group three or more coals are worked in
conjunction with the valuable Black Band ironstones,
but the remainder of the Red-and-grey Series is barren,
except four thin coals in the Newcastle Group.
The great majority of the coals in the syncline are
used for house, steam, and manufacturing purposes,
but over the eastern anticlinal area many of these
seams are coking and gas coals, the change from one
class to another being very abrupt on approaching the
anticline.
Apart from the known order of the coals and the
occurrence of sandstones or other distinguishing rocks,
definite positions in the chief coal-bearing series may
be determined by the order of occurrence of the
estuarine Lamellibranchiata and the positions of marine
bands. While, however, the study of the occurrence
and distribution of the fossils undoubtedly possesses
much practical value, it is evident that both the
occurrence and distribution depend on the accident
of preservation and upon the prevailing local conditions
which were so variable throughout the Coal-measure
period. Thus, a palaeontological sequence holding good
for one district may not be strictly applicable in
another, and caution must be exercised in determining
horizons by means of fossil evidence alone.
Among the estuarine Lamellibranchiata it is asserted
12

--- Page Break ---
178 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
that the different species of Carbonicola (Anthracosia),
Anthracomya, and Naiadites (Fig. i, p. 59) make their
appearance in a definite order, attaining their maximum
development within certain limits, and that a species,
or an assemblage of species, may occupy restricted
horizons.
Anthracomya phillipsi, for instance, appears towards
the summit of the Middle Coal-measures, becomes
abundant in the Black Band Group, and dies out in the
Etruria Marl Group. Carbonicola subconstricta is re-
stricted to the roof of the Five Feet Coal. Anthracomya
adamsi is confined to the horizon of the New Mine
Ironstone 500 feet above the Ash Coal. An assemblage
of Naiadites carinata, N. modiolaris, N. quadrata, Anthra-
comya modiolaris, and A. williamsoni, characterizes the
roof of the Hard Mine Coal, and Carbonicola acuta var.
rhomboidalis the roof of the Eight Feet Bambury Coal.
Carbonicola robusta appears at the base of the Coal-
measures, attains its maximum development about the
horizon of the Eight Feet Bambury Coal, and does not
ascend above the Ten Feet Coal.
Marine fossils are met with at nine horizons in North
Staffordshire. They occur in bands generally only a
few feet in thickness, fairly evenly distributed in the
strata between the base of the Coal-measures, and
about 700 feet below the Bassey Mine Coal.
Lingula and Discina are common to all the horizons,
but three of the beds contain a distinctive fauna, and
have, moreover, been traced over considerable areas.
The lowest of these occurs above the Crabtree Coal,
and contains Pterinopecten papyraceus, Posidoniella Icevis,
Schizodus antiquus, and Gastrioceras listeri.
A bed above the Seven Feet Bambury Coal contains

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 179
the first two of these fossils, and, in addition, Myalina
compvessa and Glyphioceras paucilobum.
The most interesting bed is one a few feet below the
Twist or Gin Mine Coal, about 1,100 feet below the
Bassey Mine Coal and about 1,300 feet above the Seven
Feet Bambury Coal. The band is rich in genera and
species of Lamellibranchiata, Gasteropoda, and Cepha-
lopoda, of w^hich some characteristic shells are figured
on Fig. 2, p. 63, and also contains a rich and peculiar
fish fauna, including the rare genera, Edestits and
Listracanthus.
The Black Band Group bears a close lithological
resemblance to the grey measures below, in which divi-
sion it is usually included ; but the great profusion of
Anthracomya phillipsi in the Black Band ironstones, and
the occurrence of several bands of earthy limestones
with Spirorbis and Carbonicola vinti, distinguish it at
once from the beds below.
Excepting four thin seams in the Newcastle Group,
the Red-and-grey Series is apparently barren, but the
different groups may be satisfactorily recognized
by their individual lithological or palaeontological
characters.
The bands of green grits (Espley Rocks) are restricted
to the Etruria Marls, and form a reliable index of this
group.
The lithological characters of the Newcastle Group
somewhat resemble those of the Black Band Group,
but are on the whole more arenaceous. The absence
of the genus Carbonicola, and the restriction of the small
shell Anthracomya calcifera to the lower 60 feet of the
strata, readily distinguish the group from the rest of
the Coal-measure sequence.
12 2

--- Page Break ---
i8o GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
In the Keele Group the red sandstones and marls
taken as a whole are distinct from the red Etruria Marls,
and also from the red measures occasionally met with
in the chief coal-bearing series. Some bands are, how-
ever, lithologically indistinguishable from the older red
Coal-measures, and in the absence of fossil evidence
great caution must be used. The presence of Pecopteris
arborescens and the entire absence of Carbonicola and
Anthracomya are reliable data in assigning a group of
red measures to the Keele subdivision.
The Coal-measure strata of the Pottery Coalfield
contain abundant plant remains. Those in the Lower
Coal-measures differ from those of the Middle Coal-
measures, but on the whole the vertical distribution of
plants, with the exception of the restriction of Pecopteris
aborescens to the Newcastle and Keele groups, has less
practical significance to the miner than that of the
Lamellibranchiata.
The net available quantity of coal remaining un-
worked was estimated by the Commissioners in 1905
at 4,368,050,347 tons, including that of Cheadle and
Shaffalong. Of this large amount the chief supplies
lie beneath the Red-and-grey Series, different members
of which occupy the centre of the syncline, and spread
out in concentric layers along the southern margin of
the coalfield.
Since very little coal has been obtained from beneath
the red measures along the southern margin, the day
is probably far distant when any attempt will be
made to reach the deeply-seated seams beneath the
Trias.
To the west of the Boundary Fault, especially in
the north between Harecastle and Congleton, the case

--- Page Break ---
S.STAFFS. THE UPPER MEASURES
OF
CENTRAL ENGLAND.
N.STAFFS. Scfl/e _ Qne tnchf40OFt.
Summit
- not seen.
Spirorbi s.
RED MARLS
AND
ESPLEY ROCKS
FIG. 14. THE RED-AND-GREY SERIES OF THE MIDLAND BASIN.

--- Page Break ---
182 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COALMINING
is different. This large fault brings Trias and Middle
Coal-measures on the west against the lower seams on
the east. It would therefore appear feasible to drive a
heading from the lower seams on the east and reach
the higher seams on the west. The success of this
operation would depend on the throw of the Boundary
Fault, which is, however, unknown between Harecastle
and Congleton.
A nearly vertical 4yke of a close-grained basaltic
rock traverses the Triassic strata and the Keele sand-
stones between Swynnerton and Keele, but has not as
yet been encountered in any of the coal-workings.
The dyke is seldom more than a few feet wide, but
expands to a much greater width near Swynnerton
Park. The unweathered rock contains large pheno-
crysts of olivine, many of them ideally fresh, but show-
ing thin films of serpentine along cracks and on the
surfaces. There is no porphyritic felspar or augite.
The ground mass of the rock is made up of a granular
mixture of a purplish augite and lath-shaped crystals of
plagioclase felspar. Dark grains of iron oxide are
abundant, and there are a few long needles of apatite.
The date of the intrusion is undoubtedly more recent
than the Keuper Marl period.
The character of these newer intrusions should be
compared with those of the older intrusive rocks of the
Warwickshire Coalfield (p. 189).
Cheadle Coalfield. The folding of the Carboniferous
strata east of the Pottery Coalfield introduces the coal-
basins of Cheadle, Shaffalong, and Goldsitch Moss.
The Cheadle Coalfield is alone of importance. Except
on the south, the productive measures are here defined

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 183
by the outcrop of the Millstone Grits. The Coal-
measures have been subdivided into (i) Lowest Coal-
measures ; (2) the Woodhead Coal and Sandstone
Group ; (3) the Lower Pale Group, with the Rider,
Cobble, and Dilhorne coals; and (4) the Upper Pale
Group with several coal-seams, the Four Feet Coal
forming the base.
A marine band, rich in fossils, occurs between the
Four Feet Coal and the Dilhorne Coal, and another
forms the roof of the Crabtree Coal near the base of
the Coal-measures.
The fossils associated with the Crabtree are similar
to those in the roof shale of the same seam in the
adjacent Pottery and Shaffalong coalfields. The higher
marine band forms the roof of a thin coal 140 feet above
the Dilhorne or Six Feet Coal (1,400 feet above the
Crabtree Coal). The fossils include Pterinopecten papy-
raceus, Pt. carbonarim, Productus scabriciilus, Leiopteria
longirostris, Posidoniella Itzvis, P. sulcata, Lingula myti-
loides, Myalina compressa, Pleuronautilus, Dimorphoceras
gilbertsoni, Temnocheilus carbonarius, Gastrioceras carbon-
arium, Orthoceras, Bellerophon. This list forcibly recalls
the fossils obtained above the Gin Mine (p. 71) in the
Pottery Coalfield ; and the fossil band may be used as
a datum line in comparing the sequence of the Cheadle
Coalfield with that of the Potteries. It will also, no
doubt, prove of great value in the determination of
horizons met with in sinking in the unproved ground
to the south of the visible coalfield.
To what distance the Coal-measures are continued
beneath the Triassic rocks to the south is unknown.
The net available quantity of coal remaining un-
worked is estimated at 92,577,007 tons.

--- Page Break ---
184 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
South Staffordshire Coalfield. Including the
present extensions, the total area of this field is
estimated at 149 square miles.
The Coal-measure strata have been subdivided into
three groups known in descending order as :
(3) Upper
Division (Halesowen Sandstone Group); (2) Middle
Division (Brick-clay or Espley Group) ; (i) Lower Divi-
sion (Productive Coal-measure Group). The Lower
Carboniferous Rocks and the Millstone Grits are
absent, and it is doubtful if the Lower Coal-measures
are present except in the north.
The visible coalfield is divided by the Great Bentley
Fault into a northern and a southern section. In the
northern section the Lower Division reaches a thickness
of about 2,000 feet, and contains many workable seams.
The names of the seams vary from place to place. In
the Cannock district the chief coals in ascending order
are :
Deep, Shallow, Cinder, Bass, Yard, Old Park, Four
Feet, Five Feet, and Brooch, with a few thin upper
seams.
In the southern area the productive Coal-measures
diminish in thickness to between 500 and 600 feet,
and about fourteen seams of the northern district unite
to form a single seam, the famous Thick Coal, which
reaches 30 feet in thickness.
The South Staffordshire coals are suitable for house-
hold, smelting, and manufacturing purposes, but true
steam coals do not occur.
Very little attempt has been made to identify horizons
in the productive measures by means of the fossils.
Reliance has been placed, as usual, chiefly on the coal-
seams, of which the Brooch Coal affords an excellent
datum from its occurrence over the whole field, and

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 185
from the peculiar character and red colour of the over-
lying shales. Carbonicola robusta has been recorded
30 feet below the Deep Coal of Cannock and Rugeley.
Marine fossils were found 195 feet above the Thick
Coal at Hamstead; in the white ironstones between
Rowley Regis and Halesowen ; in the Pennystone Iron-
stones at Oldbury ; and below the Cannel Coal at
Cannock Chase.
Information about the fauna and distribution of these
marine bands is at present too scanty to warrant their
use in the determination of horizons.
The strata of the Middle Division, from 600 to
1,000 feet thick, cover a large area in the southern part
of the coalfield and a small area near Aldridge. The
green grits (Espley Rocks) are sufficiently distinctive to
assign the Brick-clay subdivision to the Etruria Marl
Group of North Staffordshire.
The Halesowen Sandstone Group, 500 to 600 feet
thick, only occurs in the southern section. It graduates
upwards into the red rocks of the so-called Permian, of
which the lower goo feet may certainly be compared
with the Keele Group. Similar red rocks are faulted
against the productive measures along the eastern and
western boundaries of the coalfield.
Three thin limestones with Spirorbis occupy definite
positions in the Keele Group.
Igneous intrusions in the Productive Coal-measure
Group occur in several districts, and form con-
spicuous hills in the Rowley Regis district. The rock
of Pouk Hill is a typical ophitic olivine dolerite, in
which the plagioclase felspar occurs in long prisms.
The augite, in the form of irregular grains, varies from
yellow to purplish brown, and is slightly dichroic.

--- Page Break ---
186 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Olivine is very abundant, and nearly, or even quite,
unaltered; but some of the crystals are partially ser-
pentinized along cracks and on the edges. Magnetite
is fairly abundant, and there are a few crystals of
apatite.
When in contact with a seam of coal the dark colour
of the rock changes into white, and is known as
'
white
trap.' Though the igneous intrusions spoil the coal
when in actual contact, such loss of good coal is usually
trifling, and the Thick Coal has been mined under the
dolerite of Rowley Regis.
The post-Carboniferous movements have given the
Coal-measure strata an anticlinal form. On the east
and west the visible coalfield is limited by the Eastern
and Western Boundary faults.
The cover of the productive measures consists of the
Middle and Upper Divisions of the Coal-measures, the
so-called Permian, and of the Bunter and Keuper
divisions of the Trias.
In the northern district a productive area of nearly
twenty square miles has been show
y
n to exist under
Cannock Chase beneath the overlying Bunter Pebble
Beds. At Essington the seams have been followed for
some distance to the west below the so-called Permian
and Pebble Beds, and a boring at Four Ashes has
proved Coal-measures under the Trias.
In the southern district shafts have been sunk to the
Thick Coal at Baggeridge, and the productive measures
proved in a boring at Claverley, five and a half miles
beyond the Western Boundary Fault. On the eastern
side of the coalfield the Thick Coal is worked at
Hamstead and Sandwell.
No development can be looked for along the southern

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 187
margin of the coalfield, for the coals rapidly deteriorate
and become worthless south of a line drawn from
Birmingham to Stourbridge, but workable seams have
been proved for limited distances, both east and west
of the Boundary faults.
In exploratory work in this area, the chief points to
be noted are the occurrence of marine and other fossils,
the Spirorbis limestones of the Keele and Newcastle
groups and the presence of the Espley Rocks.
The net available quantity of coal remaining un-
worked is estimated at 1,415,448,072 tons.
Warwickshire Coalfield. This lies between the
towns of Coventry, Nuneaton, and Tarnworth. The
Carboniferous succession is a replica of that of the
South Staffordshire Coalfield. In South Staffordshire
the so-called Permian occupies comparatively limited
areas ; in the Warwickshire Coalfield it covers a broad
expanse.
Including the so-called Permian, the Warwickshire
Coalfield has a superficial area equal to that of South
Staffordshire.
As in South Staffordshire, the Carboniferous Lime-
stone and Millstone Grits are absent, the productive
measures reposing directly, but unconformably, on
Cambrian strata.
The productive measures attain their maximum de-
velopment in the north, where the seams are also most
numerous. As the intermediate strata dwindle in thick-
ness to the south, some of the coals tend to unite and
form seams of exceptional thickness a feature also
common to the South Staffordshire and Leicestershire
coalfields.

--- Page Break ---
i88 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The chief coal-seams are, in ascending sequence
:
Bench, Double or Deep, Seven Feet, Slate, Ell, Bare,
Ryder, Two Yard, and Four Feet, distributed in the
north among 1,000 feet of strata. In the south the
Ryder, Bare, Ell, and Slate unite together and form the
compound Hawkesbury Seam.
The Middle Division of South Staffordshire is here
represented by the Nuneaton Clays, about 300 feet
thick ; the Upper Division by the Haunchwood sand-
stones and marls, about 400 feet thick ; and the Keele
Group, or so-called Permian, by a succession of red
sandstones and marls estimated at over 2,000 feet.
Even less than in South Staffordshire has any attempt
been made in this coalfield to distinguish definite posi-
tions in the sequence by means of the distribution of
the fossils.
In the productive measures the coals alone are used
to identify horizons ; the Seven Feet Coal has appar-
ently been identified over the entire field.
The Nuneaton Clays contain the characteristic Espley
Rocks ; the Keele Beds two or more Spirorbis lime-
stones.
The Coal-measures of Warwickshire lie in a broad
syncline. Along the eastern and north-western edges
the strata turn up rapidly, but become almost flat
towards the centre of the basin. The major syncline
is broken by an east-and-west anticlinal ridge in the
neighbourhood of Arley, where the Upper Division
Haunchwood Sandstones and marls rises to the
surface in the midst of a tract of red sandstones and
marls of the Keele Group.
Fault dislocations are of no great moment. The
coalfield is surrounded by Triassic rocks, but it is by

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 189
no means certain what is the relation of the Trias to
the higher strata of the so-called Permian, or how
much of the Permian may be of Triassic age and how
much is to be relegated to the Upper Coal-measures
(Keele Group).
At present it appears as if there were an exceptional
development of the so-called Permian in the Warwick-
shire district, but it may be found that much of it
appertains to the Trias and not to the Keele Group. In
other words, it was deposited on the eroded edges and
in the hollows of the Carboniferous strata, and not in
conformable sequence, as were the Keele beds, with
which the lower 700 feet of the so-called Permian
may be confidently correlated.
The coalfield is being developed under the so-called
Permian in the Arley district. Coal-measures have
also been proved in borings to the east of Coventry
and to the west at Four Oaks.
It would appear advisable, before making more
ambitious attempts at development in the Triassic
areas, to first determine the exact geological position
and character of the so-called Permian.
The Warwickshire Coalfield affords a field for the
study of igneous rocks newer than the Cambrian strata,
but older than the Carboniferous period. These in-
trusive rocks (often termed greenstones), in the form
of dykes, cut across the Cambrian quartzites and black
shales near Nuneaton. Porphyritic olivine is frequently
present, but always in the form of pseudomorphs. In
undecomposed specimens the hornblende is fresh and
brown in colour, but is frequently replaced by augite.
Orthoclase and plagioclase felspar are present. These
rocks are usually called diorites, and belong to a type

--- Page Break ---
igo GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
intermediate between the acid and basic igneous rocks.
When fresh they differ markedly in appearance from
the dolerites of later age, and differ also in containing
hornblende as an essential constituent.
Volcanic rocks older than the Cambrian quartzites
occur at Caldecote.
Leicestershire Coalfield. In South Staffordshire the
Coal-measures are found resting on a Silurian platform,
in Warwickshire on one of Cambrian age, the Carboni-
ferous Limestone and Millstone Grits being absent from
both.
In the Leicestershire Coalfield the sediments of the
Carboniferous were deposited in hollows worn in a plat-
form of rocks older than the Cambrian. These depres-
sions were deep enough to be within reach of the seas
of the Carboniferous Limestone and Millstone Grit
periods, and to have remained below sedimentation level
until late Coal-measure times. Whether at this period
the Leicestershire platform was elevated, or whether
the Upper Coal-measures were denuded before the
Trias was deposited, has not been demonstrated.
The coalfield, with an area of about thirty square
miles, is surrounded by Triassic rocks, under which the
productive measures form a concealed coalfield with an
estimated area of fifty-four square miles.
The Millstone Grits graduate upwards into the Coal-
measures, and what are considered to be the lowest
measures occupy the central portion of the field. They
contain no important seams, and are called the
'
Unpro-
ductive Series.' This series forms an anticline, the
axis of which ranges north-west and south-east through
Ashby-de-la-Zouch. On the west, separated by the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 191
Great Boothorpe Fault, lie the coalfields of Moira and
South Derbyshire.
The chief coals are, in ascending order: Kilburn,
Clod, Stanhope, Eureka, Stockings, Woodfield, Slate,
Main or Moira (14 feet average thickness), Five Feet,
Dickey Gobler, and Ell.
On the eastern side of the anticline the Coal-measures
are mainly hidden beneath the Trias, but seams are
worked in many collieries, and have been proved by
borings as far south as Hathern and Desford. This
district is known as the. Coleorton or Eastern Coal-
field, in which the coal-seams in ascending order are
Roaster, The Three Lounts, Main (6 feet average thick-
ness), Yard, and Slate.
The Leicestershire coals chiefly belong to the bitu-
minous types. The Main Seam in the eastern area is
a good steam coal, while in the western area the same
named seam is a free-burning house coal. It is here
made up of several layers of coal receiving different
names at the various collieries.
The determination of horizons and the correlation
of the seams by means of fossils has yet to be worked
out. Marine fossils are recorded from an unknown
horizon at Leather Mill, and from four different beds
between 453 and 663 feet depth below the Main Coal.
Among the freshwater Lamellibranchiata Carbonicola
acuta and Carbonicola aquilina, as in the other Midland
coal-basins, have a wide vertical distribution. Carboni-
cola robusta ranges from the Clod Coal to the Woodfield
Coal, and Carbonicola turgida from the Clod Coal to
above the Main Coal. Naiadites modiolaris has even a
wider vertical range.
The marine fossils include species of Pterinopecten,

--- Page Break ---
ig2 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Sanguinolites, Naticopsis, Gastrioceras, Glyphiocems, and
Orthoceras, but none of the bands so far discovered are
comparable in variety of fossils with that below the Gin
Mine Coal of North Staffordshire, or that between 600
and 700 feet above the Top Hard or Barnsley Coal of
the Nottinghamshire and Yorkshire Coalfield.
A considerable number of fossil plants has been
collected. These afford evidence that the strati-
graphical position of the Coal-measures at Ashby,
taken together, is lower in the sequence than that of
the measures proved in the eastern and western
districts, and that the measures of the eastern district
from the Main Coal down to the lowest seams worked
belong to the same horizon as those between the Main
Coal and the lowest seam worked in the western dis-
trict. The plant evidence, also, by the non-occurrence
of Pecopteris arborcscens, indicates the total absence of
Upper Coal-measures over the Leicestershire Coalfield.
At the Whitwick Colliery, and as far south as Ellis-
town, a sheet of dolerite overlies the Coal-measures.
It is 81 feet thick in the Whitwick Colliery, but thins
out towards the north-west and south, and is absent at
Snibston Colliery on the west, and at Nailstone and
Bagworth on the south. The molten rock came up
along the line of the boundary fault, andwhen in contact
with a coal-seam, the coal is found burnt to a cinder,
while the overlying Triassic strata do not appear to be
changed even when in actual contact. The intrusion,
then, is apparently earlier than the Trias period, but
later than the Middle Coal-measures, and is considered
to belong to the period of the higher Coal-measures.
When in contact with Coal-measure strata the rock is
altered into
'
white trap,' an igneous rock originally a

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 193
dolerite, but with the original minerals replaced by
carbonates and kaolin.
The mineralogical character of the Whitwick igneous
rock serves as a good example of the igneous intrusions
of doubtful age, which, while not more ancient than
the Middle Coal-measures, may yet be older than the
Trias. In the Whitwick rock the olivine grains are
rounded, passing into serpentine along the edges of the
crystals and in their centres. The augite forms large
ophitic plates, is of a purplish-brown colour, and
encloses many lath-shaped plagioclase felspars. Iron
oxides and apatite are present as accessory minerals,
and as secondary products there occur chlorite, serpen-
tine, analcime, and other zeolites.
This igneous rock should be compared with the
pre-Carboniferous diorites of the Warwickshire Coal-
field (p. 189), in order to appreciate the difference
between the mineral characters of the igneous rocks
older than the Carboniferous, and between those like
the Whitwick intrusion of doubtful Carboniferous age
and those of much later date. Hornblende, it will be
observed, is usually present in the pre-Carboniferous
intrusions.
On the west the Leicestershire Coal-measures pass
for an unproved distance beneath the Trias. To the
east they extend as far as the fault that runs from
Whitwick, by Thornton, to Desford.
Putting aside for the present the probability of there
being a buried coalfield along the Valley of the Soar to
the east of the Archaean rocks of Charnwood Forest,
what prospects are there, it may be asked, of the Coal-
measures extending westwards, beneath the Trias
towards the Valley of the Trent, south-westwards
13

--- Page Break ---
194 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
towards the Warwickshire Coalfield, and in a south-
easterly direction.
In the Netherseal Colliery the productive measures
are thrown down to the west by the Linton Fault.
Borings to the south-west show that the pre-Triassic
surface descends at an abrupt angle to the south-west,
and that the Triassic rocks shortly attain a thickness
of over 1,200 feet. Borings round Market Bosworth
prove that the pre-Carboniferous rocks rise up in this
direction, and that a ridge of older rocks separates the
coalfield of Leicestershire from that of Warwickshire.
The presence of a tongue of Coal-measures, extending
between Desford and the visible eastern coalfield, is
proved by several coal-shafts, but borings to the south-
west of Desford proved that only the Lower Carboni-
ferous strata lie between the Trias and the buried
ridges of the older rocks, and so the limits of the con-
cealed coalfield are fixed in this direction.
Due west of the coalfield, therefore, Coal-measures
exist, though at considerable depths. Southwards it is
evident that spurs of older rocks are concealed under
the Trias, between which coal-bearing strata may occur,
but the exact position of these buried coalfields can only
be proved by trials, as also can the extent of the Coal-
measures beneath the Trias. One fact is evident that
the pre-Carboniferous floor underlying the Triassic
rocks of Leicestershire is of great irregularity, and
presents a series of rocky ridges stretching northwards,
with intervening hollows in which the productive
measures may or may not be preserved. Individual
efforts to prove the sites of these buried hollows may
in some cases be successful, but co-operation and the
publication of the results obtained by separate under-

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 195
takings is needed before a reliable picture can be
figured of the configuration of the pre-Carboniferous
surface, or the extent to which the pre-Triassic surface
had suffered denudation.
On the east side of the Charnwood range borings
put down at Crown Hills near Leicester entered pre-
Carboniferous rocks. Of
1
two borings near Hathern, one
reached rocks older than the Carboniferous strata, and
another strata older than the Coal-measures. The
Leicestershire Coal-measures, it would therefore appear,
do not occur under the Valley of the Soar, and how far
to the east the productive measures exist remains to
be proved ; but a boring at Ruddington seems to show
that to the east of the Charnwood range the Lower
Carboniferous rocks form the first Carboniferous belt
underneath the Trias, but how wide the lower unpro-
ductive belt may be has not been ascertained.
Yorkshire, Derbyshire, and Nottinghamshire Coal-
field. This is the largest and, next to South Wales, the
most important coalfield in Great Britain, while the
concealed coalfield contains the largest reserve of coal
in the British Islands. In 1906 the output amounted
to about 60,000,000 tons, or nearly twice that of South
Wales.
The general Midland sequence of the Carboniferous
System is present, though the Upper Coal-measures
are for the most part concealed beneath newer forma-
tions, and the highest groups of these have only been
met with in a boring at Thurgarton.
Geologists are not generally agreed as to the nomen-
clature of the different divisions and subdivisions of
132

--- Page Break ---
196 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
theYorkshire Carboniferous sequence, but the following
classification has been generally adopted
:
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN YORKSHIRE.
Upper
Carbon-'
iferous
fKeele ^^,
Upper Coal-measures
I
Newcastle
P
(5oofeet + ) \^^1
Group
Middle Coal-measures (down to the
Silkstone Coal)
Lower Coal-measures (down to the
Rough Rock)
.Millstone Grits - ...
Feet.
Proved
only in
borings.
2,000 to
3,000.
1,200 to
i,600.
Lower [Yoredale Rocks, Limestone Shales, or
CarbonJ Pendleside Series -
iferous [Carboniferous or Mountain Limestone
Intrusive or contemporaneous igneous rocks are un-
known in the Coal-measures, though they are well
developed in the Carboniferous Limestone Series of
Derbyshire. They have not as yet been met with in
any of the coal-workings to the east of the coalfield ;
but there is no reason to suspect their entire absence,
since they are known to be present at Owthorpe to the
south-east.
The chief seams are confined to the middle division.
In the lower division the only coals of importance
occur towards the summit and base, the lower seam
being known as the Alton, Halifax Hard, or Gannister
Coal ; that towards the summit as the Beeston Coal in
Yorkshire and the Kilburn Coal in Derbyshire, though
it is uncertain if these two coals are on the same
horizon.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 197
The middle division contains a great number of
seams, the most important in ascending sequence being
:
Kilburn, Silkstone or Black Shale, Parkgate or Deep
Hard, Flockton or Deep Soft, Barnsley, Warren House,
or Top Hard.
Below the Barnsley Bed the seams are wonderfully
persistent, with the exception of the Kilburn, a noted
house coal, w
r
hich is essentially a Derbyshire seam.
Above the Barnsley Bed the coals, though numerous,
are generally impersistent, seldom exceeding 4 feet in
thickness, and usually of inferior quality. The best-
know
r
n seams in ascending order are : Rents Thick
or High Hazles, Wathwood or Clowne, Sharlston and
Shafton. The alternative names chiefly apply to the
Nottinghamshire district. Only a few of these seams
have been persistently worked over large areas in the
exposed coalfield, and scarcely at all in the deeper-
seated and concealed areas, though attention is now
being directed towards them.
The coals, according to the purposes for which they
are most suitable, are classed as House, Gas, Steam,
Manufacturing, and Coking, the term
'
steam
'
being
used in its strict sense for a coal good enough for use
on locomotives, steam-vessels, and in the Royal Navy.
The quantity of steam coal available in the proved
coalfield is estimated at 1,679,694,264 tons.
The Upper Coal-measures, so far as they have been
proved in borings, do not contain any workable seams.
Horizons in the Lower and Middle Coal-measures
can be often determined by the order of occurrence
and character of the coals, and by the lithological
character of the strata. The Lower Coal-measures
contain definite groups of sandstones and the Middle

--- Page Break ---
198 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Coal-measures more or less persistent beds of sand-
stone, which can be traced over wide areas in close
association with the coal-seams. The lithological
characters of the individual sandstones, however, are
not always sufficiently distinct to identify one from
another, so that greater attention must be given to
the fossils in the associated shales. So far the following
definite order of their occurrence has proved reliable.
The roof of the Alton Coal and Halifax Hard Bed
invariably contains Pterinopectsn papyraceus, Gastrioceras
listen, and Gastrioceras carbonarium in abundance.
Carbonicola robusla does not ascend above the Barnsley
Seam, and is most abundant in the measures between
the Silkstone and Deep Hard coals. It ranges, how-
ever, down to the Millstone Grits.
A marine band with Goniatites, Pterinopecten, Myalina,
and Productus lies 300 feet above the Deep Hard Coal
over the Chesterfield area, but has not been recorded
elsewhere.
Throughout the Derby and Nottingham Coalfield
two marine bands occupy definite positions in the
measures between the Top Hard (Barnsley) Coal and
the summit of the Middle Coal-measures. The lower
occurs from 100 to 150 feet above the Clowne Coal
(450 feet above the Top Hard), and contains a fauna,
including Syncyclonema carboniferum, Pseudamusiumfibril
-
losum, Pterinopecten papyraceus, Pt. carbonarius, Nucula,
Ctenodonta, numerous species of Goniatites and spines
of the rare fish Listracanthus wardi, and thus comparable
with that above the Gin Mine in North Staffordshire
(Fig. 2, p. 63). About 200 feet above this a blue shale
(bind) yields Lingula and Discina.
The corresponding position of these bands in the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 199
Yorkshire sequence has not been exactly denned, but
four marine bands have been found high up in the
measures between the Barnsley Coal and a sandstone
known as the Ackworth Rock lying above the Shafton
Coal. A very persistent bed, rich in fossils, lies
between 650 and 700 feet above the Barnsley Coal.
Anthracomya phillipsi (Fig. i, p. 59) is common in
the strata above the highest marine band, but does not
descend below the Top Hard Coal.
The Upper Coal-measures are only known to out-
crop, and then only the lowest portion of the lowest
group (Etruria Marls), in the neighbourhood of Conis-
borough, but the complete sequence has been met with
in a boring at Thurgarton, north-east of Nottingham.
In these measures the presence of Pecopteris arborescens
determines their age just asthe abundance ofA lethopteris
lonchitica (Plate IV., p. 55), in association withNeuropteris
gigantea and other forms, indicates a Middle Coal-
measure horizon for the grey measures down to the
Silkstone Coal.
The red rock of Rotherham must not be mistaken
for these red measures of the Upper Coal-measure
Series. It was formerly considered to belong to this
series, and even to be Permian, but it is now recognized
that the name has been applied to different beds of
reddish sandstones and shales occurring at different
horizons in the Middle Coal-measures.
The coalfield lies in a basin fold. The western and
small portions of the northern edges are exposed, but
the remainder is concealed beneath the newer rocks.
These steadily increase in thickness to the east and
south by the successive in-coming of the different layers
of the Mesozoic formations (p. 174). Beneath these the

--- Page Break ---
200 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Coal-measures are known to extend as far east as
Haxey and Scarle, and as far south as Owthorpe.
Thus an area of concealed productive measures, nearly
equal in extent to that of the exposed coalfield, has
been proved.
How much farther to the east and south-east the
Coal-measures continue has not been determined, but a
considerable east and south-east extension has been
postulated by Professor Kendall, who considers that
the eastern concealed margin lies in the neighbourhood
of the Louth anticline, and that the southern concealed
edge borders on the Fen country, thus.making the con-
cealed area about 3,885 square miles.
The eastern extension is based on the supposition
that the fold in the Secondary formations is of the
posthumous type, and that the Louth anticline marks
the uprise of an ancient ridge, against which the Coal-
measure strata rise up.
Outcrops of coal-seams on the bed of the North Sea
have also been supposed, from the abundant fragments
of coal dredged up from a trough, known as the
'
Coal
Pit,' fifty fathoms deep, and situated along the edge of
the Dogger Bank. There seems no evidence, however,
to justify the belief that this coal is derived from actual
outcrops, and it is considered that the fragments may
all have been swept from the numerous steam trawlers
in rough weather.
The south-easterly extension is based on the trend of
the Pre-Cambrian Charnian ridge which lies in this
direction, and also on the fact that subsequent folding
along this line may be regarded as the governing factor
in the deposition of the Carboniferous rocks, and later
formations up to the Cretaceous.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 201
The northern limit of this great coal-basin is based
upon the presence of an east-and-west anticlinal fold in
the Millstone Grits, against which the Coal-measures
in the visible coalfield rise up, and on the continuance
of this upward movement throughout the Jurassic
period and its continuance into Cretaceous times.
There appears, however, to have been either a cessation
of movement, or one in an opposite direction, during
the deposition of the Permian and Triassic strata, for
these rocks betray no signs of diminution in thickness
on approaching the Market Weighton anticline, as do
the Jurassic strata.
Over a great portion of the concealed coalfield the
chief seams must lie at great depths, owing to the
increasing cover formed by the Permian, Trias, Jurassic,
and Cretaceous formations, and the presence of the
Upper Coal-measures towards the centre of the basin,
north-east of Gedling. In the south and south-east,
however, not only does the Permian entirely disappear,
but the Trias rapidly diminishes in thickness, while
the Coal-measure strata rise to the south, and the
Upper Coal-measures are either absent or are of no
great thickness.
The importance of the area as a great national coal
reserve justifies the insertion of a few data as to the
proved depth to the productive measures beneath the
newer formations.
In the south, a boring at Edwalton, three and three-
quarter miles south-east of Nottingham, after pene-
trating a considerable thickness of Triassic strata, is
supposed to have entered the Coal-measures a few feet
below the Top Hard (Barnsley) Coal. At Ruddington,
situated west of Edwalton, the Trias was found resting

--- Page Break ---
202 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
on Coal-measure strata a few feet below the horizon of
the Kilburn Coal, or with the exception of the Alton
Coal below the horizon of the lowest w
r
orkable coal.
Unless the strata roll over to the west of Ruddington,
the productive measures must, therefore, be absent
beneath the Valley of the Soar (p. 195).
North of Nottingham City, numerous pits, extending
to Pontefract, prove the Barnsley Coal to lie beneath
the Magnesian Limestone at depths varying between
1,250 and 2,300 feet.
Within the outcrop of the Trias, which forms the
covering formation of the Magnesian Limestone, a shaft
at Bestwood, near Nottingham, reaches the Top Hard
Coal at a depth of 1,242 feet. At Scarle, north-east
of Bestwood, the Coal-measures were entered beneath
the complete Triassic sequence at a depth of 2,019 feet,
but opinions differ as to the horizon attained in the
Coal-measures. Since the core was only 0*9 inch in
diameter, and only about 10 feet of Coal-measure
strata were proved, positive evidence as to the horizon
attained in the Carboniferous sequence cannot be
said to have been satisfactorily determined. In the
Thurgarton boring, thirteen miles south-west of
Scarle, the Permian was found resting on the Keele
Group.
The shafts of the Mansfield Colliery prove the Top
Hard Coal at a depth of 1,577 feet, while the same
seam at the Manton Colliery, west of Retford, is at a
depth of 1,848 feet. Near Doncaster the Barnsley Coal
has been proved to lie between 1,700 and 1,900 feet
below the surface, and at Haxey (South Carr) this
seam is considered to have been reached at a depth
of 3,186 feet. A boring near Selby is considered to

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 203
have reached the Middle Coal-measures at a depth of
1,305 feet.
These explorations show a marked increase in the
thickness of the Permian and Triassic formations from
south to north and from west to east.
In the determination of horizon in the Coal-
measure sequence, reliance may be placed on the
position of the fossiliferous marine band between
600 and 700 feet above the Top Hard Coal. The
existence of the Upper Coal-measures in a boring will
be indicated by the presence of the green grits (Espley
Rocks) in the Etruria Marl Group, and of the fossil
plant Pecopteris arborescens in the Newcastle and Keele
Groups. When the Upper Coal-measures are proved
to be present, it may be concluded that the full thick-
ness of the Middle measures are present beneath them
unless cut out by faulting.
Lancashire Coalfield. This coalfield, with an area
of 217 square miles of exposed Coal-measures, ranks
next in point of size and importance to the Yorkshire
Coalfield. It contains some of the deepest workings
in the British Isles, coal being obtained at the Pendle-
ton Colliery, near Manchester, at a total depth from
the surface of 3,483 feet.
The Carboniferous formation here reaches its maxi-
mum development in the Midland basin. The Coal-
measures rest on the Millstone Grits (3,000 to 5,000
feet thick), and these in turn on the Lower Carbon-
iferous rocks several thousand feet thick.
The Coal-measures are usually subdivided into an
Upper, Middle, and Lower Series. The Upper Series,
containing purplish marls with thin limestones and

--- Page Break ---
204 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
shales (Ardwick Group), only crops out over a very
limited area in the Manchester district, but has been
met with in a boring to the west and in others to the
east. Since the series is conformable to the Middle
Coal-measures, it doubtless underlies the Permian and
Trias to the south of the main coalfield. It contains
no workable seams. The Middle Series (3,000 feet)
contains the chief coals, the base line being drawn at
the Arley Mine Coal. Beneath this comes the Lower
Series (2,000 feet) with the important Mountain Mines
towards the bottom.
The Mountain Mines consist of two seams: the
Upper Mountain Mine, from 14 to 16 inches thick, and
the Lower Mountain Mine (Gannister Coal), from
18 to 30 inches, lying from 60 to 75 yards below the
upper seam. These two coals tend to coalesce, and
undoubtedly represent the Halifax Hard and Halifax
Soft coals of Yorkshire.
In the Middle Series some of the seams, though
known locally under different names, extend throughout
the coalfield. Other seams, such as the famous Cannel
Mine, thin away in every direction from Wigan as a
centre. The Arley Mine, known also as the Orrell,
Four Feet, Royley, and Fulledge Main Coal (Burnley),
is universally present, and constitutes one of the chief
seams.
Between the Arley Mine and the succeeding Ince
Group of coals several seams of importance occur,
including the Cannel Coal of Wigan, a famous gas
coal, and the Wigan Nine Feet, or Trencher Bone of
Bolton, or the Roger Nine Feet of St. Helens.
The Ince Group at Wigan contains in ascending
order the Seven Feet, Four Feet, and Yard coals

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 205
corresponding to the Rams, Crumbourke, and Bin
coals of Bolton.
Between this last groupand the next important seam,
called the Worsley Four Feet (considered by some to
be the equivalent of the Parker Mine), a group of
barren strata intervenes, thick in the east but diminish-
ing to the west. Following the Parker Mine comes
another barren interval, and above this the Bradford
Four Feet Seam (formerly regarded as equivalent to the
Worsley Four Feet), succeeded at intervals by a few
seams, including the Charlotte and Openshaw Mines.
The strata of the Upper Series, beneath the Ardwick
Group, consist of grey measures with thin limestones,
attaining a thickness of over 600 feet around Man-
chester. They contain occasional Black Band iron-
stones, but no workable seams.
Among the fossils the following will be found to
serve a useful purpose in attempting to identify horizons
in the Coal-measures ; but except the band above the
Mountain Mines, the knowledge of the fossil sequence
is admittedly most imperfect.
The roof of the Upper Mountain Mine, or, as it is
sometimes called, the Bullion Coal, contains a marine
fauna, Goniatites and Pterinopecten. Carbonicola robusta
characterizes the Lower Series, but ascends some
distance above the Arley Mine. A bed with Lingula
and Goniatites occurs at some distance, not yet deter-
mined, above the Arley Mine. About 200 feet below
the Bradford Four Feet Coal, marine fossils, Ctenodonfa,
Nuculana, Pseudanmsium,among others, occur at Ashton-
under-Lyme, but have not been recorded in any of the
shaft-sinkings. Anthracomya phillipsi, frequently found
in great abundance, characterizes the Upper Series, and

--- Page Break ---
206 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
is a common fossil in the thin limestones and Black
Band ironstones.
The Coal-measures occupy a trough, closed on the
south and west by the Permian and Trias, and rising
on the north and east until the Millstone Grits are at
the surface.
Numerous faults traverse the South Lancashire Coal-
field, having a general north-west and south-east direc-
tion. A fault with an estimated downthrow of 1,000
yards forms the western boundary of the coalfield.
The Irwell Valley Fault, to the east of Manchester, is
also calculated to possess over 1,000 yards throw.
The Burnley Coalfield, to the north of the South
Lancashire field, is brought in by a synclinal fold.
The newer formations covering the Coal-measures
to the south and west are as follows :
fKeuper Marl.
Trias
-[ Keuper Sandstone.
[Bunter Sandstone and Conglomerate.
p
.
(Marl and Dolomites.
Q
\Sandstone (Collyhurst).
The area occupied by these formations, as well as a
great part of the exposed coalfield, is thickly covered
with Glacial Drift, which in many cases obscures the
outcrops, and often makes it difficult in the absence of
borings or sinkings to determine what strata lie imme-
diately beneath it.
The Trias increases in thickness westwards from
i,600 feet on the east to 2,300 feet near Liverpool,
reaching its maximum thickness in the south near
Northwich, where a boring failed to reach the base of
the Bunter at a depth of 2,610 feet. The Permian
marls and sandstones vary in thickness from nearly

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 207
2,000 feet at Heaton down to 280 feet near Leigh.
Besides the covering of red rocks, the unproductive
portion of the Upper Coal-measures must be taken into
account, and also the thick barren zone lying between
the Bradford Four Feet and the Parker Mine coals.
Reference has been previously made to the thick
deposits of Drift. To what extent these deposits conceal
the geology is shown by the boring at Heaton Park,
where these surface rocks are 143 feet thick, and rest
on 1,447 feet of Trias and Permian, whilethe capricious-
ness of their distribution is shown by the outcrop of
solid rocks a short distance to the south.
The borings put down in the search for coal along
the southern margin of the coalfield afford good
examples of the value of fossils in the determination
of horizon. Thus, in one of these borings, some red
sandstones and marls were found beneath the Permian
formation. These red beds closely resembled the
Keele Group of North Staffordshire, but were found
resting on grey measures containing Anthracomya
phillipsi in abundance, whereas if the underlying grey
strata appertained to the Newcastle Group, as they
would do if the red beds belonged to the Keele Group
(see p. 178), this fossil would not have been met with.
Moreover, Anthracomya phillipsi occurred in the red
measures, which indicates that they belong to an horizon
lower than the Keele and Newcastle groups, and are
most likely some portion of the Ardwick Series.
The net available number of tons remaining un-
worked is estimated at 4,238,507,727.
Denbighshire and Flintshire Coalfields. The Coal-
measure sequence in Denbighshire and Flintshire closely

--- Page Break ---
208 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
resembles that of Lancashire, but the Upper Coal-
measures the subdivisions of which may be grouped
as in North Staffordshire attain a fuller development,
the highest, or Keele Group (so-called Permian), coming
to the surface between Oswestry and Wrexham.
The Coal-measures rest on the Millstone Grits, and
these in turn on the Lower Carboniferous Strata. The
Coal-measures may be divided as follows :
THE UPPER CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN NORTH WALES.
Feet.
Keele Group
: Wrexham red sand-
stones and marls - 600+
Newcastle Group
:
Coedyrallt grey
r sandstones and marls, with Mor-
Upperuoal- laig Main Coals and Spirorbismeasures
(
Limestones 350
Etruria Marl Group
: Ruabon red
clays, with Espley Rocks and
Spirorbis Limestones -
840
Middle Coal- (Grey sandstones and shales, with
measures \ the chief coals - - 800
Lower Coal- fGrey sandstones and shales, with a
measures \ few thin seams - -
1,000
Millstone Grit Series.
The chief seams of the Flintshire Coalfield are :
Lower Four Feet, Main (7 feet thick), Brassy, Hollin,
and Four Feet coals ; of the Denbighshire Coalfield,
Main Brassy, Two Yard, Powell, Drowsalls, and some
higher sulphurous coals.
The Upper Coal-measures closely resemble those of
North Staffordshire, except for the greater number and
increased thickness of the limestones in the Ruabon
Clays. As in North Staffordshire, the lithological
characters of the groups are sufficiently distinctive.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 209
The Coal-measures dip sharply to the east or north-
east. Numerous faults cross the coalfields, one of
which, named the Wrexham Fault, was formerly con-
sidered to bound the Denbighshire Coalfield on the
east, but workable seams have now been proved to the
east or downthrow side.
Between Oswestry, and a little north of Wrexham,
the Bunter formation rests on the Keele Group, but in
Flintshire it appears to transgress on to the Middle
Coal-measures. Owing, however, to a thick covering
of sands and clays, belonging to the Glacial Epoch, the
boundary between the two formations has been imper-
fectly determined. The extent and depth of the con-
cealed Coal-measures, which undoubtedly exist to the
east of the Denbighshire and north of the Flintshire
Coalfield, can therefore only be determined by sinking
or boring through these glacial deposits.
At Sealands, in the Estuary of the Dee, two borings
put down within short distances of each other show
how very different results may be obtained. One boring,
half a mile south-east of Ferry Bank Farm, reached
the Main Coal at 376 feet depth ; while the other, less
than a mile farther east, failed to reach the Middle
Coal-measures at a depth of 1,632 feet, having pene-
trated 932 feet of New Red Sandstone and 700 feet of
Mottled Marls, with seven bands of limestone, presum-
ably belonging to the Ruabon Clay Group. These
diverse results forcibly illustrate the great unconformity
of the Trias, and show how essential it is, in explora-
tory work, to be able to distinguish the different mem-
bers of the Coal-measure sequence by the lithological
and palaeontological characters.
Scarcely any attempt has been made to identify

--- Page Break ---
210 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COALMINING
horizons by means of fossils, but the sequence of the
type region (p. 178) will serve as a reliable guide for
future workers.
The productive measures are probably continuous
across the broad basin of red rocks, extending from the
Denbighshire Coalfield to North Staffordshire, but are
beyond workable depths, since the Trias formation
exceeds 4,000 feet, and below this about 2,000 feet of
upper unproductive measures may be expected.
The net available number of tons remaining un-
worked is estimated at 1,736,467,829.
A small area of productive Coal-measures, partly
hidden under red rocks, exists in the island of Anglesey,
and a few seams were formerly worked.
Shrewsbury and Le Botwood Coalfields. Coal-
measure strata with a few impersistent seams rest
unconformably on the edges of Pre-Cambrian and older
rocks along the southern margin of the Cheshire basin
south of Shrewsbury. The presence of bands of Spirorbis
limestone and the passage upwards of these coal-bearing
strata into the so-called Permian (Keele Group) places
them in the Upper Coal-measures. These upper
measures must either have overlapped the Middle Coal-
measures, or, as is more likely, they were deposited in
a hollow which was not depressed until Upper Coal-
measure times. The existence of the productive
measures beneath the so-called Permian, or beneath
the overlying Trias, is therefore problematical.
Coalbrookdale Coalfield. The Middle or Grey
Coal-measures follow in conformable succession upon
the feeble representatives of the Millstone Grits and
Carboniferous Limestone. They are separable into

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 211
two divisions a Lower Series about 400 feet in thick-
ness containing the chief coals ; and a Higher Series
about 400 feet thick with only thin seams, and passing
upwards into the Permian of Pemberton.
In the Lower Series the coals, all of a bituminous
character, occur in the following ascending order :
Clod, Best, New Main, Flint, Top, and Fungous.
The measures associated with the Pennystone Iron-
stones, 300 feet below the Fungous Coal, contain a
rich molluscan fauna, and afford an important marine
horizon in the coalfield.
The Higher Series of red and grey marls, grey sand-
stones and shales, with a band of Spirorbis limestone,
rests on an eroded surface of the Lower Series. This
relationship is locally known as the Symon Fault.
The Coal-measure strata dip as a whole to the east,
passing in this direction beneath a broad band of red
rocks (so-called Permian), but there is some uncertainty
as to whether these red rocks belong to the Keele
Group or are of later age. In the north-west the
Coal-measures are faulted against Triassic strata. To
the south they rest on Old Red Sandstone or Silurian
strata.
Forest ofWyre Coalfield. Relatively unimportant
as a coal-producing area, this coalfield illustrates the
filling up of an irregular pre-Carboniferous hollow by
Coal-measures. The Lower Series, containing the
Sweet Coals of Highley and Kinlet, occupies the
deeper portions of the hollow. The strata never crop
out, as they are overlain by the Higher Series (Sulphur
Coal Group), which dips eastward under Triassic strata
and to the west and south-west rests on Old Red
142

--- Page Break ---
212 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Sandstone, overlapping the edges of the Sweet Coal
Group, so that this does not crop out. The red strata
at the summit of the Higher Series undoubtedly belong
to the Keele Group, and contain Spirorbis limestones,
and at least one thin seam of coal.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XII
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN NORTHERN
PROVINCE, INCLUDING IRELAND
ON crossing the Wharfe anticline, the Lower Carboni-
ferous rocks to the north gradually assume different
lithological characters. The massive Carboniferous
Limestone becomes split up by the intercalation of
shales and sandstones ; coal-seams make their appear-
ance, increasing in thickness and quality until, in
Northumberland, they become workable.
The Limestone Shale, or Pendleside Group, either
thins out or, by the development of limestone bands,
becomes indistinguishable from the Carboniferous Lime-
stone Series, and, under the name of
'
Yoredale Group,'
has been placed with this series.
The Pennine uplift extends northwards across the
Wharfe anticline, and continues to be the dominant
structural feature separating the Northumberland and
Durham coalfields on the east from that of Cumber-
land on the west.
Igneous rocks, contemporaneous with or intrusive
into the Coal-measures, rare or absent in the Southern
and Midland provinces, are of frequent occurrence in
the northern coalfields, but do not seriously interfere
with mining.
213

--- Page Break ---
214 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Cumberland Coalfield. The Coal-measures rest on
representatives of the Millstone Grits, and these again
on the Carboniferous Limestone Series, which contain
a few thin coals.
The Coal-measures have been divided into :
(3) An
Upper Series, consisting of reddish sandstone (White-
haven Sandstone) and shales, with a band of Spirorbis
limestone, considered to be unconformable to the pro-
ductive measures; (2) a Middle Series, with seven
workable seams, of which the most important in
ascending sequence are the Main Band (9 feet thick),
Bannock Band, Cannel or Metal Band ; (i) a Lower
Series, with five inferior coals.
The determination of definite horizons by fossil
evidence has not been attempted.
The Coal-measure strata are inclined to the west and
north-west, and are crossed by many large faults, which
do not affect the overlying Permian and Triassic forma-
tions that form the cover on the south and north-
west.
Extensions of the coalfield may be looked for sea-
wards, and beneath the Secondary rocks of the Carlisle
basin to the north-west. On the northern margin of
this basin the Coal-measures have been proved at
Canonbie. The district is a highly faulted one, and
the productive measures appear to be overlain by a
great thickness of Upper Coal-measures.
Ingleton Coalfield. At Ingleton, in the West Riding
of Yorkshire, a small area of productive Coal-measures,
forming an isolated coal-basin partly hidden in the
central area beneath the Permian, and for the most
part covered by Glacial Drift, occurs on the south-west

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 215
Ntwer Rocks.
UpperCarboniferous
LowerCarboniferous
OlderRocks.
Iinch ~ about-25mi/es.
FIG. 15. THE COALFIELDS OF NORTHERN ENGLAND.
or downthrow side of the Dent Fault. The coalfield
is divided by the River Greete into a northern and a
southern district. Coal-mining on a limited scale has.

--- Page Break ---
216 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
taken place in the southern field, and boring is in pro-
gress north of the Greete.
The Coal-measures consist of an upper series of red
sandstones and clays without coal-seams, and of a
lower grey series containing two or three workable
seams. Near Bentham some seams lying either in the
Lower Millstone Grits or upper part of the Carboni-
ferous Limestone Series were formerly worked. The
limits of the basin are clearly defined as regards the
Coal-measures, so there can be no large extension,
though the field may attain a local importance.
Northumberland and Durham Coalfield. The coal-
bearing strata of this well-known coalfield may be
divided into two series that of the Upper Carboni-
ferous rocks, comprising the Coal-measures and Mill-
stone Grits, and that of the Lower Carboniferous rocks,
including the seams contained in the Carboniferous
Limestone Series.
The complete Carboniferous sequence is as follows :
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN NORTHUMBERLAND.
Feet.
/Upper Coal-measures (?) 900
Upper Middle Coal-measures (Brockwell Coal
Carbon- -I at base)
-
2,000
iferous Lower Coal-measures 150
[Millstone Grits - - -
400
(
I
Shales and thin coals ;
Lower Bernician J Limestones, shales and
Carbon- -
( coals - -
2,000
iferous Tuedian: Conglomerateand grits (with-
out coals) 1,200
The coals of the Bernician Series in Northumber-
land are less persistent than those in the Coal-measures,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 217
but increase in number and thickness going from south
to north.
The Fells Sandstone forms the base of the Bernician
coal series. Between this and the Dun Limestone,
500 feet above the Fells Sandstone, there lies the im-
portant group of seams known as the Scremerston
coals. These range from 2 feet 2 inches to as much
as 5 feet in thickness, and, in ascending order, include
the Wester, Cooper Eye, Three -Quarters, Bulman,
Hardy, Blackhill or Scremerston Main, and Fawcett
coals.
Above the Eehvell Limestone, 400 feet above the
Oxford Limestone and about 800 feet above the Dun
Limestone, is a well-known seam of the central district
called the Shilbottle Main Coal. A seam worked ex-
tensively in the Tyne Valley, and known as the Little
Limestone Coal, lies above the Dryburn Limestone,
and forms one of a group,named the
*
Lickar coals.'
Two seams, known as the Cowden and Gunnerton
coals, occur below the horizon of the Shilbottle Main
Coal in the Belsay district. In Tynedale, below the
Scar Limestone, seams are worked under the name of
Lewisburn, Splint, Shilburnhaugh, Greeneyes, Plashetts,
and Thirty-Inch coals in ascending sequence.
The quantity of coal down to a depth of 2,000 feet
remaining unworked in the exposed Bernician Series
is estimated at 1,523,750,000 tons, and that in the
same series concealed beneath the Coal-measures at
305,041,668 tons, in seams from one foot in thickness
upwards, after deduction is made for the amount not
able to be worked.
Numerous dykes of basalt, with a general north-
north-east and south-south-west trend, traverse the

--- Page Break ---
2i8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Lower Carboniferous rocks, and some of them extend
into and cut across the Coal-measures. The Great
Whin Sill is an intrusive sheet of basalt which has
forced its way sometimes along the bedding planes of
the Carboniferous rocks and sometimes across them.
The amount of coal lost by the destructive action of
this igneous material is seldom great.
The Millstone Grits and Lower Coal-measures con-
tain a few thin workable seams.
The Coal-measures cover an area of about 800 square
miles. They extend seawards, and are considered to
be workable for a distance of three miles eastwards
from the coast-line.
Twenty-three seams out of a total of sixty are
regarded as workable. In ascending order the chief
seams are: The Brockwell (Denton Low, Low or Main),
Three-Quarter, Five-Quarter, Low Main ofNorthumber-
land and Hutton Seam of Durham, Bensham or Maudlin,
High Main (Wallsend). These range from 3 to 7 feet
in thickness, and are mostly of the bituminous type,
the field being especially famous for its house and gas
coals.
The structure of the coalfield is that of an irregular
basin, with its axis directed north and south. The
strata rise at a fairly constant angle to the north-west,
but flatten out eastwards, and in some cases rise towards
the surface. The basin structure is interrupted on the
south by the Butterknowle Fault, with an upthrow to
the north of 80 to 140 yards.
West of the main coalfield, and extending into
Cumberland, limited areas of Coal-measures occur on
the downthrow side of the Stublick Dyke Fault, form-

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 219
ing the small coalfields of Stublick, Plainmellor, Coan-
wood, and Midgeholme.
South of Tynemouth the Coal-measures disappear
beneath the Magnesian Limestone Series. The two
formations are quite discordant, and it is evident that
the earth-movements affecting the older strata were
almost completed in pre-Permian times. Thus, the
fault known as the go-fathom dyke possesses a throw
of only a few feet in the Magnesian Limestone. Con-
siderable areas of the coalfield are thickly covered by
Glacial Drift, which frequently fills up and conceals the
pre-Glacial hollows and valleys, as in the case of the
'
Team Wash,' which is an old valley between the
Tyne and the Wear, fifteen miles wide, and in places
filled to a depth of 300 feet with gravel and clay,
against which the coal-seams abut.
The Coal-measures are rich in fossils, but the coal-
field has not been systematically zoned, or the fossils
as a whole collected with this object in view. Dis-
tinctive fossil horizons appear to be: (i) A band with
Carbonicola robusta in the roof of the Brockwell Seam ;
(2) a marine bed with Cephalopoda, 888 feet below the
Hutton Seam ; (3) a marine bed with Brachiopoda,
17 feet above the Five-Quarter Coal ; (4) the Zone of
Anthracomya phillipsi in the highest visible measures.
In Northumberland the Coal-measures down to a
depth of 2,000 feet contain an available supply of
3,680,833,973 tons. Of this quantity, 1,112,910,292 tons
lie beneath the bed of the North Sea. In Durham,
down to a depth of 3,000 feet, 4,401,087,735 tons remain
available under the mainland, and 870,028,611 tons
under the sea.

--- Page Break ---
220 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
SCOTLAND.
The coalfields of Scotland occur in about a dozen
more or less separate basins, occupying the central low-
^-1NewerRocks.
UpperCarboniferous
LowerCarboniftrous.
mWderRocks.
/nch= about 25 mites.
FIG. 16. THE COALFIELDS OF SCOTLAND.
lands and stretching from the Firth of Clyde to the
Firth of Forth. Numerous coal-seams occur in the
Lower as well as in the Upper Carboniferous Series,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 221
more than one-quarter of the coal still remaining to be
worked lying in the Carboniferous Limestone Series.
The original area over which the Carboniferous
strata were deposited lies between the Ochil and
Lennox Hills on the north, and the Lammermuir and
Southern Uplands of Ayrshire on the south. Owing
to earth-movements in operation during the Carboni-
ferous period, the sediments were deposited in an
irregular manner, and it is a matter of speculation as
towhat extent these separate coal-basins were originally
connected, and how much of their present isolation has
been brought about by post-Carboniferous folding and
denudation. It is, however, usually considered that
the Upper and Lower Carboniferous strata once con-
tinuously covered an area of 3,600 square miles, which
has been reduced by subsequent denudation to about
1,680 square miles.
The complete Carboniferous succession in Scotland
is as follows :
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN SCOTLAND.
Feet.
j
Red sandstone and shales - 600
Coal-measures
-[
Upper Coal Series 300
[Lower Coal Series -
800-1,500
Millstone Grits : Roslin Sandstone or Moorstone
Rock - -
0-700
Carboniferous
(
Upper Series of limestones
Limestone
j Sandstone, shales and coals
Series (Lower Series of limestones
Calciferous Sandstone Series : sandstones and
conglomerates
Old Red Sandstone.

--- Page Break ---
222 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The term Lower Coal-measures is sometimes, though
erroneously, applied in Scotland to the coal-bearing
portion of the Carboniferous Limestone Series, while
the measures above the Millstone Grits are frequently
alluded to as Upper Coal-measures. The equivalent
of the Upper, Middle and Lower Coal-measures of
England are, however, the coal-bearing strata above
the Roslin Sandstone, while the Carboniferous Lime-
stone coals of Scotland are unrepresented in England
south of the Wharfe anticline. The Lower Carbon-
iferous rocks of the Midland and Southern provinces,
as before mentioned, contain no workable seams.
Mr. Kidston considers that in Scotland the coal-
bearing strata above the Roslin Sandstone include the
representatives of the Lower Coal-measures (Lanarkian)
and the Middle Coal-measures (Westphalian).
The overlying red sandstones and shales w
r
ith the
Spirorbis limestones of Fife and Midlothian have been
grouped with the Upper Coal-measures of England ;
but this correlation, resting solely as it does on partial
lithological resemblances, has not been generally ac-
cepted, the red measures being placed in the Middle
subdivision of the English Coal-measures.
The palaeontology of the Carboniferous formation of
Scotland has been examined in much detail.
A distinct subdivision of the Carboniferous sequence
into an Upper and Lower portion has been established
on the evidence of the vertical distribution of the fossil
plants and fishes. The species, and in many cases the
genera, found in the strata below the Roslin Sandstone
are distinct from those met with above it. The vertical
distribution of the mollusca, however, differs from that
of the English Carboniferous Series. On the whole,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 223
the genera and species tend to appear lower down in
the sequence in Scotland, and such genera as Carboni-
cola and Anthracomya, unknown below the Millstone
Grit in England, are found in the Carboniferous Lime-
stone Series. Whether the distribution of the mollusca,
marine or estuarine, will serve the same useful purpose
in the determination of horizon in Scotland as it does
in England remains to be proved. It is, however,
certain that the order of their appearance is somewhat
different among the Carboniferous rocks of Scotland.
Igneous intrusions, in the form of dykes and sills
rarely met with in the Carboniferous formation of
England, except in Northumberland and among Lower
Carboniferous rocks of Derbyshire, are very general in
Scotland, and especially in Ayrshire.
The coalfields of Scotland are those of Ayr, Lanark
(including the Douglas Coalfield), Renfrew, Dumbarton,
Stirling, Linlithgow, Clackmannan, Midlothian, Fife,
and the Firth of Forth, the most important being Mid-
lothian, Lanark, and Fife.
In Ayrshire the Coal-measures and Lower Car-
boniferous rocks, though occupying considerable areas,
are poor in coal, and much intruded into by igneous
material. Occasionally, as at Guilt and Gosswater,
pockets of thick coal have resulted from the union of
two or more seams. The coals are generally bituminous,
with a high percentage of volatile matter, but are some-
times locally converted by igneous intrusions into
varieties of steam coal and anthracite.
Midlothian Coalfield. The Carboniferous rocks
here lie in a trough sunk in the Old Red Sandstone of
the Pentland and Lammermuir Hills. In the centre of

--- Page Break ---
224 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
the basin the coals lie nearly horizontal (Flat Coals) ;
at the margins they are highly inclined (Edge Coals).
The Flat Coals occur at the surface in the Coal-
measures and the Edge Coals in the Carboniferous
Limestone Series, but traced from the outcrop towards
the centre of the basin, the Edge Coals, from being
nearly vertical, become inclined at i in 10, and ultimately
become horizontal (Fig. 17).
a o a
FIG. 17. SECTION ACROSS THE MIDLOTHIAN COALFIELD.
(e) Coal-measures with Flat Coals ; (d) Roslin Sandstone ; (c] Car-
boniferous Limestone Series with Edge Coals ; (b) Calciferous
Sandstone Series ; (a) Old Red Sandstone.
In the Carboniferous Limestone Series the seams
deteriorate rapidly in thickness and quality towards
the south, a united thickness of 100 feet in the north
being reduced to a few thin seams of poor quality in
the south.
In the north the coals can be grouped according to
their occurrence in relation to the limestone bands.
Between No. 6 and No. 5 limestones at the top of the
sequence the seams are all thin ; between No. 5 and
No. 4 limestones two seams occur, averaging 2 feet in
thickness; between No. 4 and No. 3 limestones over
twenty seams are met with, the most important of these

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 225
being the Great Seam and Stairhead Coal. The coals
between No. 3 and No. 2 limestones are unimportant,
and the North Greens is the only seam of any conse-
quence between No. 2 Limestone and No. i, or Index
Limestone.
The Carboniferous Limestone coals usually contain
bands of cannel, amounting, in the case of the Great
Seam, to over 2 feet in thickness.
In the Coal-measures the seams are thicker and
more numerous in the west than in the east, and, like
the seams in the Carboniferous Limestone Series,
deteriorate south of the Sheriffhall Fault, which
traverses the coalfield from east to west between Dal-
keith and Gilmerton. This fault introduces the highest
measures, the red sandstones and clays of Dalkeith
Park, formerly thought to be equivalent to the red
clays Etruria Marls (p. 176) of the Midland coal-
basin in England, but now usually referred to the
Middle Coal-measures.
The chief seams in ascending order are : Seven
Feet, Fifteen Feet, Nine Feet, Jewel, Diamond, Beefie,
and Splint ; and in the south a seam known as the Great
Seam (not to be confounded with the seam bearing the
same name in the Carboniferous Limestone Series)
occurs towards the top of the exposed measures, and,
though of poor quality, can be economically worked.
A nearly continuous section between the lower part of
the Coal-measures and No. 6 limestone is exposed on
the foreshore at Joppa. At Musselburgh, on the east
side of the basin, a marine band, apparently absent at
Joppa, is found some distance above the Millstone
Grits. With the exception of these shore sections and
those in a few quarries inland, the Coal-measure strata
15

--- Page Break ---
226 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
are rarely visible, being hidden for the most part under
Glacial Drift. Towards the centre of the basin the
banks of the Esk afford good sections of the highest red
measures.
Fife Coalfield. With an area of 170 square miles,
this coalfield extends east and west parallel with the
Forth River and Firth of Forth. Along the northern
boundary, faults introduce lower formations. To the
west the coalfield joins that of Alloa, and on the
south unites itself with the Carboniferous strata of
Linlithgow and Midlothian. Seawards its limits are
not definitely known.
The area around Dunfermline furnishes the type
region of the Carboniferous Limestone coals, the chief
seams in ascending sequence being the Dunfermline
Splint, Five Feet, Lower and Upper Eight Feet,
Swallow Drum, and Six Feet.
The Dunfermline Splint yields a house and first-class
steam coal, with a carbon percentage of 81.
The Coal-measure coals are chiefly confined to the
sea border around Dysart and Leven. A coast section
shows seventeen seams, giving a thickness of over 74 feet
of coal. The workable seams from below upwards are
Dysart Main, Earl's Parrot, Chemiss, Coxstool, and
Barncraig.
A large quantity of coal lies beneath the Firth of
Forth, but how much of this is obtainable depends to
some extent on the character of the rocks beneath the
sea sands. If these prove to be of impervious boulder
clay, such as occurs over the workings opposite Bowness,
it is reasonable to estimate that, within the three-mile
limit, coal could be worked beneath the Firth to the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 227
extent of 1,000,000,000 tons. It is calculated that the
lower seams underlie an area of thirty-nine square miles
at a depth not exceeding 4,000 feet, and that the upper
seams extend over an area of fifty-eight square miles.
Lanarkshire Coal-basin. Famous for its black
band ironstones and the boghead coals of Armadale
and Torbanehill, this coal-basin forms the chief coal-
producing area in Scotland, and embraces the coalfields
of Glasgow, Lanarkshire, and Linlithgowshire. Asmuch
as 95 per cent, of the coal output comes from the
Coal-measures obtained from 250 collieries, while only
fourteen collieries work the seams in the Carboniferous
Limestone Series.
The Coal-measures rest on the representative of the
Roslin Sandstone with the Carboniferous Limestone
Series below. At Hamilton and Bothwell, situated in
the deepest portion of the basin, the Coal-measures are
overlain by red sandstones, once believed to belong to
the Old Red Sandstone, but now proved to be of Coal-
measure age.
Among the Coal-measures, the Drumgray, Kiltongue,
Virtuewell, Splint, Main, and Ell seams are the most
important.
The well-known boghead gas coal or Torbanehill
cannel coal, now nearly exhausted, proved to be of very
irregular occurrence, seldom exceeding a few inches in
thickness.
Argyll and Sutherland Coalfields. A limited area
of Carboniferous rocks occurs on the west coast of
Kintyre at Machrihanish Bay. The seams are eight
in number, the two lowest being 12 and 8 feet thick
respectively. Three seams of anthracitic coal have
152

--- Page Break ---
228 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
been found at the north end of Arran, and may form
a continuation of the Ayrshire Coalfield. In Suther-
land there is a limited area of Oolitic and Jurassic
coals along the sea-coast at Brora. The chief seam is
the Main Coal ; another below it, named the Parrot
Coal, is a shaly coal of inferior quality.
The net available quantity of coal remaining un-
worked in Scotland is estimated at 15,681,456,356 tons.
IRELAND.
A geological map shows that the greater part of
Ireland is largely composed of Lower Carboniferous
strata resting on older formations. Coal-measures are
represented in small detached areas in the north, and
to a larger extent in the south.
The north-east and south-west structural lines deter-
mining the orientation of the coalfields in the Northern
Province of Great Britain extend across the North
Channel into Antriin and County Mayo, and the east
and west tectonic lines of the Southern Province are
continued across St. George's Channel into Queen's
County, Limerick, Cork, and Kerry.
Coal-measures are found within the folds belonging
to these general lines of structure, but the equivalents
of the Coal-measures of the Midland Province of
England have been entirely swept away, if, indeed,
they ever existed over Central Ireland.
Concurrently with the distribution of the Carbon-
iferous rocks the seams vary in character. In the north
they are bituminous, and are found in the Lower
Carboniferous strata as well as in the Upper Carbon-
iferous. In southern Ireland the seams are semi-
bituminous or anthracitic, and belong to the upper

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF GREAT BRITAIN 229
division of the Carboniferous, agreeing both in age
and character, though much less developed, with the
coals of South Wales.
The area of the productive Lower Carboniferous
measures in northern Ireland, excepting possible ex-
tensions under the newer formations of Antrim, is of
limited extent, while in Munster, where the Upper
Carboniferous formation attains its greatest develop-
ment, it is the lower or least productive subdivision
that forms the greater part of the coalfield.
The extent of the coalfields of Ireland has been
estimated at 79,090 acres, and the total coal tonnage
at 204,107,700, or under 3,000 tons per acre that is,
less than the quantity contained in an acre of coal
3 feet in thickness. Between 1880 and 1892 the pro-
duction amounted to 2,542,000 tons, an average of
110,521 tons per annum. In 1905 the output fell short
of 100,000 tons.
Black shales, but containing impure, earthy lime-
stones (calp), met with in the Lower Carboniferous
rocks, so closely resemble the productive Coal-measures
that they are still frequently mistaken for them ; but
they may be readily recognized by the presence of
Posidonomya becheri, Goniatites of a Lower Carboni-
ferous facies and other Lower Carboniferous fossils.
The principal Irish coalfields are those of West
Munster, East Munster, Leinster, Connaught, and
Tyrone of Upper Carboniferous age, and the small
coalfield of Ballycastle belonging to the Lower Carbon-
iferous formation.
In point of size the West Munster Coalfield is the
largest, but the lowest measures (marine), rarely con-
taining coals over 2 feet in thickness, occupy the

--- Page Break ---
230 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
greatest area. The highest measures in the Black
Water Valley and County Cork contain two coals at
the summit, known as South or Harris's Bulk Vein,
and the Bulk Vein, from 5 to 7 feet in thickness, re-
sulting from the union of two or more seams.
In East Munster the highest measures are estimated
to be 1,300 feet thick, containing the Clashacona and
Parknaclea seams at the top. The first-named,
averaging 2 feet in thickness, is described as a good
anthracite, but with a bad roof. The Parknaclea Coal,
4 feet thick, has been exhausted. In Leinster the
highest measures are considered to occur in the Castle-
comer Coalfield, which contains five seams, giving a
total thickness of 9 feet of coal, distributed through
700 feet of strata. Between this coalfield and the
districts of Coolbaun and Newtown is a fault with an
upthrow west. Five seams are recognized at Coolbaun
and Newtown, the best known being the Jarrow Coal,
varying in thickness from 3 inches to 6 feet. Numerous
fossils have been obtained from a thin band of car-
bonaceous shale forming the roof.
The chief coalfields of County Tyrone are those of
Dungannon and Coal-island, containing several seams,
among which are the Annagher Coal (7 to 9 feet),
the Blackaveel Coal (5 feet), the Derry Coal (4 feet
6 inches), and the Drumglass Main Coal (4 feet).
Very little coal-mining is at present being carried on in
this district.
The Coal-measures of Ballycastle, County Antrim,
are compared with the Edge coals of the Lower Car-
boniferous rocks of Scotland. Three seams were
formerly worked, but the coalfield is now regarded as
practically exhausted.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XIII
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE
THE chief coals on the Continent are of Carboniferous
age, but coal is also met with in large quantities, though
of inferior quality, in the Mesozoic and Tertiary forma-
tions.
In western Europe the distribution of the Carbon-
iferous rocks has been chiefly determined by the two
great earth-movements known as the Armorican and
Hercynian disturbances.
The Armorican uplift resulted in the formation of
mountainous ridges,stretching in a general east-and-west
direction from Armorica to Bohemia, and of correspond-
ing depressions in the north. In these hollows, towhich
the Carboniferous sea had access, the Carboniferous
Limestone (Dinantian) and the Coal-measures (West-
phalian stage) were laid down in Germany, Belgium,
and northern France, but no deposition took place over
the elevated regions to the south.
Succeeding the Armorican uplift, the Hercynian
movement reversed the prevailing land features, ele-
vating the northern areas while the central region
became depressed, and a series of freshwater lakes was
formed, in which the highest Coal-measures (Stephanian
stage) of Europe were deposited.
231

--- Page Break ---
232 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Sedimentation and coal formation were therefore
taking place over the central region, while the West-
phalian Coal-measures in the north were being folded
and denuded.
The combined results of these two great disturb-
ances constituted the chief later Palaeozoic mountain-
building period of western Europe, known as the
Variscan.
The Stephanian and Westphalian Coal-measures
were subsequently covered up by the deposits of
Permian age. These follow consecutively on the
Stephanian Coal-measures in the central region, but
rest with a great discordance on the upturned and
denuded edges of the Westphalian Coal-measures in
the north.
While western Europe was undergoing alternate
elevation and depression in Carboniferous times, a
depression to which the sea had access lay over eastern
Europe throughout the period represented by the Car-
boniferous and Permian formations.
The Continent, therefore, presents two types of
Carboniferous rocks a western type composed of
marine, estuarine and freshwater sediments, and an
eastern type in which the sediments are wholly marine.
The main divisions of the Carboniferous formation
of Europe, and the conditions under which they were
laid down,may be expressed in tabularform (see p. 233).
Some British geologists consider the Stephanian
stage to be represented by the Upper Coal-measures,
but continental geologists are generally agreed that the
Stephanian Coal-measures are absent in Great Britain.
The most important coalfields on the Continent are
those of Westphalia, Belgium, and northern France.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 233
THE CARBONIFEROUS SEQUENCE IN EUROPE.
Great Britain. Western Europe. Eastern Europe.
Upper
Carboniferous.
Carboniferous
Limestone Series.
Stephanian fresh
water.
(Unconformity.)
Westphalian
marine and
estuarine.
(Conformity.)
Dinantian
marine.
Uralian marine.
(Conformity.)
Moscovian
marine.
(Conformity.)
Dinantian
marine.
BELGIUM.
As a result of folding and subsequent denudation,
the Carboniferous rocks of Belgium occur in three
basins, extending east and west, and separated from
each other by ridges of older rocks. The central and
most important basin that of Namur and Liege is
flanked on the south by the Silurian ridge of Condros
(Crete du Condros), and on the north by the partially
concealed Silurian plateau of Brabant. South of the
ridge of Condros an east-and-west fold introduces the
Carboniferous basin of Dinant, the strata of which are
chiefly Lower Carboniferous. North of the Silurian
plateau of Brabant a fold again brings in the Coal-
measures of the recently discovered but concealed coal-
field of the Dutch Limburg.
The structure of the central basin of Namur and
Liege is one of considerable complexity, the strata

--- Page Break ---
234 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
being thrown into sharp zigzag folds and crossed by
numerous overthrust faults, as in the adjoining French
coalfields of Valenciennes and Pas de Calais.
The Carboniferous strata fall into two main groups
a lower or Dinantian, and an upper or Coal-measure
group.
The Coal-measures have been divided by Belgium
geologists into a lower stage, Namurian (Lower Coal-
measures), and an upper stage, Westphalian (Middle
Coal-measures), these being subdivided as follows:
Division. Subdivision.
Westphalian
-
, f
' '
'
(Beds of Chatelet - 1,000
Namnriar /Beds of Andenne 700r\ diiiuricin -
~\ -r> j r /~i i * o
\BedsofChokier - 80
The strata bear a closer resemblance to the Coal-
measures of the central than to those of the south-
western coalfields of England. Shales predominate over
the sandstones in the proportion of 260 to 70. Beds
of impure limestone from i to 3 feet in thickness, and
apparently unfossiliferous, occur in the Westphalian
division, but are not met with in the Namurian
Coal-measures.
As in England, two distinct faunas the one marine,
the other estuarine or freshwater characterize the
Westphalian division of the Coal - measures. Ap-
parently, however, the estuarine and freshwater Lamel-
libranchiata do not adhere to the same general order of
appearance as in the Middle Coal-measures of England.
Thus, Anthracomya phillipsi, which is confined to the
highest zones in England, is met with in the Namurian
division, of which the fauna, with this exception, is

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
236 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
entirely marine. Carbonicola turgida, again, extends
throughout nearly the whole of the Westphalian divi-
sion, and cannot, therefore, be used as even an approxi-
mate index of position in the sequence.
The distribution of the lamellibranchs throughout
the strata of the Belgian coalfields has not received
the close attention that it has in this country, and
possibly some parallelisms may be demonstrated on
more minute examination.
Judging from the little at present known, it seems
probable that the Coal-measures of the Namurian basin
are altogether distinct from those of the Midland coal-
basin of England.
The marine fauna met with at several horizons in
the Westphalian division contains the same species of
Lingula, Pterinopecten, and Goniatites as those of the
Upper Carboniferous rocks of Britain.
The chief coal-seams are found in the Beds of
Charleroi, the upper subdivision of the Westphalian.
The Charleroi strata are again divided, and are known
to the miner, in descending order, as the Saint-Gilles,
Liege, and Seraing groups. The exploited seams
number about fifty, of which forty are usually and ten
occasionally workable. Out of a total of 133 feet of
coal, the Charleroi Beds yield a united thickness of
123 feet. The seams are mostly thin, one of the
thickest being the Grande-Veine-des-Dames of the
Seraing Group, which averages 4 feet over large areas.
The coals are classified according to the value of
M.V. the volatile matter present as gas coals (29 to
45 M.V.), bituminous coals (17 to 29 M.V.), semi-bitu-
minous coals (10 to 17 M.V.), and short flaming coals,
in which the value of M.V. falls below 10 per cent.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 237
As a rule the seams highest in the sequence contain the
greatest amount of volatile matter, which decreases in
the deeper-seated coals, though the gradation is not
everywhere uniform, and there are some notable
exceptions.
The output of the Belgian coalfields in 1904 amounted
to 22,761,430 tons, obtained from the Namurian basin.
A new but entirely concealed coalfield in the Campine
in Dutch Limburg has, within recent years, been
proved beneath the Tertiary and Secondary rocks in
North Belgium. This coalfield, as previously men-
OUTCH LIMBURG
MtSOZO/C AND TERTIARY
FIG. 19. THE RELATION OF THE CONCEALED COALFIELD OF
THE CAMPINE TO THE EXPOSED COALFIELD OF LIEGE.
tioned, is separated from that of Namur by an uprise
of Silurian and Devonian rocks. The area at present
proved is estimated at 400 square miles. The southern
margin of the basin has not yet been determined, but
the Coal-measures are expected to extend westwards as
far as Antwerp. From the Meuse up to Westerloo and
Sauthoven over thirty borings have been put down.
Three of these, situated in the north, ended in Triassic
strata at great depths, but many others proved Coal-
measures with seams having a high percentage of
volatile matter, and considered to belong to the horizon
of the flenu coals of Mons.

--- Page Break ---
238 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
FRANCE.
Though fairly rich in coal, France does not produce
sufficient for home consumption. For this reason
seams of inferior quality, or those of a better class, but
averaging little more than a foot in thickness, and
often obtained with considerable difficulty, prove
sufficiently remunerative to be worked.
The coalfields of France occur in about fifty isolated
patches generally grouped as the northern, central, and
southern coalfields. Many of them are of small size, and
the richest and most extensive, that of northern France,
belongs for the most part to the concealed coalfields,
where the seams are obtained from beneath a thick
covering of new
r
er rocks.
The complete Carboniferous sequence consists of
three divisions, known in descending order as Ste-
phanian (Upper Coal-measures of England), West-
phalian (Middle Coal-measures), and Dinantian (Car-
boniferous Limestone Series).
The Stephanian measures do not occur in the same
region as the Westphalian, and, as before stated, a
great unconformity is considered to separate these two
divisions.
The coal-seams are confined to the Stephanian and
Westphalian divisions, the Dinantian being unpro-
ductive.
The Westphalian Coal-measures are limited to
northern France and Brittany, the Stephanian to
the central and southern provinces.
The strata of the Stephanian and Westphalian
divisions may be conformably or unconformably
succeeded by strata, relegated to the Permian System ;

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 239
or, again, they may be overlain unconformably by
Mesozoic and Tertiary formations without the inter-
vention of Permian strata.
In France, as in England, there seems to be great
difficulty in determining whether certain strata imme-
diately following the normal Coal-measure sequence
should be included in the Carboniferous or relegated
to the Permian System. At present it is the custom
of French geologists to divide the Permian System
into two groups
: a lower or Autunian, and an upper
or Saxonian. In one coalfield, strata conformable to
the Stephanian, and containing many fossil plants found
in this division, are placed with the Autunian group of
the Permian. In another coalfield, strata without any
fossil evidence, either plant or animal, and resting with
a great discordance on the Stephanian measures, are
also placed in the Autunian group.
Northern Coalfield. The Northern coalfield is a
westerly prolongation of the Namurian coal-basin of
Belgium, and with some interruptions extends from the
French frontier to Boulogne. It is divided into three
separate areas : the Valenciennes Coalfield on the east,
the Bas Boulonnais Coalfield on the west, and that of
the Pas de Calais situated between the two.
While French geologists seem to be agreed that the
Valenciennes and Pas de Calais coalfields belong to the
Namurian stage of depression, the opinion has been
expressed that the coalfield of Bas Boulonnais belongs
to a western extension of the Dinantian basin, and
that the Namurian basin would be found to the north.
Numerous borings, however, put down along the
littoral to the north of the Bas Boulonnais have

--- Page Break ---
240 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
failed to prove the existence of another basin. These
borings either ended in rocks newer than the Coal-
measures, or in rocks older than the Carboniferous
formation.
The Coal-measures belong totheWestphalian division
and appear at the surface in the Valenciennes basin,
but those of the Pas de Calais and the Bas Boulonnais
are hidden beneath the Secondary and Tertiary forma-
tions, which, either singly or collectively, are termed
*
mortes terrains.'
The Hercynian disturbance, to which the complex
structure of the coalfields is attributed, was super-
imposed on the Namurian depression in which the Car-
boniferous strata were laid down. This intense earth-
movement took place subsequent to the deposition of
the Coal-measures, but was completed and the Car-
boniferous strata were extensively denuded before the
laying down of the earliest Mesozoic strata, so that a
great unconformity intervenes between the Carbon-
iferous and the newer strata. Again, earth-movements
of a later age than the Mesozoic were superimposed on
the earlier Hercynian folds, and these newer folds are
often found to agree in direction and character with
those of the Hercynian.
The Hercynian movement consisted of a powerful
thrust from the south, which buckled up the Carbon-
iferous strata into a series of overfolds trending east
and west and sloping to the south. This overfolding
has resulted in the complete inversion and constant
repetition of the order of the strata by minor thrusts
situated between the major thrusts (Fig. 20).
The overfolding naturally resulted in the formation
of numerous thrust faults, and of these two major

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 241
thrusts play an important part in the general structure
of the coalfields. A major thrust known as the
'
Faille
du midi,' or
'
Faille limite,' extends along and forms
the southern boundary of the coalfields, while a com-
plementary thrust fault, called the
'
Cran de retour,'
limits the coal-basin on the north.
Along the line of the
'
Faille du midi,' Dinantian and
even Devonian strata are frequently thrust over West-
phalian Coal-measures, so that a shaft may enter Coal-
FIG. 20. DIAGRAM TO ILLUSTRATE THE REPETITION OF COAL-
SEAMS BYOVERTHRUSTS IN THE COALFIELDS OF NORTHERN
FRANCE.
measures after penetrating these older strata. In other
cases, as a result of overthrusting, a considerable thick-
ness of Coal-measure strata may lie between two layers
of Dinantian Limestone, the appearance of interstrati-
fication being so deceptive that for a long time the
Coal-measures of northern France were considered to
be of Dinantian age.
Again, in an overthrust area the order of the coal-
seams becomes inverted, and the seat-earths or beds
of clunch, which lie beneath the coals when in the
natural order of sequence, come to lie over the seams,
16

--- Page Break ---
242 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
frequently causing the coals to have a bad roof for
mining.
The seams of coal in the northern coalfields, though
numerous and persistent for considerable distances, are
mostly thin, the average thickness being about 2J- feet ;
but by the union of two or more seams a thickness of
12 feet may be locally attained, as when the Beaumant
and Leonard veins, of the Pas de Calais Coalfield, come
together. The seams change their character from below
upwards, the volatile matter ranging from 8 to 10 per
cent, in the lowest seams to 40 per cent, in the highest ;
but, as in other coalfields, exceptions to this general
increase occur. A thrust fault may also cause a series
of coals of a semi-bituminous or anthracitic character
to lie above seams rich in volatile matter.
The basin of Valenciennes contains four veins of
anthracite, thirty-one seams of house coal, and thirty-
one seams of gas coal.
The seams of the Pas de Calais Coalfield number
about ninety, with a united thickness of 250 feet of
coal.
Coalfields of Brittany and Normandy. The small
lineally arranged coalfields of Saint Laurs, Faymoreau,
Vouvant, and Chantounay, which border the old
Vendean massif, are of Lower Westphalian age. These
coalfields are situated along a line of fracture, and the
strata, especially the shales, are frequently so intensely
folded and faulted that they often bear a close resem-
blance to the adjacent older rocks.
At Plessis and Littry, two small coal-basins, are con-
sidered to represent the highest beds of the Stephanian,
for they are conformably overlain by strata of Permian

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 243
Scale'about
FIG. 21. THE COALFIELDS OF CENTRAL FRANCE.
age. In the Laval basin the coal-bearing rocks of
Saint Pierre de la Cour are of Middle Stephanian age,
and rest discordantly on the Dinantian Series. The
16 2

--- Page Break ---
244 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
coals, numbering seventeen, are of a bituminous char-
acter, and range from 6 inches to 2 feet in thickness.
Coalfields of Central France. Of the various small
coalfields, all of Stephanian age, which lie scattered
over the central plateau of France, the largest and most
productive are those of Blanzy and Creusot, Saint
Etienne, Commentry, Gard, and Brive. All these coal-
fields have more or less probable extensions beneath
the Permian or later formations, but many of the
smaller coal-basins are strictly limited by the surround-
ing crystalline rocks.
The separate coalfields are arranged along thewestern
and southern margins of the plateau, and along the line
of central disturbance.
On the western margin, in the north, the small basin
of Decize yields eight seams of coal from 6 to 12 feet in
thickness.
The lower portion of the sequence in the Autun
basin contains workable seams at Epinac, while an
upper portion, consisting of sandstones and conglomer-
ates, contains a few thin seams, which are mined at
Grand-Moloy.
In the Morvan basin, which includes the coal districts
of Blanzy and Creusot, the Stephanian Coal-measures
crop out for a limited distance from beneath a thick
covering of Permian strata, which occupies the centre
of a narrow basin, stretching north-east and south-west,
and separated from the Autun Coalfield by an anticline
of granite.
Four main seams of coal, varying greatly in thick-
ness, have been recognized. At Creusot a seam, called
La Grand Couche, attains a thickness of go feet. The

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 245
seams are classified, according to the amount of volatile
matter present, as :
Gras, 20 to 26 per cent, of M.V.
Mi-gras, 16 to 20 per cent, of M.V.
Maigre et anthracite, 12 to 16 per cent, of M.V.
In 1900 the output amounted to 1,633,998 tons.
The structure of this coalfield appears to admit of
two interpretations. According to some geologists, the
Coal-measures, which crop out at Blanzy, are con-
tinued beneath the overlying Permian strata, from under
CREUSOT
FIG. 22. THE CREUSOT COALFIELD, SHOWING THE COAL-
MEASURES (b) OVERLAIN BY THE AUTUNIAN PERMIAN (c}>
AND THESE BY THE SAXONIAN PERMIAN (d).
which they rise on the opposite side of the basin at
Creusot. Other geologists maintain that the coalfield
of Creusot is distinct from that of Blanzy, and that the
Coal-measuresdo not exist over the central parts of the
Morvan basin.
According to the latter theory, the Coal-measures
were deposited in an eroded hollow of crystalline rocks.
Subsequently, but long prior to the deposition of the
Permian strata, the floor of this basin was bent up
along a medial line, and two structural basins the one
of Blanzy and the other of Creusot were thus formed.
Denudation then took place on an extensive scale
over these two areas, which were subsequently buried

--- Page Break ---
246 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
beneath the bituminous sandstones and shales of the
Autunian or Lower Permian division. These Autunian
measures were again denuded before the red sandstones
and shales of the Saxonian Permian were deposited
over them (Fig. 22).
The Creusot Coalfield is separated by an axis of
Archaean rocks from the Dinantian basin of Roannais.
To the south the Archaean rocks of Haut Beaujolais
and Haut Lyonais isolate the narrow basin forming
the small coalfield of Saint Foy from that of Roannais
on the one side, and from the important coalfield of
Saint Etienne on the other.
The base of the Saint Etienne sequence is a breccia,
over 500 feet in thickness, which is conformably over-
lain by a conglomerate varying from 600 to 2,500 feet
thick. This is succeeded by the productive Coal-
measures of Saint Etienne, consisting of a lower group
(Saint Chamond) 2,800 feet thick with twelve seams of
coal ; a middle group (Berard) over 1,000 feet thick
with nine coal-seams; and an upper group (Aveize)
from 600 to 700 feet thick with twelve coal-seams.
The Saint Etienne Coalfield is prolonged beneath the
Secondary and Tertiary formations towards the Jura.
Further south the basin of the Gard forms an im-
portant coal district, from its proximity to the maritime
border and the possibility of its extension eastwards,
though at considerable depths, beneath the Liassic and
Triassic formations. The Coal-measures, all of Stepha-
nian age, exceed 8,000 feet in thickness. The richest
portion, 3,000 feet thick, forms the Besseges group,
and lies about 1,000 feet above the base of the Coal-
measures, which consists of a coarse conglomerate
resting on rocks of Pre-Cambrian age.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 247
A large fault bounds the coalfield on the east, and the
strata are much folded and faulted, due in part to the
Alpine movement.
From near Moulins on the northern margin to
Aubin on the southern, a linear series of small isolated
coalfields of Stephanian age extends across the central
plateau. The most important is that of Commentry
in the north, well known from the classic researches
of M. Fayol into the origin of coal and the formation
of the Coal-measures, and also from the presence of
a seam of coal, La Grande Couche, exceeding 60 feet in
thickness, and worked by open cast.
The Coal-measures which belong to the later stages
of the Stephanian division consist mainly of loose,
coarse-grained sediments, extremely false bedded and
roughly stratified.
In Autun a considerable thickness of strata conform-
ably overlies the coal-bearing Stephanian measures, but
these higher strata are considered to belong to the
Permian and not to the Carboniferous period. They
are divided into three groups, each of which contains
workable seams of boghead coal.
The lower group, about 1,200 feet thick, contains the
seams worked at Ignornay, Saint Leger, Du Bois, and
Lally. In the middle group, about 1,000 feet thick,
the coals are worked at several localities, and those
contained in the upper group are obtained at Millery
and Sur Moulin.
In the lower and middle groups the flora has a Coal-
measure facies, but the strata at Millery and Sur
Moulin contain many specimens of Callipteris and
Walchia, which occur, though rarely, in the Keele beds
of central England.

--- Page Break ---
248 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
On the assumption, therefore, that the Stephanian
Coal-measures of Autun are of Upper Coal-measure
age, the coal-bearing Permian strata of Autun are
among the newest Palaeozoic coalfields in France.
The area of the French coalfields is estimated at
2,500 square miles. In 1905 the output amounted to
35,869,497 tons.
GERMANY.
Germany not only possesses extensive areas of Coal-
measures of Carboniferous age, but also very thick and
widely distributed deposits of Lignite and Brown Coal
belonging to the Tertiary period. These later coals
are indeed of great importance, and form a large pro-
portion of the total coal output of the Empire.
The principal coalfields of Carboniferous age are those
of the Ruhr or Westphalian basin, those of Upper
Silesia, the coalfield of Saarbrucken, and the smaller
coalfields of Saxony; all these belong to the West-
phalian division.
In the Ruhr basin, estimated to cover an area of
more than 1,080 square miles, the Coal-measures of
Westphalian age are exposed at the surface from near
Dusseldorf to the south-east of Dortmund. Along the
southern margin of the coalfield the Westphalian
measures rest on Dinantian Carboniferous rocks or on
Devonian, .while along the northern margin in the
latitude of Dortmund they gradually sink beneath a
cover formed by the Cretaceous and Secondary forma-
tions. This concealed area has been traced to Dorsten,
near Wesel, south-west of Munster, and to near Osna-
briick on the north-east, where boring has proved the
existence of seven workable seams.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 249
The exposed and concealed coalfields are collectively
known as the Miinster basin.
Compared with the coalfields of Belgium and
northern France, the structure of the Ruhr Coalfield
is very simple. The strata are thrown into a series of
folds having their axes directed generally east and west,
but the folds are of a more or less open nature, except
in the south, where in places they assume a complex
arrangement.
Anthracitic coals are of more general occurrence in
the more disturbed regions, but their presence may be
attributed as much to the outcropping here of only the
lower seams, and, therefore, in accordance with Hilt's
law (p. 41), likely to be of a less bituminous character
than the higher seams. The basin edge-folding of the
strata happens in this case to correspond with the
difference in character of the seams, induced before the
folding took place, just as along the southern margin
of the South Wales basin, folding was superinduced on
seams having an original bituminous character, which
the subsequent folding and earth pressure did not
materially alter.
The general succession of the measures in the Ruhr
basin is given in the following table in descending order
of sequence
:
THE COAL-MEASURE SEQUENCE OF THE RUHR BASIN.
VII. Measures over 2,400 feet, with twenty-one seams of
anthracitic coals (Sandkohlen).
VI. Barren measures, 280 feet in thickness.
V. Group 400 feet thick, containing seven workable
seams of semi-bituminous coals (Sinterkohlen,
Esskohlen).

--- Page Break ---
250 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
IV. Group 300 feet thick, containing nineteen workable
seams of caking coal, including the seams Rottgers-
bank and Katharine.
III. Barren measures, 230 feet in thickness.
II. Group with gas coals, 1,000 feet thick; eight
workable seams, the thickest being the Laura
Seam, about 5 feet in thickness.
I. Group with long-flaming coals ; 3,300 feet in thick-
ness, with thirty-five workable seams, and con-
taining the well-known Bismarck Seam.
The total thickness of coal is estimated at between
230 and 250 feet, distributed among ninety seams,
giving an available supply down to a depth of 4,900 feet
the maximum limit of working assumed to be possible
on the Continent of 52,000 millions of tons.
Much further investigation is needed to determine
the nature of the pre-Carboniferous floor, which, how-
ever, is known to immediately underlie the Chalk at
Lippstadt. The faunal and floral succession has also
to be elucidated, not only locally, but generally, before
the fossils can be used as an index of exact position in
the Coal-measure sequence.
The coalfields of Upper Silesia cover a wide area,
and extend into Austria and Poland. The Westphalian
measures stretch eastwards by Rbynik to Dombrowa.
Of this extensive basin 2,500 square miles belong to
Germany, 630 to Austria, and 300 to Russia. Coal-
seams make their appearance in the strata immediately
succeeding the Culm. The upper productive measures
or Schatzlar group, containing tw
r
enty seams of coal,
among which is the Bismarck Seam over 20 feet thick,
are separated by 1,000 feet of sterile strata from the
lower productive series containing about twenty seams
of coal, the thickest being a little over 4 feet.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 251
In eastern Pologne a coal, the Redan Seam, ranges
from 24 to 45 up to as much as 60 feet in thickness.
On the German border this seam yields coke, the coals
above being gas coals, and the highest seams yielding
steam coals ; but in Poland all the seams cease to
produce either gas or coke.
Numerous marine incursions are met with in the
sequence, among the fossils found being Phillipsia,
Gastrioceras listeri, Belterophon urei. At Cracovie the
Westphalian commences to assume the Moscovian or
eastern marine type.
The Carboniferous Coal-measures of Zwickau and
Lugau in Saxony occupy limited areas, but some of
the seams are in places over 30 feet in thickness.
Though not equal in extent to the Silesian Coalfield,
but of approximately the same size as that of Ruhr, the
Saarbriicken Coalfield takes a high position among the
coal-producing districts of the German Empire. The
area is estimated at about 1,080 square miles. It con-
tains seventy-seven workable seams one seam being
over 12 feet thick with an aggregated thickness of
260 feet of coal. The measures among which these
seams are distributed belong to an horizon higher than
those of the Ruhr, Belgian, or northern French-basins,
and lie at the base of a great thickness of overlying
barren strata, referable in part to the Stephanian
Coal-measures and in part to the Permian. Above the
productive series there succeeds a great thickness of
red conglomerates and violet-coloured sandstones and
shales (Geislautern Group), containing only thin and
unworkable seams of coal. Above these again come
the Ottweiler beds (Kohlenrothliegende), about 6,000 to
8,000 feet in thickness. This division consists of a

--- Page Break ---
252 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
lower group of grey clays, with thin beds of limestone
and seams of coal ; of a middle group of grey sandstones
and conglomerates ; and of an upper group of grey
shales containing beds of coal. The fossil plant
Pecopteris aborescens is abundant, and the genus Car-
bonicola survives in the Ottweiler beds. In the over-
lying Permian formation, the lowest beds (Cusel) con-
sist of grey sandstones, shales, and red marls. Plants
of Coal-measure species are met with, but associated
with them are Walchia pinniformis, Callipteris conferta,
and Catamites gigas.
The extension of the Saarbrucken Coalfield into
French Lorraine has been proved within recent years.
The barren cover is very thick, and the seams, as
shown in the boring records, are mostly thin. At
Pont-a-Mousson the first seam, 2 feet 6 inches thick,
was found at a depth of 2,686 feet. Below this four
other seams were passed through, one at a depth of
4,204 feet being about 4 feet thick. In the Atton boring
the first seam, 23 inches thick, occurred at a depth of
2,600 feet. Below this again the boring notified the
existence of six seams, but none of them attained 3 feet
in thickness.
An output of over 52,000,000 tons per annum affords
the best proof that the Tertiary coals of Germany rank
high among the fossil fuels. According to their physical
characters, these Tertiary coals are known as Lignite,
Erdige Kohle, Gemeine Braunkohle, Blatter (leaf)
Kohle, Peckkohle (Pitch Coal), Gaskohle, and Glanz-
kohle. The last-mentioned variety contains the highest
percentage of carbon, and represents the highest class
of the Tertiary Lignitic coals as shown in the follow-
ing table of analyses
:

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 253
All the Brown coals belong to the Tertiary period.
The older are of Eocene age, and the younger of
Miocene age.
The older (Eocene) Brown coals extend, though in
isolated patches, from around Chemnitz and Leipzig
to the west of Magdeburg. The Miocene Brown coals
are met with around Cologne, Aachen, Frankfurt,
Cassiland, and generally in the valleys of the Oder and
Warthe. Many of the deposits are mined by open
cast workings. The area of lignites around Cologne
is estimated at forty-five square miles, and a seam is
present which averages 100 feet and sometimes reaches
300 feet in thickness.
AUSTRIA AND HUNGARY.
Austria possesses coals of Carboniferous age and
extensive deposits of Brown coal belonging to the
Jurassic and Tertiary formations. The output of
Carboniferous coal amounts to over 11,000,000 tons
per annum, and that of Brown coal to about double
this quantity.
The most important coalfield is that of the Ostrau-

--- Page Break ---
254 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Karwin district in Silesia, where twenty-five of the
chief seams give a total thickness of 72 feet of coal.
Altogether there are 313 seams, varying from 18 inches
to 12 feet in thickness, and of these 102 are workable.
In Bohemia the main seam of the Kladno-Rakonitz
basin attains a thickness of 20 to 36 feet. Bohemia is
rich in Brown coal ; some of the seams in the Taplitz
basin reaching a thickness of nearly 100 feet. Styria
comes next in importance, where the Miocene lignites
attain a general thickness of 80 to 100 feet, and occa-
sionally approach 200 feet. Lower Austria contains
thin seams of Triassic, Liassic, and Cretaceous ages.
Hungary is poor in Carboniferous coals, but con-
tains extensive deposits of Tertiary lignites along the
Carpathians, and in Transylvania in the Zsill Valley.
Tertiary lignites are met with in Bosnia at Zenica,
Kreka, Kakanj-Doboi, in seams of 33 to 52 feet in thick-
ness. In Servia some important workings of Liassic
coals occur at Dobra on the Danube.
Roumania and Bulgaria are together responsible for
an annual output of about 270,000 tons of Tertiary
lignite. The largest mine in Roumania is at Mar-
gineanca, which produces 51,000 tons per annum.
Turkey possesses coal in many places, but the only
important mines are situated at Eregli. The annual
output from Turkey amounts to about 450,000 tons.
Greece yields lignite of good quality in Coumi,
Oropos, and Aliverion, and of inferior quality in several
other localities. The total output from all sources does
not exceed 12,000 tons per annum.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 255
ITALY.
Italy is said to be rich in coal in the provinces of
Sienna and Grosseto in Tuscany and in Sardinia, as
well as in Piedmont and Undine in the north. Along
the flanks of the Alpine massif the coal deposits chiefly
belong to the Stephanian Coal-measures ; but rocks,
highly altered by great pressure due to the Alpine
folding, are referred to the Westphalian Coal-measures.
In the Carnic Alps the Uralian and Stephanian phases
dovetail. Coals situated along the Alpine massif have
been often changed into anthracite or graphite, some of
the veins of graphite in the Cottian Alps attaining a
thickness of 6 to 10 feet.
Italy in 1905 raised 407,887 metric tons of lignite,
1,165 tons of anthracite, and 3,341 tons of bituminous
shale.
SPAIN AND PORTUGAL.
Carboniferous coals occur in seven provinces, but out
of an output of 3,371,919 metric tons in 1905 nearly
two-thirds came from the coalfields situated in the
province of Oviedo in Asturia.
In this province the coalfields cover an area of
460 square miles. The principal coals, belonging to
the Westphalian division, occupy about 350 square
miles, and are deeply dissected in the Nalon Valley,
where several seams crop out along the precipitous
slopes. The seams, averaging from 2 to 6 feet in
thickness, range from bituminous to anthracite. A
much dislocated Carboniferous coalfield, containing
seams varying greatly in thickness, but occasionally
being as much as 80 feet, is that of Sabero. Another

--- Page Break ---
256 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
important though narrow coalfield extends parallel with
the Guadiato River in Cordova. The Coal-measures
are flanked by older rocks, and are much intruded by
quartz-porphyries and diabases. The coal-seams are
of a pockety nature, varying from a few inches up to
130 feet in thickness.
Secondary and Tertiary lignites are found in several
districts, an important district being Ultrillas.
The coal areas of Portugal are of very limited extent?
and the amount raised in 1905 was less than 20,000
tons. Anthracite occurs in the Douro district and
bituminous coal of Jurassic age at Cape Mondego.
RUSSIA-IN-EUROPE.
Carboniferous rocks occurring either at the surface
or lying concealed beneath Permian deposits extend
over great areas in Russia-in-Europe. There are also
extensive deposits of Tertiary Brown coals.
The chief coalfields of Carboniferous age are those of
the Donetz basin, the Moscow basin, and the Pologne
basin, with smaller areas along the flanks of the Ural
Mountains.
The important basin of Donetz in southern Russia
covers an area of 30,000 square miles, but the produc-
tive portion is very much less. The workable seams,
which rarely exceed 5 feet in thickness, lie in two zones,
one towards the summit, and the other in the middle
of the sequence, separated by a band of almost sterile
measures. In the upper group the seams are of a
bituminous character, while those in the lower group,
confined to the south-east, are of a semi-anthracitic or
anthracitic nature. The basin is capable of a great

--- Page Break ---
/00 ?OO .700 ^0 50
FIG. 23. THE COALFIELDS OF RUSSIA-IN-EUROPE.

--- Page Break ---
258 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL MINING
extension under the Permian formation to the east and
west.
Above the highest measures containing the important
bituminous coals over 3,000 feet of strata succeed, con-
sisting to a great extent of limestone containing the
fossil Spirifer mosquensis in association with Productus
com and Fusulina ventricosa, thus forming a passage
between the Moscovian Coal-measures and the Uralian
or eastern marine representative of the Stephanian
measures.
The Carboniferous rocks of the Moscow basin cover
an area of 150,000 square miles, but the coals only
occur in the lower portion. The workable seams are
intercalated between limestones containing Productus
giganteus, and siliceous grits with Lepidodendron velthei-
mianum. Though the presence of these fossils shows
the coals to be of Lower Carboniferous age, they are
of the nature of boghead and lignites. The seams
number over 200, but only twelve are at present worked.
These vary from 24 to 60 feet in thickness, but are of
a poor quality, and yield large quantities of ash. Some
classes are extensively used for gas-making.
In the western Urals the coals occur in the same
position in the Carboniferous sequence as in the Mos-
cow basin, but they are true coals, anthracitic in the
north and bituminous in the south. The thickness of
the seams varies from 3 to 15 feet.
The basin of Pologne is a continuation of the Silesian
Coalfield. The productive measures resting on the
unproductive or culm-type of Carboniferous rocks are
subdivided into an upper group containing 'the thicker
coals, and a lower group with only inferior seams.
The lower seams yield chiefly gas and coking coals and

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CONTINENTAL EUROPE 259
the higher seams give steam coal. One seam is said to
attain a thickness of nearly 40 feet.
Besides Carboniferous coal, Russia-in-Europe pos-
sesses immense quantities of lignite of Tertiary age.
The chief deposits are those of the basin of Kiev-
Elizabetgrad, situated in the centre of the sugar-
refining districts. The map (Fig. 23) shows the extent
of the Tertiary basin, but the lignites occur only on the
west side of the Dneiper, where they occupy an area of
over 1,300 square miles in the Government of Kiev
and Kherson.
Coals of Jurassic age crop out on both sides of the
Caucasus. The beds are thin, but the coals on the
northern flanks yield a good coke. On the southern
side there are several seams giving a total thickness of
over 40 feet of coal.
The total output of Russian coal in 1905 amounted
to 19,628,008 metric tons.
172

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XIV
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS
No more striking proof of the dependence of modern
civilization on coal can be adduced than that afforded
by the great increase in the output of coal in the United
States within recent years.
In 1880 Great Britain headed the list of the world's
production of coal with 146,969,409 statute tons, the
United States producing 63,822,830 tons in that year.
In 1906 the output of Great Britain reached 269,929,379
tons, while that of the United States amounted to
344,912,205 tons. Of this enormous quantity the coals
of Carboniferous age chiefly bituminous coal from the
Appalachian Coalfield contributed by far the greatest
amount, but no less than 70,296,000 tons of semi-
bituminous and anthracitic coal were obtained from the
Pennsylvanian anthracite region.
The visible coal-bearing strata of North America
cover an area far exceeding that of any of the coal-
producing countries of the world. The coals range in
age from Carboniferous to Tertiary, and are found
extending from within the Arctic Circle southwards
into the Gulf States.
The comparatively recent date in the development
260

--- Page Break ---
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS 261
of the coal resources of America is well illustrated by
the fact that shafting or deep sloping, even in the
extensively worked bituminous Appalachian Coalfield,
has not exceeded a depth of 700 feet. In this vast
area, in which workable seams at shallow depths occur,
the coal-miner does not need an extensive geological
knowledge, but in the development of the unexplored
regions an acquaintance with the principles of the
science will be found invaluable to the explorer.
Within the Arctic Circle coal-bearing rocks, ranging
in age from Carboniferous to Tertiary, occur within
comparatively short distances of each other. "The coals
of the Carboniferous rocks are for the most part far
superior to those of later age. The explorer, therefore,
should be competent to recognize the difference between
the fauna and flora of the Palaeozoic period and that of
the Mesozoic and later period.
In the highly inclined and folded strata, or in areas
traversed by numerous igneous dykes, he must also be
able, from a careful examination of the surface structure,
to locate the most suitable position for an experimental
boring or shaft.
UNITED STATES.
Distribution. -The coal-bearing formations range
in age from the Carboniferous to the Tertiary. The
Carboniferous coals rank first both in extent and
quality ; the Mesozoic coals, chiefly of Cretaceous age,
come next ; and the Tertiary coals last.
The area of Carboniferous coals lies east of the
looth meridian. The Cretaceous coals are scattered
between the looth and H5th meridians, while the

--- Page Break ---
262 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Tertiary coals occur in small, widely separated regions
between the i2Oth meridian and the Pacific coast.
In point of time, therefore, the formation of coal in the
United States proceeded, in the main, from east to
west, though coal of Triassic age is found along the
Atlantic border, and there are extensive deposits of
Tertiary lignites in the Gulf States. In addition, coals
of Carboniferous age have recently been discovered in
Alaska.
Tertiary Coals. The Tertiary coals of the Pacific
slope vary in character from bituminous to lignitic, but
they are of comparatively poor quality, as is shown by
the extensive importation of foreign coals along this
coast. The better-class bituminous coals are confined
to the disturbed regions, the best being met with in
Washington County, where the seams, said to exceed
100 in number, are found in the lower 2,000 feet of a
thickness of strata estimated at 10,000 feet. Igneous
dykes often locally convert the coals into a natural
coke, but more frequently totally destroy the value of
the seams in their proximity. In Alaska the Kenai
Series of the Eocene formation contains some workable
coals.
In the Gulf States the Tertiary coals of Eocene age
are low-quality lignites with a high percentage of
moisture and ash.
Mesozoic Coals. The Triassic coals of the Atlantic
coast, though of little commercial importance, were
among the first to be worked in the States. The
Triassic coalfields occupy an area of 10,000 square
miles, but only the Richmond and Deep River districts
are at present productive. The strata are much folded

--- Page Break ---
/OlV-fl
ARI2.ONA
English Miles
100 zooAbout
TEXAS
FIG. 24. THE TERTIARY AND CRETACEOUS COALFIELDS OF
THE UNITED STATES, AND THE CARBONIFEROUS COAL-
FIELDS OF THE WESTERN INTERIOR.

--- Page Break ---
264 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
and faulted, and invaded by igneous material. In the
Richmond area there are three workable seams, one
having an average thickness of 20 feet. In the Deep
River area the seams are thin. In both regions the
coal is normally bituminous, but passes locally into
anthracite when in contact with the igneous intrusions.
The Mesozoic coals are chiefly found in the Laramie
division of the Cretaceous formation in the Rocky
Mountain region. The proximity of these coals to the
rich metalliferous areas has led to their being exten-
sively developed, but the difficulty of transport prevents
their exportation to the Pacific coast. The coalfields
cover a broad tract estimated at 100,000 square miles,
extending from Canadian territory to New Mexico.
In Wyoming and Dakota the coals are chiefly
lignitic ; but in the disturbed and folded regions of
Colorado the character varies from lignite to anthracite,
the percentage of fixed carbon varying from 36 to
88 per cent. In Colorado the seams range from a few
inches up to as much as 32 feet in thickness. A
characteristic of all the Cretaceous coals is their great
variability in thickness within short distances.
Within the Arctic Circle in Alaska, coals of Mesozoic
age crop out in the sea cliffs, and are known to extend
for some distance inland. The chief seams belong to
the Thetis and Corwin groups of Jurassic age, and
have been mined in the Cape Lisburne region, and
the coal supplied in limited quantities to the whaling
stations.
Altogether there is stated to be in Alaska some
150 feet of coal, more or less pockety, distributed
among forty to fifty seams, ten of which are over 4 feet
in thickness. An average of twelve analyses gives a

--- Page Break ---
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS 265
fuel ratio of 1*21, which compares very unfavourably
with the fuel ratio of the Carboniferous coals of these
regions (p. 274) ; but unlike the coals of Carboniferous
and later ages, they occur in undisturbed areas, and can
therefore be more economically mined.
Carboniferous Coals. The Carboniferous formation
covers vast areas in the United States; the Coal-
measures alone occupy an exposed surface, exceeding
230,000 square miles. At first sight the European
coalfields appear insignificant in comparison ; but the
difference is less striking if we include the areas
of concealed Coal - measures in Northern Europe
and Russia-in-Europe, whereas only limited areas in
America are hidden beneath a covering of newer
rocks.
The Coal-measures of the United States lie as a rule
at gentle angles, and large areas are in consequence
occupied by barren strata, which compose much of
the Coal-measures ; so that sometimes only one-half
of a coalfield can be regarded as productive, while a
further reduction of the total available supply must be
made for the great variability in thickness of many of
the seams.
The Carboniferous System of North America falls
into two main divisions. The Lower or Mississippian
stage is of marine origin, and corresponds to the
Carboniferous Limestone Series or Dinantian of Europe.
The Upper or Pennsylvanian stage is partly marine
and partly estuarine, and represents the Lower and
Middle (Westphalian) Coal-measures of Europe. In
the western States the entire Carboniferous System
assumes a marine phase.

--- Page Break ---
266 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
A widespread unconformity separates the Pennsyl-
vanian from the Mississippian stage.
The coalfields are met with in five separate areas,
named from east to west :
(i) Pennsylvanian Anthra-
cite Region; (2) Appalachian Basin; (3) Northern In-
terior Basin ; (4) Eastern Interior Basin ; (5) Western
Interior Basin (Figs. 24, 25).
The anthracite region is the smallest, but most
valuable ; the Appalachian Coalfield ranks first in size,
and contains the greatest variety of coals, besides yield-
ing the largest output.
These two areas, now separated by wide intervening
gaps, were once continuous, their present isolation
being caused by folding and denudation. The folding
is most intense along the line of the Alleghanies, and
gradually dies away westward. Accompanying this
difference in physical structure a change takes place in
the nature of the coals. In the least disturbed regions
the coals belong to the bituminous variety, and gradu-
ally attain a greater carbon percentage on approaching
the folded region, until in Pennsylvania they become
true anthracites.
This anthracitization has been attributed to the effect
of pressure and heat, but some geologists consider that
the character of the coals changed on approaching the
original shore line, which certainly lay to the east.
The nomenclature for the subdivisions of the Penn-
sylvanian Group varies considerably. The table given
on p. 268 is recognized for South-West Pennsylvania,
West Virginia, and Ohio.
In northern Missouri and northern Texas beds of
limestone and shale become more prevalent. Coal-
seams are few and thin.

--- Page Break ---
FIG. 25. THE CARBONIFEROUS COALFIELDS OF THE UNITED
STATES.

--- Page Break ---
268 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
THE UPPER CARBONIFEROUS ROCKS OF NORTH AMERICA.
Name of
Formation.
Thickness
in Feet. Characteristics.
Dunkard Series [400-1,000
(? Permian).
Monongahela
Series.
Conemaugh
Series (Elk
River).
Alleghany
Series.
Pottsville Con-
glomerate.
Massive sandstones, red shales,
thin limestones,and thin coals ;
not marine.
Some limestone, sandstone,
shale ; important coals includ-
ing the Pittsburg Seam ;
Permo - Carboniferous flora ;
freshwater fauna.
Red and green shales, some
sandstone and limestone ; thin
coals ; Permo - Carboniferous
flora ; lower half marine.
Shales, some limestone, sand-
stones; important coals; Coal-
measure flora ; marine fossils.
60-4,500
! Sandstone and conglomerate ;
some shale ; important coals
in the south.
200-400
400-600
200-300
Anthracite Region. The anthracite coalfields, con-
fined to eastern Pennsylvania, cover an area of
484 square miles. Two divisions are recognized in
the coal-bearing strata: (i) the Pottsville Conglomerate
at the base with workable seams in the south, and
(2) the Coal-measures with several workable seams.
Folding and subsequent erosion of large quantities
of material from the crests of the adjacent anticlines
have separated the coalfield into four elongated, parallel
synclinal basins, the longer axes having a north-east and
south-west direction.
These basins are known as the Northern Field,

--- Page Break ---
FIG. 26. THE ANTHRACITE COALFIELDS OF PENNSYLVANIA.
Upper Carboniferous rocks in black ; Lower Carboniferous rocks
shown by lattice pattern ; the remainder Devonian and
Silurian.

--- Page Break ---
270 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Eastern Middle Field, Western Middle Field, and
Southern Field, the limitation of each of these areas
being sharply defined by the Pottsville Conglomerate,
so that reports of the discovery of anthracite outside
these known areas possess no foundation.
The Coal-measures attain an aggregate thickness of
2,500 feet in the deep basins of the Southern Field.
The seams vary in number, thickness, and quality.
The best known are the Mammoth Seam, Red Ash
Coal, and Buck Mountain Bed. The amount of
marketable coal decreases from 81 per cent, in the north
to 72 per cent, in the south ; the deterioration is largely
MAMMOTH BED
FIG. 27. FOLDS IN THE ANTHRACITE REGION.
due to the southerly increase in the intensity of the
folding and consequent crushing of the coal.
The well-known Mammoth Bed attains a thickness
of from 50 to 60 feet over large areas in the Middle and
Southern fields ; but it is frequently divided into three
beds with partings and layers of unmarketable coal,
reducing the thickness of good coal to from 20 to 25
feet. In the Panther Creek Basin the bed attains
the unusual thickness of 114 feet, with 82 feet of good
coal.
In the Northern Field the great ice sheet from the
north has left an undesirable legacy in the form of
gravel deposits sometimes reaching a thickness of
200 feet. These superficial accumulations have levelled

--- Page Break ---
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS 271
up the deep pre-glacial valley of Wyoming, and have
proved to be a source of considerable danger in mining.
The percentage of fixed carbon in the fuel con-
stituents ranges from 91 to 96, and the volatile com-
bustible matter from 3 to 81 per cent.
The total original contents of the Anthracite fields
has been estimated at 19,500,000,000 tons. In 1893 no
less than 2,255,000,000 tons had been exhausted, thus
leaving 17,245,000,000 tons available, of which it is
expected only 40 per cent, will be won. The output in
1905 was 69,339,152 long tons.
FIG. 28. THE ANTHRACITE FIELD. COAL CROPS CONCEALED
BY GLACIAL DRIFT.
Appalachian Coalfield. This is the most productive
coalfield in America, the output in 1905 amounting to
212,830,030 short tons.
The coalfield extends from the northern border of
Pennsylvania to Central Alabama, a distance of 850
miles, and includes an area of about 70,000 square
miles, of which about 75 per cent, contain workable
coals.
A large portion of this field is strictly limited by
older rocks, which crop out along the margins ; but at
the southern end the Coal-measures pass beneath the
deposits of the central plains, and may connect beneath
them with the Arkansas Coalfield.

--- Page Break ---
272 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Speaking in general terms, the strata of this field are
horizontal or gently undulating. The inclination is
steepest along the western edge, and in the south,
where the measures reach their maximum thickness,
the strata are folded. The chief coals lie in the
Alleghany and Monongahela Series, though thin im-
persistent seams occur in the Dunkard and in the
Pottsville Series. The Sharon Seam was especially
sought for in the past, and is now largely exhausted.
In the two chief productive groups the seams are
for the most part irregular, but the Pittsburg Coal, at
the base of the Monongahela Series, has an average
thickness of 6 feet over an area of fifty square miles,
and in varying thickness it has been proved over an
area of 14,000 square miles. The average total thick-
ness of coal for the whole field is estimated to be
25 feet.
The coals are bituminous, many yielding large
quantities of coke. As a whole, there is a general
increase in volatile matter from the semi-bituminous
coals of Maryland in the east to the highly-bituminous
coals in the west.
Northern Interior Coalfield. This coalfield, cover-
ing an area of about 7,500 square miles in the southern
peninsular of Michigan, appears never to have been
connected with the other coal areas.
Seven workable coals, with an average thickness of
2 feet and rarely exceeding 4 feet, are recognized. The
coals are bituminous, some yielding good coke.
A thick covering of glacial deposits conceals much
of the outcrop, but the general structure appears to be
that of a shallow basin, with a maximum thickness of
700 feet of Coal-measure strati at the centre.

--- Page Break ---
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS 273
The covering of glacial deposits, by concealing the
outcrop of the Coal-measures, causes the limits of this
coalfield to be ill-defined. In boring or sinking through
the surface deposits, beyond the proved limits, rocks
older than the Coal-measures may be reached, so that
the prospector needs to be able to distinguish between
the black shales of older formations and those of
Carboniferous age.
Eastern Interior Coalfield. This covers an area of
about 46,000 square miles in Indiana, Illinois, and
Kentucky. About 55 per cent, is productive. The
field was formerly connected with the Appalachian and
Western Interior coalfields, but is now separated from
them by broad, low anticlines, from which the Coal-
measures have been denuded.
The structure is that of an elongated basin, with the
strata gently inclined towards the centre. Small faults,
folds, and irregularities of several kinds are common.
The coal-bearing strata vary from 100 to 600 feet in
thickness. They are underlain by a massive sandstone,
and overlain by a maximum thickness of 400 feet of
barren measures, thought by some to be of Permian age.
The workable coals seldom exceed three in number
at any one point, and usually not more than one
workable bed is found, while considerable areas contain
no workable seams. The lower coals, though thin, are
of better quality and more regular than the higher
seams, the Bright Block coals being the best.
As gas coals they are unsatisfactory, but the Ken-
tucky seams produce excellent coke.
Western Interior Coalfield. The estimated area of
this imperfectly surveyed coalfield varies from 66,000 to
18

--- Page Break ---
274 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
94,000 square miles. The Coal-measures extend from
Northern Iowa to Central Texas, and include parts of
Iowa, Nebraska, Missouri, Kansas, Arkansas, Indian
Territory, and Texas.
The coal-bearing strata belong to the Upper Carboni-
ferous Series, which here rest unconformably on the
Mississippian Series. In Kansas and Nebraska they
are conformably overlain by Permo-Carboniferous, in
Iowa by the unconformable Cretaceous, and in the
northern part of the field by Glacial Drift.
The strata, consisting mostly of shale with some
limestone, increase in thickness westward and from
north to south, being estimated at 3,000 feet in Kansas.
In Arkansas and Indian Territory the beds are folded,
but elsewhere the structure is simple.
The coals are very irregular in thickness, and appear
to have been formed in channels eroded in the older
rocks. They are exclusively bituminous, but are not
adaptable for coking or gas-making.
Alaska. Carboniferous coals have been recently
found over a limited area in the vicinity of Cape
Lisburne, in Alaska. The quality is of a high grade,
but the crumpled and broken character of the strata
renders it far more difficult to mine these coals than
those of Mesozoic age.
Rhode Island. Metamorphosed and intensely folded
conglomerates and shales form a limited area in Rhode
Island. The coal-seams are few in number, the thickest
averaging 4 feet. They have so far proved to be of
poor quality, containing a high percentage of ash, but
being remarkably free from sulphur. They have been

--- Page Break ---
18 2

--- Page Break ---
276 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
anthracitized, and in many places converted into
graphite. Their stratigraphical position appears to be
high up in the Coal-measure sequence.
CANADA.
The coal-bearing strata occur in rocks of Carbon-
iferous and Cretaceous ages. The Carboniferous for-
mation covers a considerable area, but is for the most
part unproductive. The coals are chiefly found in
New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia, and are known to
occur on some of the islets within the Arctic Circle.
Coals of Cretaceous age are met with in the western
territories.
The areas of productive Coal-measures in Canada
are thus seen to lie outside the regions of densest
population.
Carboniferous Coals. The Carboniferous rocks in
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia extend over 18,000
square miles, but only a small proportion of this area
yields workable coals.
The coal-seams of New Brunswick are thin and of
poor quality, and the field gives only a small output.
At The Joggins on the northern arm of the Bay
of Fundy, an unrivalled continuous section of Coal-
measures, showing 14,570 feet of strata with over
seventy seams of coal, mostly thin, has been made
classic by the investigations of Logan, Lyell, and
Sir W. Dawson. Numerous specimens of air-breathing
reptiles and of Mollusca have been obtained and
figured from these beds.
The coalfields of Nova Scotia include those of

--- Page Break ---
NORTH AMERICAN COALFIELDS 277
Sydney on the east coast of Cape Breton, of Pictou
in the centre, and of Cumberland in the west. These
coalfields have been preserved in troughs produced by
east-and-west folding.
The Pictou Coalfield is the richest, containing five
or six good seams, including the Pictou Main Coal,
which attains a thickness of 37 feet. The lower
1,300 feet of strata contain fifteen seams yielding
119 feet of coal; the upper 4,300 feet possess twenty-
one seams giving 39 feet of coal.
In the Cumberland Coalfield only two of the seams
are workable.
Denudation has swept away the upper portion of the
Coal-measures in the Cape Breton area. In the re-
maining productive measures there are over thirty
seams, but only four of these are workable. The coal
here is more bituminous than that of Pictou and
Cumberland.
The mineral Albertite (p. 16), once a valuable source
of gas, was formerly extensively worked. The coal-like
substance, Anthraxolite, of variable composition, occur-
ring as veins in the Silurian rocks near Sudbury in
Ontario, differs from Albertite in having lost its volatile
constituents.
Cretaceous Coals. Coals of Cretaceous age are
chiefly confined to the Laramie Division. This forma-
tion occupies a considerable area in Manitoba, and
extends at some points into the Rocky Mountains.
The total area is estimated at about 60,000 square
miles.
In the eastern part of the field the coal is a lignite
containing a high percentage of moisture, but as the

--- Page Break ---
278 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Rocky Mountains are approached it gradually improves
in quality, and in certain parts of the Rockies has been
converted into a semi-anthracite.
The chief mining centres are at Estenan, Lethbridge,
and Canmore, the mines of Lethbridge yielding by far
the largest output.
Coal deposits of Cretaceous and possibly later ages
have been also met with in several places in British
Columbia. The coals are here of excellent quality,
giving as much as 85 per cent, of fixed carbon. They
are not, however, extensively worked, the mines at
Nanaimo and on Vancouver Island being the most
important producers.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XV
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA, INDIA, AUSTRALIA
AND SOUTH AMERICA
THE continental land areas at the present day are
situated in the northern hemisphere, but during the
later stages of the Carboniferous period the distribution
of land and sea was very different. While shallow seas,
bordered by low-lying marsh lands, lay to the north of
the equator, high land existed to the south.
Geologists disagree as to whether South America,
Africa, India, and Australia, during the Carboniferous
period, formed a connected land mass, but they recog-
nize that the coal-bearing strata of these countries were
laid down under continental conditions. Thus, while
the strata associated with the Carboniferous coal-seams
of the northern hemisphere show the close proximity
of the sea, the later Palaeozoic rocks of the southern
hemisphere were deposited under continental lacustrine
conditions in Indo - Africa and presumably South
America, but at a lower altitude in Australia, where
some of the sediments are marine.
The character of the flora and fauna of the later
Palaeozoic coal-bearing strata of the southern hemi-
sphere is therefore, leaving geographical situation out
279

--- Page Break ---
28o GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
of consideration, very different from that in the northern
hemisphere. The remains of terrestrial organisms are
abundant, while marine organisms, except in Australia,
are entirely absent. The coal-seams also lack that uni-
formity of distribution and thickness so characteristic
of the Carboniferous coals of the northern hemisphere.
Igneous rocks interrupt the continuity of the coal-
seams of later Palaeozoic age in the southern hemisphere,
and frequently render considerable areas valueless; but
the strata have not been subjected to intense earth-
movements, and for the most part the coal-bearing
strata lie at very gentle angles.
AFRICA.
General. The coalfields of Africa at present known
are all situated in the southern half of the continent.
Whether coal-bearing formations occur in the great
territory north of the equator remains to be proved, but
the general geological structure, so far as it has been
made out, does not favour the existence of coal in the
north.
In South Africa the coal strata were deposited in
hollows caused by the sinking down of the central
portions of an old continent called Gondwana Land,,
which, continuing in existence in Mesozoic times,,
extended across the Indian Ocean, and included the
peninsula of India. Detached fragments of the lacus-
trine coal-bearing deposits, laid down in this central
depression, occur in British and German East Africa
and along the margins of Lake Tanganyika ; but it is
uncertain how far this depression extended to the west,
or what were its limitations in the north.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 281
It is known, however, that strata of Devonian age
cover wide areas in the regions of western Sahara,
and still greater areas in northern Africa are occupied
by marine deposits of Cretaceous and Tertiary ages,
while, when not covered by volcanic material, the floor
of the continent in Upper Egypt and in the Soudan is
known to consist largely of rocks older than the Car-
boniferous. It would thus appear that the coal-bearing
sediments terminated here, or, if they had a northerly
extension, they have either been greatly denuded or lie
concealed beneath newer formations.
It is possible that the marine Carboniferous strata
of the western Sahara may be succeeded by the West-
phalian or Stephanian Coal-measures of central France,
but there is no evidence of the presence of the Karroo
beds. The Cretaceous and Tertiary formations may
contain beds of lignitic coal, as they are said to do
along the west coast and in Algeria, from which
105 tons were obtained in 1904, but as the output for
1905 is only 85 tons, it would seem that either the coals
are not extensive or they are of poor quality.
Workable lignites are also said to occur at Tegullet,
Debra-Lebanos, and Ankober, in the Shoa district of
Abyssinia.
Though the seams of coal are restricted to certain
regions, and occur only at one or possibly two horizons
in the sequence, South Africa may be regarded as one
vast coal-basin. Deposition of arenaceous and argil-
laceous sediments seems to have been continuous over
an area stretching from Worcester to beyond the
Zambesi. Where fully developed, as in Cape Colony
and Natal, the sequence presents an apparently uninter-
rupted succession of sediments approaching 20,000 feet

--- Page Break ---
282 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
in thickness. The whole of this great mass of strata is
known as the Karroo System, and is usually regarded
as representing the formations included in the Upper
Carboniferous and Jurassic of Europe.
With some interruptions, caused by denudation, the
Karroo beds extend in one sheet over the greater part
of Cape Colony, through the Orange River Colony and
the Transvaal into Rhodesia, and have been traced to
the north of the Zambesi, while isolated masses, let into
older strata by faulting, are met with in Nyassaland
and about Tanganyika.
Cape Colony affords the type development of the
Karroo System, and south of the Zambesi this Colony
alone contains fossiliferous sediments older than the
Karroo. The following table gives the formations met
with in Cape Colony, and their probable European
equivalents
:
THE PALAEOZOIC AND LATER FORMATIONS IN SOUTH
AFRICA.
CretaceousfPondoland Cretaceous Series 1~o . < TT ., i o >v_/reiaceout).
System \Uitenhage Series /
Unconformity.
Volcanic beds, 4,000 feet \TnraQ<;
:
r
Cave Sandstone, i,800feet J
Jurassic -
Red beds, 1,400 feet
Molteno beds, 2,000 feet
Burghersdorp beds
Dicynodon beds
Pareiasaurus beds
Shales and sandstones
Laingsburg beds
Shales
Upper Shales
Conglomerates
Lower Shales
Conformity.
[Trias.
vPermian.
|
Carbon-
iferous.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 283
Ca fWitteberg Series, 1,000 feet 1
System1
B kkeveld Series, ^Devonian.
[Table Mountain Series, 1,000 feet J
Great Unconformity.
Pre-Cape Rocks.
Cretaceous rocks occur only along the coastal belt,
and do not anywhere conceal the Karroo formation in
FIG. 30. MAP SHOWING THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE KARROO
SYSTEM IN SOUTH AFRICA.
the interior. In Cape Colony the Cape System passes
conformably up into the Karroo, but in Natal the
Dwyka Series rests unconformably on the Table Moun-
tain Series, and elsewhere on the eroded and generally
intensely folded pre-Cape rocks.
Workable coals are confined to the Molteno beds in
Cape Colony. The Transvaal coals have been referred

--- Page Break ---
284 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
to the Ecca and Beaufort Series, and also to the Storm -
berg Series.
The South African coalfields owe their isolation for
the most part to denudation, and seldom to earth-move-
ment, the strata rarely departing more than a few
degrees from the horizontal.
Cape Colony, Natal, and the Transvaal contain the
chief coalfields, but Karroo coal is worked in South
Rhodesia, and occurs in the Central African Protec-
torate and German East Africa.
The Karroo System has been divided into an Upper
subdivision (Stormberg Series), a Middle subdivision
(Beaufort Series), and a Lower subdivision (Ecca and
Dwyka Series). The coarse character and glacial origin
of the Dwyka Conglomerate distinguishes the Lower
Karroo, but the Middle and Upper Karroo sandstones
and shales havemany lithological characters incommon
with the Ecca Series. The classification of the Karroo
strata is mainly based by geologists on the vertical dis-
tribution of the fossil reptiles and plants.
The reptilian remains of the Karroo are very
abundant and of peculiar forms, but identical with
those found in the Gondwana formation of India, and
in the Permo-Carboniferous rocks of Australia, where
they appear in much the same order of occurrence as in
South Africa. Allied forms are met with in the Permo-
Carboniferous strata of Russia - in -
Europe and in
America.
Until recently reptilian remains were unknown in
the Ecca Series, but they are now known to have
existed at this period.
The chief reptilian remains are found in the Beaufort
Series, where the following forms have been identified :

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 285
Pareiasaurus, Oudenodon, and large Dinocephalians in the
Lower Beaufort beds ; Dicynodon and many Thero-
cephalians in the Middle beds ; and Cynognathus, Micro-
gomphodon, Batrachosuchus, and Dicynodon latifrons in
the Upper beds.
The recently discovered crocodile Notochampsa, from
the Red beds and Gave Sandstones, indicates the
Jurassic age of the highest beds of the Stormberg
Series. :
Plant remains, though not so abundant as in the
Carboniferous rocks of the northern hemisphere, form
useful guides in determining the age of the major
divisions of the Karroo System.
With the exception of certain species of Lepido-
dendron, Bothrodendron, Sigillaria, and Cordaites, the
flora is distinct from that of the Upper Carboniferous
rocks of Europe. On the other hand, the Glossopteris
flora of the Karroo beds distinguishes the chief coal-
bearing strata of India and Australia. Wherever the
genus Glossopteris (Plate VIII., p. 291) is found in the
strata of South Africa, they may be confidently referred
to the Karroo System, and therefore may possibly be
coal-bearing.
The chief plants met with in the Ecca Series are :
Bothrodendron lesli, Glossopteris browniana, Nceggera-
thiopsis hislopi, Gangamopteris cyclopteroides, Lepido-
dendrony Sigillaria brardi, and Phyllotheca.
In the Beaufort Series, Glossopteris browniana and
Phyllotheca ascend from the Ecca Series, but are
mingled with species of Glossopteris not found in the
beds below.
The genus Glossopteris is rare or absent in the Storm-
berg Series, where Thinnfeldia odontopteroidts, T. rhom-

--- Page Break ---
286 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
boidalis, Stenopteris elongata, Tceniopteris carruthersi, and
Callipteridium stormbergeme constitute the distinguish-
ing flora.
Cape Colony. The chief coalfields of Cape Colony
are situated in the Stormberg-Indwe area, towards the
southern outcrop of the Stormberg Series. The work-
able coals are restricted to the Molteno subdivision,
which gives the following general section in descending
order :
1. White sandstone and beds of shale and mudstone.
2. Coal horizon of Cala, etc.
3. Fine-grained sandstone.
4. Coarse pebbly sandstone (Indwe Sandstone).
5. Coal of Guba.
6. Fine-grained grey sandstone, 80 feet thick.
7. Coal of Indwe.
8. Fine-grained grey sandstone, with beds of buff-
coloured shales.
The coal-bearing strata consist of sandstones and
shales lying almost horizontally, but intersected by
numerous dykes and intrusive sheets of dolerite, which
generally exert a very deleterious effect on the coals,
converting them into coke or soot.
Molteno coal is met with in the Stormberg Mountains
and along the lower slopes of the Drakensberg up to
the Natal border. The coals are of bituminous variety,
containing from 45 to 70 per cent, of fixed carbon, and
from 10 to 28 per cent, of volatile hydrocarbons. Like
most South African coals, the ash percentage is high,
ranging from 20 to 30. The sulphur percentage is
generally low.
At Indwe, the centre of one of the most important
coal-producing areas, the chief coal is known as the
Jndwe Seam. It is a composite seam, being made up

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 287
of a number of shale bands, and seven distinct coals
named : Lower Smith's Coal, Upper Smith's Coal,
Cannel Seam, Twelve Inch Seam, Main
Seam or Top Coal, Blue Coal, and
Smith's Coal. These give a united
thickness of 7 feet of coal. The Main
Seam, about 2 feet thick, is divided
into three by two thin partings of shale.
A thick sandstone forms the roof of
the Indwe Seam, and frequently cuts
across one or more of the beds of coal
forming extensive washouts. In the
neighbourhood of the intrusive dykes,
the seams are converted into coke.
This develops a great heat in burning,
which fuses the ash, forming much
clinker. An analysis of the Indwe
Coal shows :
hydrocarbon, 12*54; fixed
carbon, 63*03 ; ash, 24*42 per cent.
In the Sterkstroom area a coal 2\ feet
thick gives an analysis
: volatile matter,
25 to 30 ; fixed carbon, 46 to 58 ; ash,
II to 18 ; sulphur, 0*75 to 1*20 per cent.
This coal probably lies a little above
the Indwe Sandstone.
At Matatiele a carbonaceous shale
allied to Torbanite occurs below a seam
of coal, but contains a large amount of
ash (47*26 per cent.).
Considerable discussion has taken
place as to the existence of coal beneath
the Karroo desert. The Upper Dwyka black shales
occur at Kimberley (Kimberley Shales), and are hence

--- Page Break ---
288 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
probably continuous with the coal-bearing rocks of
Vereeniging in the Transvaal. These black shales,
wherever they have been examined along the southern
margins of the Karroo desert, are without coal. There
seems no reason, therefore, to suppose that they are
productive beneath the great thickness of Upper Karroo
strata, which occupy the centre of the Karroo basin
between De Aar and the outcrop of the black shales
along the southern margins of the Karroo desert.
In 1905 the output of coal from Cape Colony
amounted to 146,529 tons.
Natal and Zululand. Both Natal and Zululand
possess coal-seams very similar to those of Cape
Colony, but many of them are of higher grade.
Collieries in the Newcastle and Dundee districts are
being actively worked, and the output is greatly in
excess of that of Cape Colony. In 1905 the output
amounted to 1,129,407 tons.
The geological formations, chronologically arranged,
are given on the opposite page, but the stratigraphy
of the Colony is far less known than that of Cape
Colony.
Some doubt exists as to whether the coal-bearing
strata should be included in the Ecca Series, some
authorities placing them with the Beaufort Series.
Glossopteris and Phyllotheca occur in the sandstones and
shales associated with the coal strata, while in the
Stormberg Series, in which only thin seams occur,
the flora contain Thinnfeldia odontopteroides and Pterop-
tyllurn.
Natal coals are bituminous, but those of Zululand
are stated to be anthracitic or semi-anthracitic.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 289
Coal occurs in large quantities in the three divisions
of Natal and in the Vryheid and Utrecht districts,
though at present they are mainly undeveloped. In
Zululand, where the coal-bearing series is extensively
developed, prospecting has only been carried on in a
very desultory manner.
THE PALAEOZOIC AND LATER FORMATIONS IN NATAL.
Cretaceous : Umtavuna Beds.
Unconformity.
I
Plateau Basalts.
Re^Be^s
S r
Molteno Beds.
System
: } Beaufort Series Beaufort Beds.
T- o fEcca Co;Ecca Series - -f
Ecca ghaieb
\ Dwyka Series - Glacial Conglomerate.
Unconformity.
Cape System
: Table Mountain Sandstone.
Unconformity.
Pre-Cape Rocks.
Transvaal. The local demand for coal in the great
mining and metallurgical industries has caused the
coal-deposits of the Transvaal to assume an importance
they might not otherwise have obtained. In 1905 the
output from the Transvaal coal-mines and from the
adjacent mines in the Orange River Colony amounted
to 2,771,439 tons, of which the Transvaal contributed
2,606,799 tons.
Coal-bearing strata cover wide areas in the south-east,
and mining is being extensively carried on at Viljoen's
Drift, Vereeniging, Brakpan, and Springs in the Middle-

--- Page Break ---
29b GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
berg and Belfast districts, while the Ermelo and Caro-
lina districts are now being opened up. Attention has
also recently been drawn to the Koomati Poort Coal-
field in the eastern Transvaal on the Portuguese border-
land.
The total thickness of the Coal-measures does not
exceed 600 feet, and is under 400 feet over large areas.
The Coal-measures of the Transvaal belong to the
Karroo System. This rests in hollows on the upturned
and eroded edges of a great variety of unfossiliferous
sedimentary and crystalline rocks, which cannot be
confounded with the plant-bearing and gently inclined
strata of the Karroo System.
The Karroo System has been subdivided as follows :
THE KARROO FORMATION IN THE TRANSVAAL.
("Volcanic Rhyolites.
Stormberg Series: ^ Bushveld Amygdaloids.
[Bushveld Sandstone Series.
Beaufort Series (?)
: Coal-measure Series.
Ecca and Dwyka Series: Ecca Shales and Dwyka Con-
glomerate.
Great Unconformity.
Pre-Karroo Rocks.
The Stormberg Series, consisting of an immense
thickness of sandstones and volcanic rocks, only crop
out along the Portuguese border. Over the rest of the
Transvaal they have either been denuded or were never
deposited. Authorities differ as to the presence of the
Beaufort Series, some geologists, on the evidence
afforded by the plants, referring the Transvaal coal-
bearing rocks to the Ecca Series. The following fossils
found at Vereeniging certainly appear to support the

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
Plate VIII.
Photo}
SlGILLARIA BRARDI, BRONGT. Reduced.
Photo} \A. C.Seivard.
GLOSSOPTERIS BROWNIANA, BRONGT. Reduced.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 291
Ecca age of the Coal-measures at
this locality
: Schizoneura, sp. ; Glos-
sopteris angustifolia, Brongn. var. nov. ;
Glossopteris angustifolia , Brongn. ;
Glossopteris browniana, Brongn. ; Glos-
sopteris indica, Schimp. ; Gangamop-
teris cyclopteroides, Feist. ; Callipteri-
diumy sp. ; Neuropteridium validum,
Feist. ; Bothrodendron lesli, Sew. ;
Lepidodendron, sp. nov. ; Lepidoden-
dron podroanum (Carr.) ; Sigillaria
brardi, Brongn. ; Psygmophyllum kid-
stoni, Sew. ; Cordaites (Nceggera-
thiopsis) hislopi, Bunb. ; Conites, sp.
Elsewhere in the Transvaal the
plant evidence is too scanty as yet
to permit a definite conclusion to
be drawn, while the knowledge of
the fossil plants of Natal, to which
a comparison might be instituted, is
as yet very imperfect.
The strata of the Karroo System
in the Transvaal lie at gentle angles,
and fill up hollows in much older
rocks. They are little subjected to
disturbance by faulting, but
'
wash-
outs
'
are frequent. These are com-
monly considered to be caused by
contemporaneous erosion, but they
are also explained by the action of
percolating water which has oxidized
the carbonaceous constituents, and
removed the pyritic and soluble
O ptf
< o ri
Wz"
J X< w -
H fflH
o o
19 2

--- Page Break ---
292 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
portions of the coal-seam. The chief interruptions in
the sequence are caused by dykes and intrusive sheets
of dolerite, which are general throughout the series
except in the Witbank Coalfield.
Although some seams attain a great thickness, the
amount of marketable coal rarely exceeds a few feet, as
these thick seams are made up of intercalations of shaly
material and dull, impure coal. With the exception of
the narrow bands of good coal, the percentage of ash
is seldom less than 7 per cent., and ranges as high as
21 per cent. The fixed carbon ranges between
50 and 60 per cent. The coals also contain much
moisture.
In the Koomati Poort Coalfield the fixed carbon
occasionally reaches 80 per cent., but the low percentage
of the volatile constituents is probably due to the effect
of the igneous intrusions which are general throughout
the series. Unlike Welsh coals, these anthracitic coals
of Koomati Poort contain a high percentage of ash, up
to as much as 36 per cent.
A coal-seam in Swaziland, 6 feet in thickness, gives
a carbon percentage of over 87, the ash being under
10 per cent.
In prospecting for coal in the Transvaal there can
be no question that rotatory drills and trial shafts give
the best results, since outcrops of coals are seldom
visible owing to the perishable nature of coal near the
surface. The coal-bearing strata rarely exceed a few
hundred feet in thickness at any one spot, and so
present little difficulty either in drilling or shaft-
sinking.
Until recently the Dwyka Conglomerate lying at the
base of the coal-bearing strata was considered to be the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AFRICA 293
only conglomerate among the Karroo rocks, but it is
now known that a conglomerate is frequently present
above the productive measures of the Karroo, so that
it is essential to determine whether a conglomerate
reached in a trial sinking is above or below the coal
strata. A conglomerate in which the pebbles are uniform
in size and fairly evenly distributed may be taken as
newer than the Dwyka Conglomerate, in which the
pebbles are of all sizes, very unevenly distributed, and
often striated. Since, however, neither of the con-
glomerates is of any great thickness, it is certainly
advisable to continue any experimental boring through
the conglomerate, and so prove the rocks below.
Rhodesia. Coal of Karroo age is worked at Wankies,
in the Zambesi basin, and was discovered at Tete by
Livingstone. The Karroo formation, containing coal,
occurs also in the basins of the Sabi, Sengwe, and Tuli
rivers, but owing to their remote situation little is known
about them.
A red and white felspathic sandstone (Forest Sand-
stone), with interbedded basalts like the Karroo, covers
immense areas in Rhodesiaand the Congo Free State. It
is uncertain whether the Forest Sandstones belong to
a formation newer than the Karroo, or whether some
portions at least may not belong to the higher divisions
of this formation.
The output of coal from Rhodesia, chiefly obtained
from Wankies, amounted in 1905 to 98,751 tons.
INDIA.
Since 1893 India has taken her place as one of the
important coal-producing regions in the East. In 1905

--- Page Break ---
294 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
the output amounted to nearly 8,000,000 tons, obtained
from pits of comparatively shallow depths, situated
chiefly in Bengal. The quantity annually being raised
is, however, a very small fraction of the available supply,
estimated at 9,085,000,000 tons, contained in the 35,000
square miles that the coalfields are estimated to cover,
and the coal-mining industry is yet in its infancy, though
permanently established.
The coal-bearing strata of Peninsular India occur in
numerous isolated basins, and though some are of
considerable size, others do not attain to more than a
few square miles in extent.
The area of the exposed coalfields is small when
compared with the vast extent of the continent, and
there seems little possibility of India possessing con-
cealed coalfields to any extent.
The continent is, in fact, built up largely of crystalline
gneisses and schists, or of rocks older than the Carbon-
iferous, and in which, therefore, it is useless to look for
coal.
Besides these older rocks, more than 200,000 square
miles in the Deccan are covered with basalts attaining
a thickness exceeding 6,000 feet. The immense plain,
exceeding 300,000 square miles, of the Ganges, Indus,
and Brahmapootra is thickly covered with alluvial
deposits, completely burying the solid rocks over the
whole of this area.
The chief coalfields of India belong to the lower
division of the Peninsula development of the Gond-
wana System, which more or less corresponds to the
Upper Carboniferous, Permian and Triassic periods of
Europe.

--- Page Break ---
( "I
) KASHMIR j"*
--.-. >^ * ' *
English Miles.
Too 200 5*5 wo sofbouf
FIG. 33. THE PERMO-CARBONIFEROUS COALFIELDS OF INDIA.

--- Page Break ---
296 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The Gondwana System has been subdivided as
follows :
THE GONDWANA SYSTEM IN INDIA.
TT ~ , fUmia and JabalpurUpper Gondwana Rajmahal and Mahadeva.
fPanchet, 1,800 feet.
K^
, fRaniganj, 8,000 to 10,000 feet,
Lower Gondwana
|
' a
\Barakar,
IT i v.' /Karharbari, 800 feet.
I i aicnir -{ /
~pa ir.'u r
i \. " > j? ?
The Upper Gondwana is considered to be the homo-
taxial equivalent of the Rhsetic, Lias, and Oolitic
formations. The comparison, however, is not a close
one, and it is far preferable to compare the strata with
those of the Karroo System of South Africa, in which
the fossils are of the same types as those occurring in
the Gondw
r
ana.
There is little doubt that the Gondwana beds, like
those of the Karroo, were laid down in lakes. There
is the same irregularity in the coal-seams and arrange-
ment of the strata, while the fauna in both is either
terrestrial or freshwater. A thick conglomerate at the
base of the Talchir division unquestionably corresponds
to the Dwyka, and, like this, is of glacial origin.
A comparison between the other subdivisions of the
Lower Gondwana and those of the Karroo must for
the present be regarded as tentative, since, as we have
said, geologists are not agreed as to the age of the
different parts of the Karroo System.
TheGondwana rocks occupy basin-shaped depressions
in the older formations, and the boundaries of the
coalfields are usually rigidly defined by the outcrops

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF INDIA 297
of these older strata. Few of the coalfields, therefore,
have any possible extensions beneath newer formations.
Some of the depressions correspond to the existing
river valleys and have a linear extension ; but different
opinions are held as to the extent to which this present
mode of occurrence is due to earth-movements, and
how far the basins represent the original hollows in
which the sediments accumulated. Many of the coal-
fields were unquestionably once connected, and owe
their present isolation to denudation and faulting.
There is a general conformity between the different
members of the Gondwana System, but the Upper
division rests unconformably on the Lower.
The rocks of the Karharbari group consist of sand-
stones, grits, conglomerates, and coal-seams. The latter
are somewhat variable in thickness, but undergo com-
paratively little change in composition. Sandstones
and shales form the chief rocks of the Damuda and
Panchet Series, but the latter contain beds of red clay
absent in the Damuda, while the carbonaceous shales,
present in the Damuda, are wanting in the Panchet
Series.
The character of the flora of the Upper Gondwana
is very distinct from that met with in the Lower Series.
In the upper measures, cycads chiefly prevail; in the
lower, equisetums and ferns of the Glossopteris type
are most abundant. Among the flora of the Lower
Gondwana the commonest forms other than Glossop-
teris are species of Gangamopteris, Schizoneura, and
Vertebraria (now admitted to be a root of Glossopteris}.
Like the Karroo formation, the Lower Gondwana
contains numerous reptilian remains, among them being
Dicynodon.

--- Page Break ---
298 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Indian coals of the Gondwana period resemble those
of South Africa in composition, in irregularity of thick-
ness, and in the amount of ash, which is usually much
greater than in European coals. Besides the ash,
many of the thicker seams contain bands of dirt and
shale, so that though a seam may reach 100 feet in
thickness the available quantity of good coal may be
much less than this amount.
Most of the seams belong to the bituminous varieties,
and several yield good metallurgical coke, of great im-
portance considering the quantity of rich iron deposits
in the country.
The chief coals occur in the Karharbari and Barakar
groups, those found in the former being of excellent
quality, and generally superior to the majority of the
Damuda seams. Nearly all the coalfields of the Indian
Peninsula, however, belong to the Damuda Series.
In the Barakar group the coals, as is usual in
lacustrine deposits, show a general tendency to vary
in thickness and quality within short distances, some
of the seams, including the partings of shale, ranging
between 35 and 90 feet in thickness.
The most important coalfields of India are those of
Raniganj, Giridhi (Karharbari), and Jharia, situated in
Bengal. In 1900 the output from these fields amounted
to nearly 5,000,000 tons out of 6,118,692 tons for the
whole of India.
The Raniganj Coalfield, 130 miles from Calcutta, with
an area of over 500 square miles, is one of the most
important in India, the total available amount of coal
being estimated at 14,000,000,000 tons. The fixed
carbon ranges from 50 to 60 per cent., the ash averaging
10 per cent.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF INDIA 299
The Giridhi Coalfield, 200 miles from Calcutta, covers
an area of about eight square miles, and is estimated
to contain 136,000,000 tons of coal. One of the lower
seams varies from 12 to 30 feet in thickness. It is of
good quality, the fixed carbon amounting to 67 per cent.,
and the ash ranging from 5 to 12 per cent.
The Jharia Coalfield, situated a few miles to the
west of that of Raniganj, has an area of about
200 square miles, and is estimated to contain 864,000
tons of coal. Analyses give an ash percentage of over
10 per cent., but the coal is nevertheless of good
quality.
Other coalfields, though little development has yet
taken place, are those of Bokaro, with an area estimated
at 220 square miles, and Karanpura, estimated at
472 square miles in extent. In addition there are
the smaller coalfields of Ramgarh, Daltonganj (Pala-
mau), Talchir, and Rajmahal.
The Central Provinces contain the little developed
coalfields of Mohpani and Warora, both of Gondwana
age.
In the Nizam's dominions, coals occur in the Barakar
group, but the only area worked is Singareni in the
Godavery Valley. One seam here attains a thickness
of over 40 feet.
Coals of Cretaceous age occur in Assam, in the Garo,
Khasi and Jaintia Hills, but the coal is of inferior
quality, resinous and woody. In Burmah, Cretaceous
coals, from 4 to 5 feet thick, are worked on the west
bank of the Irawaddy, about sixty miles from Man-
dalay, and near Kaliwa, on the Chindwin River. The
percentage of ash is small, but in quality the coals
resemble those of Assam.

--- Page Break ---
300 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The Tertiary coals appear to be the next best in
quality to those of the Gondwana System. They are
met with in Baluchistan, the Punjab, Sind, Assam, and
Burmah.
In Baluchistan, thin seams of bituminous coking
coals of fair quality, but usually sulphurous, are worked
in the neighbourhood of Quetta. Coals are also known
to exist at Khost and Much.
The Makum Coalfield, in Assam, contains a seam of
coal 100 feet in thickness, of which 75 feet are said to
consist of solid coal of a superior quality. There are
also several small seams less than a yard in thickness
extending over large areas. Analyses of the coals give
an average composition of fixed carbon, 6o
e
o ; volatile
matter, 36*2 ; ash, 3*8 per cent. The Assam Tertiary
coals are stated to be among the best steam coals in
India.
AUSTRALIA.
The name of New South Wales at once suggests the
presence of coal in this important region of Eastern
Australia, and, in fact, the Colony gained this title
from the discovery of coal as early as 1797 at Coal
Cliff, Wollongong, south of Sydney.
The geological succession in Australia is, on the
whole, more complete than that of South Africa and
India. Fossiliferous, Cambrian, Silurian, and Devonian
strata are well represented, but in the chief coal-
bearing regions of New South Wales the later Mesozoic
and Tertiary formations are of no great thickness, and
chiefly consist of loosely stratified sands and gravels, or
of volcanic rocks. In Victoria the Tertiary sea covered
a large area south of the Murray River and north of the

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AUSTRALIA 301
Great Australian Bight, but no marine beds of Tertiary
age are known in New South Wales or Queensland east
of the main dividing range.
The following table gives the general succession of
the Australian stratified rocks :
THE GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS OF AUSTRALIA.
Post-Tertiary
-
Pliocene -
Miocene -
Eocene
Cretaceous
Jurassic
-
Trias-Jura
Permo-Carboniferous
Carboniferous
Gravels, sands, alluvial flats and
great plains of the interior.
Alluvial deposits capped by basalt.
Western Victoria, Queensland.
Marine limestones of Adelaide.
Marine beds of Arumpo, Coria Bay.
Lower volcanic group of Queens-
land.
Freshwater beds, New England.
Muddy Creek beds, Victoria.
Table Cape beds, Tasmania.
Desert sandstones and Rolling
Downs formation, Queensland,
New South Wales, and West
Australia.
New South Wales ; Champion Bay,
West Australia.
Wianamatta shales, Hawkesbury
sandstone, Clarence River beds
(Artesian water-bearing beds ?),
Ipswich and Burrum beds ; Upper
Coal-measures of Tasmania.
Coal-measures, Newcastle ; Upper
and Middle Bowen River forma-
tions. West Australia, Tasmania.
Contemporaneous lavas and tuffs.
Gympie, Lower Bowen and Star
formations; Lower Coal-measures
of Tasmania.

--- Page Break ---
302 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Devonian - - Mount Lambie and Wollongong
sandstones, New South Wales ;
Mount Tambo beds, Victoria ;
Burdekin beds, Queensland. Fin-
gal slates, Tasmania. Intrusive
granites.
Silurian - - -
Graptolite beds, Victoria; New
South Wales, South and West
Australia and Tasmania.
Cambrian - - Olenellus beds.
Pre-Cambrian - -
Metamorphic rocks.
Brown coal and lignite are obtained from the thin
deposits of Tertiary rocks around Kiandra Bay. At
Lal-Lal, in Victoria, a bed of lignite 100 feet in
thickness occurs. Coals from I to 6 feet thick, con-
taining little ash and with a percentage of fixed carbon
from 61 to 69, occur in the Burrum Coalfield, and seams
between 3 and 7 feet thick in the Broadsound Basin.
The evidence as to the age of these coals points to
their being certainly older than the Desert Sandstones
by which they are unconformably overlain, but newer
than the Permo-Carboniferous rocks on which they rest
unconformably.
In Queensland the Ipswich Coalfield, estimated at
12,000 square miles in extent, belongs to the Upper
Trias-Jura formation, the measures being the probable
equivalents of the Lower Clarence Series of New South
Wales. The seams are numerous and often thick, but
have an ash percentage varying from 6 to 50. It is,
however, from the Permo-Carboniferous rocks that the
chief supply of coal is drawn, over 80 per cent, of the
total output for the Commonwealth being obtained
from this formation in New South Wales alone. Taking
16,550 square miles as the area of the coal-basin,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AUSTRALIA 303
and an average of 10 feet of coal over the whole area,
it is estimated to contain 115,346,880,000 tons of avail-
able coal after subtracting about one-third for the loss
in working.
A great thickness of the Hawkesbury Series, belong-
ing to the Trias-Jura formation, conceals the productive
measures over much of the region between the coast
and the great dividing range. In the south the Hawkes-
bury Series is divided into the Wianamatta Shales, the
Hawkesbury Sandstone, and the Narrabeen Shales, and
are considered to be represented in the north by the
Upper, Middle, and Lower Clarence shales and sand-
stones. The Middle Clarence Series is also considered
to cover vast areas west of the dividing range, and to
form the reservoirs of the Artesian water, though some
geologists consider the water-bearing sandstones to be
of Cretaceous age.
Thin seams of coal are found in the Hawkesbury Sand-
stone and Wianamatta Shales, and seams varying from
2 to 37 feet in thickness occur in the Lower Clarence
Series (Ipswich Beds, p. 302) ; but the thick coals are
made up of numerous layers of dirt and shale, the
individual seams of clean coal seldom exceeding one foot
in thickness. They contain a high percentage of
carbon, but the percentage of ash is great, and the coals
are only suitable for local use. Coal fragments are
obtained from the drills used in boring for water on the
western plains, but if seams of workable thickness and
of good quality should be found to occur, in mining them
there will always be a difficulty owing to their close
association with strata bearing water under pressure.
Since the Hawkesbury and Clarence Series cover up
the valuable Permo-Carboniferous measures, it is im-

--- Page Break ---
304 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
portant toknow their stratigraphical relation to the older
formation, and how they may be distinguished from it.
With the exception of a few though striking
instances, the Hawkesbury Series rests conformably on
the Newcastle or highest strata of the Permo-Carbon-
iferous System. The great tectonic movements of
Australia which resulted in the formation of the north
and south dividing range, followed, therefore, the
Trias-Jura period instead of preceding it as in Europe.
Though the Hawkesbury Series is thus closely con-
nected stratigraphically with the Permo-Carboniferous
formation, there is a very marked difference between the
fauna and flora, enabling the two formations to be
readily distinguished one from the other.
The Hawkesbury Series is wholly of freshwater or
estuarine origin ; the Permo-Carboniferous is largely a
marine formation, but contains the important estuarine
coal-bearing beds. Between the different strata of
the two systems a marked distinction exists in the fauna
and flora, as will be seen by comparing the following lists
of the common fossils of the Hawkesbury Series with
those of the Permo-Carboniferous rocks (p. 307). In
the Hawkesbury Series the fauna contains Mastodonto-
saurus platyceps among the Labyrinthodonts ; the fishes
Palczoniscus, Cleithrolepis, Myrolepis ; and the curious
gasteropod Tremanotus. The flora contains true cycads
of the genera Podozamites and Otozamites and conifers,
but the most characteristic fossil plants are Tceniopteris
daintreei and Thinnfeldia odontopteroides, genera, it will
be remembered, common in the Upper Karroo forma-
tion of South Africa (p. 285) and in the Upper Gond-
wana rocks of India.
The Permo-Carboniferous formation of New South

--- Page Break ---
t
.-.-:;--
..
. . .
t
v:.^:: Y-c-.-m^m
^milgiilimjjM SOUTH
FIG. 34. THE PERMO-CARBONIFEROUS COALFIELDS OF EASTERN
AUSTRALIA.
20

--- Page Break ---
3o6 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Wales is divided, in descending order of sequence, as
follows :
Thickness
in Feet.
Upper or Newcastle Coal-measures (50 to 60 feet
workable coal)
-
1*150
Dempsey Series (unproductive)
-
2,000
Middle, Tomago or East Maitland Series (20 feet
workable coal) 570
Upper Marine Series (Productus brachythoerus) 5,ooo
Lower and Greta Coal-measures (20 to 40 feet
workable coal)
-
130
Lower Marine Series (Eurydesma cordata)
-
4,800
The Permo-Carboniferous rocks lie in a shallow open
syncline, the productive measures extending longi-
tudinally from Four Mile Creek to the Clyde River, a
distance of over 200 miles, and latitudinally (Fig. 34,
p. 305) from the coast to the outcrop of Devonian
strata and the granites of the Blue Mountain region?
a distance of over fifty miles.
The Newcastle Series is well developed in the neigh-
bourhood of Newcastle, Bulli in the Illawarra district,
and on the western side of the Blue Mountains around
Lithgow. The principal seams of the Newcastle Coal-
field, in ascending order, are the Borehole (6 to 8 feet),
Great Northern (20 feet), Catherine Bay (14 feet), Four
Feet (4 feet), Wallarah (n feet). In all it is estimated
that the Upper Measures contain between 50 and
60 feet of workable coal. In the Wallarah Coalfield
the seams in descending order are the Bulli (2 to
ii feet), Four Feet (4 feet), Thick (14 feet), Eight Feet
(7 to 9 feet), Bottom (6 feet).
The Dempsey freshwater series do not occur in
every coalfield, but rest on the Middle or Tomago
Coal-measures in the neighbourhood of East Maitland,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AUSTRALIA 307
where the principal seams of the Tomago Series occur
in the following order, commencing with the highest
seam : Four Feet (4 feet), Seven Feet (7 feet), Six
Feet (6 feet), Three Feet (3 feet), Two Feet Six (2 feet
6 inches), Rathluba (4 to 8 feet), Morpeth (4 to 6 feet),
the total average thickness of workable coal being
estimated at 20 feet.
Between West Maitland and Greta, the Greta coal
series contains two seams varying respectively from
3 to ii and from 14 to 32 feet in thickness. From
Inverell up to the Queensland border a long coalfield
about a quarter of a mile broad contains a seam of
coal about 27 feet thick, considered to belong to the
Greta Series, here often much disturbed. This seam
is of excellent quality, in places anthracitic, and said
to be suitable both for steam-raising and smelting
purposes.
Contemporaneous sheets of basalt, andesite, and
volcanic tuffs, reaching a thickness of 1,600 feet near
Kiama, lie between the Upper Marine and Newcastle
Series. Intrusive dykes of basalt and dolerite are
common, and locally cause a seam to become anthra-
citized, but frequently,when numerous, render a district
worthless. At Mitagong a seam is locally converted
into a typical anthracite by the intrusion of a mass of
syenite. There is no evidence to show the age of the
intrusions, but since the Mesozoic period was one of
volcanic quiescence in Australasia they possibly belong
to the great Tertiary volcanic period.
The coal horizons of the Permo-Carboniferous lie
above the Lower and Upper Marine Series. The fossil
characteristic of the Lower Marine Series is the lamelli-
branch Eurydesma covdata, in association with Platy-
20 2

--- Page Break ---
3o8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
schisma and Pachydomus. In the coal-bearing horizons,
remains of Glossopteris browniana, G. angustifolia, Ganga-
mopteris, and Vertebraria, are the most characteristic
fossils, as they are in the Lower Karroo and Lower
Gondwana Series. In the Newcastle Series numerous
silicified trunks of trees belonging to the genus
Dadoxylon (allied to the modern Araucaria) occur at
several horizons in close association with seams of
coal.
The carbonaceous mudstones of the Upper Marine
beds, where about to give place to freshwater beds,
contain crystals of the remarkable pseudomorph Glen-
donite from 2 to 20 inches in diameter. Consisting
now essentially of carbonate of lime, they may be
pseudomorphs after salts of calcium and sodium.
These pseudomorphs occur only at a few horizons in
the Upper Marine Series, and nowhere else in Australia.
Explorations to prove the deep-seated coals in the
Newcastle basin have taken place from time to time,
the best known and most important being the Cremorne
boring in Sydney harbour. At a depth of 2,917 feet a
seam 10 feet thick of nearly pure coal, containing
71*09 per cent, of fixed carbon, 17*57 Per cent- of volatile
matter, and 10*68 per cent, of ash, was encountered by
the drill in November, 1893. The seam is considered
to represent the Bulli Coal, and the site of the boring
is supposed to be near the centre of the basin (Fig. 35,
p. 309).
In Queensland, the chief coalfields of Permo-Carboni-
ferous age occur in the Bowen River district, where the
strata are separated into Upper, Middle, and Lower
Bowen Series. The Upper Bowen Series is considered
to represent the Newcastle Series. The Middle sub-

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF AUSTRALIA 309
division contains the Dempsey Seam of Pelican Creek.
A composite seam, known as the Daintree Coal, occurs
near the base of the Upper Series, and two more
composite seams called the MacArthur and Havilah
seams above this. All these seams give a very high
percentage of ash, and are much intruded into by trap.
The Settle River Coalfield, near Palmerville, contains

--- Page Break ---
3io GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
numerous and thick seams, but they are of poor quality
and mixed with dirt. An anthracite, n feet thick, has
been found on the Dawson River. The Carboniferous
and older rocks contain no coal. The former are
marine formations, but are distinguished from the
lowerand uppermarine bedsof Permo-Carboniferous age
by the absence of the corals Trachypora and Stenopora
among animals, and by the absence of Lepidodendron
veltheimianum among plants. Most characteristic of
the Carboniferous marine beds are Productus semi-
reticulatus, Orthis crenistra, O. resupinata. The lower
part of the Lower Marine Series contains evidences of
the existence of a cold climate, and in Victoria the
Greta measures are possibly represented by part of the
Bacchus Marsh beds of glacial origin, and containing
no workable coals.
The output of coal for Australia in 1905 amounted to
7,495,956 tons, of which a considerable portion was
shipped to the Pacific ports and to India, though less
now goes to the latter country since the opening up of
the Indian coalfields.
SOUTH AMERICA.
The most important, and geologically the most
interesting, coals of South America are those found in
the Brazil and Argentine republics. It is now beyond
question that these coals can be compared in age with
the chief coals of South Africa, India, and Australia
that is, they are of Permo-Carboniferous age. The
flora, fauna, and nature of the Brazilian Coal-measures
show, indeed, the closest parallelism to those of South
Africa. In both countries the sediments were deposited

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF SOUTH AMERICA 311
in large continental lakes situated at high altitudes,
and in striking contrast to the estuarine and maritime
flats in which the Carboniferous Coal-measures of the
northern hemisphere accumulated.
The South American succession of the Permo-Car-
boniferous rocks has been recently classified as follows :
THE GONDWANA SYSTEM OF SOUTH AMERICA.
TSerra Geral eruptives.
Sao Bento Series
-[
Botacatu sandstones.
[Rio do Pasto red beds, with reptiles.
{Rocinha
limestone.
EstradaNovagreyandvariegated shales.
Inky-black shale. Mesosaurus.
I
Palermo Shales.
Rio Bonito shales and sandstone with
coal.
Orleans conglomerate.
Yellow sandstone shales.
Fossils are abundant in the Tubarao Series. Among
these, Phyllotheca griesbachi, Sigillaria brardi, Glossopteris
browniana, Glossopteris indica, Gangamopteris obovata, and
Nceggerathiopsis hislopi indicate that the Tubarao Series
represent the Ecca Beds of South Africa and the
Karharbari Series of India. Like the Dwyka of South
Africa, the Orleans conglomerate is of glacial origin.
In 1905 the output of Brazilian coal reached a total
of 700,000 metric tons.
Peru possesses considerable coal areas in theAncacho
Santa valley, in the departments of Junin and Huanuco.
In 1905 the output amounted to 75,338 metric tons.
The principal coalfields of Chili, from which 789,229
tons were obtained in 1905, are of Tertiary age, and
lie to the south of Concepcion.

--- Page Break ---
3i2 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
In Trinidad, lignites of Tertiary age, but very variable
in thickness and extent, have been found near Sangre,
Williamsville, Caparo, Erin, Chatham, Rio Negro,
Point Noir, and Cedros.
Bituminous coals occur in Guatemala, and several
localities within a few miles of Port Livingstone.

--- Page Break ---
CHAPTER XVI
COALFIELDS OF CHINA, CENTRAL ASIA, JAPAN,
NEW ZEALAND, AND DUTCH EAST INDIES
FROM dealing with the well-defined coal-bearing regions
of the northern and southern hemispheres, described in
former chapters, we now pass to several eastern and
southern coalfields which, though they geographically
belong to one or other of the regions previously men-
tioned, are nevertheless geologically distinct. The im-
portant coals of northern China, for instance, belong to
a different geological period to those of India ; but the
latter, as we have seen, are of the same age as those of
Australia, though deposited under somewhat different
conditions. The chief Australian coals, again, are dis-
tinct in age from those of New Zealand and other
islands of the southern Pacific.
CHINA.
The total production of coal in China is altogether
unknown, but that it exists in large quantities is an
accredited fact, since it is extensively used throughout
the country. Indeed, the use of coal as a fuel for
manufacturing and metallurgical purposes, as well as
a source of warmth, seems to have been known to the
Chinese from remote antiquity.
313

--- Page Break ---
3H GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The chief coals are of Carboniferous age, but whether
they can be referred to the Uralian or Moscovian
division remains uncertain.
In Manchuria, the most northerly coal-producing
area of China, the coal once thought to be of West-
phalian age is considered to belong either to the
Stephanian Coal-measures or to the Permian. The
chief outcrops of the coals lie to the east of the Port
Arthur and Mukden Railway, the most important coal-
field being atTow Chouw, to the east of Mukden. The
coal is mainly of a bituminous character, one seam
attaining a thickness of about 96 feet. The estimated
output for Manchuria is nearly 55,000 tons per annum.
Coal-measure strata occupy a considerable area in
the province of Pe-chi-li, where the coal, as in Man-
churia, though formerly placed in the Westphalian
division, is now said to belong either to the Stephanian
or to the Permian.
The basin of Kaiping, traversed lengthwise by the
Chinese Imperial Railway from Pekin, is the chief coal-
field of Pe-chi-li. This important coal area extends for
over twenty-five miles from east to west along the main
axis of the syncline, whose limits to the north are
clearly defined by the outcrop of the Carboniferous
limestone and Cambrian strata. Alluvial deposits con-
ceal most of the southern outcrop west of Liushu. The
Coal-measures dip at a high angle towards the centre,
and are occasionally found to be reversed by over-
folding.
At the Tongshan Colliery the coal-seams number
seventeen, and yield about 75 feet of good coal to about
1,900 feet of barren strata. The present workings are
confined to the upper seams, which vary in thickness

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
3i6 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
from 3 to 14 feet ; but in the lower levels the coals
show a tendency to unite. A considerable portion of
No. 5 seam, one of the most worked, yields
'
smalls,'
giving a different analysis to the larger coal. The
'smalls
'
give fixed carbon, 55*27 ; volatile matter, 26*58 ;
water, 0*30 ; ash, 17*85 ; while the large coal gives fixed
carbon, 58*45 ; volatile matter, 33*50 ; water, 0*35 ; and
ash, 7*70 per cent. This seam yields a good coke.
North of the Hoang-Ho River, in south-eastern
Shan-Si, occurs one of the largest anthracite regions
known, the area being roughly estimated at 13,500
square miles; and the amount of anthracitic coal,
taking an average of 40 feet in thickness over the
district, is calculated at over 630,000,000,000 tons.
The bituminous coalfields of western Shan-Si are con-
sidered to be nearly as large, and coal is also said to
occur in thick and extensive deposits in northern
Shan-Si.
On the plateau of Shan-Si the coal-bearing formation
is said to consist of a lower limestone (Kohlenkalk)
overlain by a series of shales and sandstones, with
some beds of limestone, containing the chief seams of
coal. The deeply dissected and scarped faces of the
plateau show several outcrops of coals, one seam vary-
ing in thickness from 10 to 40 feet being everywhere in
evidence. The coal-bearing strata are overlain by
sandstones and shales (Bantgefarthen) of a reddish-
brown or yellow colour, affording striking features in
the landscape. Loess covers many of the hills and fills
up the valleys.
The fossils of the Kohlenkalk, at present known,
are Phillipsia, Spirifer mosquensis, Orthotetes, and Orthis
michelini ; although the coal-bearing strata rest in places

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF CHINA 317
on Carboniferous Limestone, it appears that they often
unconformably repose on limestones of Ordovician age,
which have been mistaken for those of the later
Palaeozoic formation.
From our knowledge of the character of the strata
in other regions where anthracites occur, the presence
of these would suggest a folded and highly disturbed
area, or one in which igneous activity had been
developed on a considerable scale. Reports of Shan-Si
state, on the contrary, that the coal-bearing strata lie
almost horizontal, and are not intruded into by igneous
material. The anthracites from Shan-Si give a carbon
percentage between 84*67 and 89*24, with that of the
ash between 6'ig and 12*20, and a calorific power of
5,727 and 7,166. The coal is very hard in character,
with little impurity ; it burns with scarcely any flame,
emits no smoke, and leaves little ash.
The annual output of coal can only be approximately
guessed at by calculating the amount that must be
consumed for domestic purposes and in the iron
furnaces. The population of Shan-Si is estimated at
from fifteen to twenty millions, and as coal appears to
be extensively used for fuel, the annual output, it is
reckoned, cannot be less than 5,000,000 tons for
domestic purposes alone.
In Shen-Si, west of Shan-Si, the Kiu-Chou series of
red shales and sandstones, with marine limestones and
local coal-seams, are of Permo-Triassic age. They rest
on the Wu-Shan limestone of Carboniferous age which
locally contains coal.
In northern Ss'i-ch-uan folding took place at the
close of the Carboniferous period, but not till early or
late Triassic times in the middle Yang-tsi region.

--- Page Break ---
3i8 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
In Shan-Tung the coal-bearing series, of Moscovian
age, consists at the base of shales and sandstones, and
of lavas, tuffs, and intrusive rocks near the summit.
Red and grey sandstones, shales and conglomerates,
succeed. The Lower Carboniferous rocks, forming the
Po-Shan Series, contain Chonetes, Squamularia, and
Marginifera, and rest on the Tsi-nan limestones of
Ordovician age.
In Honan the coal-bearing measures contain the
fossil plant Pecopteris cyathea, a Uralian species.
Coal also occurs in Hunan, where most of the seams
are considered to belong to the Moscovian development
of the Westphalian Coal-measures. The coal is an
anthracite of good quality.
In Yunnan and Tonkin the coal-bearing strata
belong to the Rhaetic formation. The coals, of a semi-
bituminous character, contain about 30 per cent, of
volatile matter.
Central Asia. Carboniferous shales containing
workable coals rest on Dinantian Limestone at Ekibas-
Touz in the steppes of Kirghis. Coal-bearing Jurassic
strata cover a large area in the basin of Kouznetsk.
The coals are irregular, but occasionally attain a thick-
ness of over 150 feet. Coke obtained from these coals
is extensively used in the metallurgical works of the
Altai district.
JAPAN.
Japan, in the distribution of her coalfields, displays
an arrangement resulting from earth-movements on a
great scale. The islands of the empire are but the
summits of a partially submerged range girdling the
Asiatic continent on the east.

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF JAPAN 319
In Formosa (Taiwan) the watershed follows the
longer axis of the island. The lofty peaks of the
Lu-tchu (Ryuku) islands continue the girdle as far as
the island of Kiushu (Kyushu), with the north-easterly
trend of the central mountain range dominating the
physical outline, though the nearly meridional coast-line
south of Hyugo conforms to the strike of the Tertiary
formations. The Kyushu range continues into the
island of Shikuku. Honshu, or the main island, is
divided by an east-and-west tectonic line into a northern
and a southern part. Hokkaido, again, is traversed in
the middle by the Ezo range trending north-north-west
and south-south-east.
The framework of the Japanese Islands had been
outlined before the deposition of the Mesozoic strata,
which contains the oldest of the coal-bearing forma-
tions. Great earth-movements followed the Mesozoic
period in Japan, and resulted in the partition of
northern and southern Japan in Tertiary times, the
formation of the general north and south structural
lines, and in the determination of the shape and distri-
bution of the coalfields as they are now seen.
At the end of the Tertiary and during the Quaternary
period Japan was the seat of volcanic manifestation of
great magnitude, comprising the eruption of liparites,
dacites, andesites, and basalts met with in the Tertiary
or most important coal-bearing formation in Japan.
Besides these newer igneous rocks there are also intru-
sions of granites, quartz diorites, diorites, gabbros,
periodotites, and porphyrites, of which the age is very
uncertain, some being of early Tertiary and some of
much older date.

--- Page Break ---
32o GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
The sedimentary strata of Japan may be chrono-
logically tabulated as follows :
THE GEOLOGICAL FORMATIONS OF JAPAN.
Recent and fAlluvium.
Quaternary\Diluvium.
j'
Pliocene.
T
, . I Miocene. Coalfields of Kyushu and Hokkaido.
"
I Eocene. (?) Nummulite beds of Ogasawara-
\ jima.
/Mikura and Misaka Series.
Shinzi Series.
Cretaceous Ammonite beds of Hokkaido. Coal.
j
Izumi Sandstones.
\Ryoseki and Torinosu Series.
(Tetori Series.
Jurassic
-
-j Shizugawa Series.
[inkstone Series (Nagato). Anthracite.
(Plant bed of Yamanoi (Rhaetic). Anthracite.
Triassic -
-|
Pseudomonotis beds.
[Ceratites beds.
fUpper Chichibu Series (Carboniferous). No
Palaeozoic J coal.
|Lower Chichibu Series.
Archaean : Schists and Gneiss.
The chief anthracite fields are those of Moriyosho
(Tertiary), Higashi-Muro-gori (Mesozoic), Nagato
(Trias-Jura) ,andAmakusa (Cretaceous) . Andesite dykes
cross a seven-foot seam in the Moriyosho field. In the
Higashi field the seams vary from I to 4 feet thick,
giving from 84-11 to 90*09 per cent, of coke and 2*03 to
5'i6 per cent, of ash, and yielding annually about
30,000 tons. The Amakusa anthracite field, considered
to be of Cretaceous age, contains, in the northern half,

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF JAPAN 321
three seams, the highest being 8 feet thick. Many
dykes of liparite cut across the northern and southern
fields, and in their passage convert the anthracite into
a natural coke (senseki).
Out of an output, exceeding 11,000,000 tons in 1905,
coals classed as anthracite yielded less than 100,000 tons,
the major quantity of coal raised belonging to the
bituminous class.
The main supplies of bituminous coals come from
the islands of Kinshin, which yield 82 per cent, of the
total output, the northern island of Hokkaido (Yezo)
giving about 10 per cent., the rest coming from the
provinces of Hitachi and Nagato, in the main island
(Honshu).
Kinshin contains five coalfields, comprising those
of Chikuhu, Karatsu, and Miike, and of the three
islets Takashima, Hashijima, and Yokoshima, and the
anthracite field on Amakusa Island. The axes of the
synclines are directed north-north-west and south-south-
east. Excepting that of Amakusa, all these coalfields
are referred to the Tertiary System.
In Chikuhu the available quantity of coal is estimated
at 87,000,000 tons, and in Miike 100,005 tons, within
1,500 feet below sea-level. The Miike Coalfield, one
of the most productive, contains eight seams of coal,
enclosed in a thick-bedded Tertiary sandstone. The
lowest or Eight Feet seam, which often reaches 20 feet
in thickness, is the best. It is a bituminous coking
coal containing much sulphur, and possessing a calorific
power of 2,100 calories. An average of analyses gives
volatile matter, 40*1 ; coke, 53 ; water, 0*65 ; ash, 6*84 ;
sulphur, 3*14 per cent.
On the main island the chief coalfields are those of
21

--- Page Break ---
322 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Nagato, probably of Rhsetic age, and of Iwaki, in the
province of Hitachi. The output is 250,000 and
450,000 tons respectively per annum.
The Island of Hokkaido produces annually about
1,000,000 tons. The total amount of available coal is
estimated at 600,000,000 tons. In the Yutari Mine the
coal is pure, dry, and very hard, giving an analysis of
volatile -matter, 42*89; coke, 57*1 1 ; ash, 4*57; water,
1*46 ; sulphur, 0*31 per cent.
Formosa contains several thin seams of Tertiary
coal seldom exceeding 4 feet in thickness. Tertiary
coal of good quality, but of limited extent, occurs on
Isiomoteshima, one of the Lu-tchu islands. In 1900
the production was 18,640 tons. The exports from
Tamsui and Kilang amounted to 39,072 tons.
NEW ZEALAND.
Crystalline rocks of Archaean age cover extensive
areas, and the coal-bearing strata of Cretaceo-Tertiary
age are for the most part restricted to Auckland in the
North Island, and to the west and south-east in the
South Island. Tertiary lignites of inferior quality occur
in several localities.
The Cretaceo-Tertiary formation consists in its upper
part of marls, greensands, and limestone containing
marine fossils. At the base the greensands pass down
into the coal-bearing mudstones and brown sandstones
with dicotyledonous and coniferous trees.
New Zealand coals chiefly belong to the brown coal
group, but vary very much in quality. Some seams are
good pitch coal, others bituminous and coking, while
a few seams of anthracite are met with in the vicinity

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF NEW ZEALAND 323
of igneous intrusions. The bituminous coals give an
average analysis of: fixed carbon, 61*75; volatile
matter. 34*20; water, 2*53 ; ash, 1*54 per cent. The
anthracitic varieties have the following composition
:
fixed carbon, 89*01 ; volatile matter, 2*60 ; water, 3*21 ;
ash, 5*18 per cent.
In 1905 the total output of coal amounted to
I 585756 tons.
Buller Coalfield. The flat coastal belt at Westport
rises abruptly inland into a high plateau intersected by
numerous ravines and deep gorges. At the foot of the
hills the coals are faulted and shattered, but are undis-
turbed on the plateau above. The coalfield has a length
of about forty miles, with a maximum width of seven
miles. The seams vary greatly in thickness, and are
hard and of good quality.
Brunner Coalfield. This coalfield is favourably
situated on the Grey River. The coal is in places
nearly 18 feet in thickness, being a bituminous coking
coal of good quality, yielding a large quantity of gas.
Kaitangata Coalfield. The strata of this coalfield
consist chiefly of conglomerates, sandstones, and shales,
and cover an area of about forty square miles in the
hilly country between Kaitangata Lake and the sea-
coast, along which the measures and coals can be seen
in the cliffs. There are several seams ; one of them,
being as much as 30 feet thick in places, is seen in open
section at Coal Point. The coal contains 3 per cent, of
ash and about 10 per cent, of water. It is free-burning,
furnishes a good house coal, and is also used on
locomotives.
21 2

--- Page Break ---
324 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Shag Point Coalfield. This field lies to the north
of Dunedin. The measures resemble those of the
Kaitangata Coalfield. A seam of pitch coal 7 feet
thick was followed in undersea workings.
Green Island Coalfield. Though the seams are
very inferior brown coals, the close proximity of this
coal area to Dunedin has resulted in the establishment
of several collieries.
Malvern Hills Coalfield. This coalfield is situated
about 30 miles to the west of Christchurch. The
measures consist of sandstones and shales containing
several seams of coal, the thickest seam being about
7 feet. Numerous dykes of basalt intersect the
seams, converting them locally into
'
glance
'
coal or
anthracite.
Waikato Coalfield. This coal area lies in South
Auckland. The coal-bearing rocks are supposed to be
of Lower Greensand age. There are several workable
seams ranging from 18 to 30 feet in thickness. Some
of the mines have proved very successful.
DUTCH EAST INDIES.
Lower Carboniferous rocks are found in the Islands
of Sumatra and Timor, but are unproductive. The
upper Carboniferous strata, if they were ever deposited,
must have been denuded away during the long time
embracing nearly the entire Mesozoic period that the
islands of the Archipelago were above water. The
coals belong to the Tertiary period, the best being of
Eocene age, the next those of Miocene age, while the
Pliocene coals are inferior lignites. The output from
the islands in 1905 was nearly 390,000 tons.

--- Page Break ---
JP -A C IF J C
Greymou
Rock*
Newer
Coal
Sfrara
Rocks
Oldat
English Miles
\About
FIG. 37. THE COALFIELDS OF NEW ZEALAND.

--- Page Break ---
326 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
SUMATRA.
After crossing the long chain of mountains known as
the Brissan range, composed of crystalline rocks, and
extending along the entire length of the island, the
Padang Lowlands are entered. The basin of the
Ombilen River, which crosses the Lowlands, contains
the chief coalfields of Sumatra. It yielded an output
of 207,280 metric tons in 1904-1905, and is estimated
to contain over 200,000,000 tons of available coal.
Volcanic activity commenced in the Cretaceous period,
and attained its maximum development in post-
Tertiary times, when the long line of volcanoes along
the western coast was formed.
In the Ombilen Coalfield the Tertiary formation rests
directly on Lower Carboniferous or older rocks. The
Eocene formation is divided into a lower series com-
posed of breccias, conglomerates, shales, and limestones,
a middle series of sandstones and shales containing the
important seams of coal, and an upper series of marls
and sandstones with a few thin seams of coal. These
are overlain in the southern part of the coalfield by
thick beds of orbitoidal limestone. The entire thick-
ness of the Eocene deposits is estimated at 5,600 feet.
The coal-basin is divided into: (i) The northern or
Parambahan Coalfield, containing several thin seams and
four workable coals ; but numerous faults detract from
the value of this field ; (2) the middle or Ligalet Coal-
field, containing seven very regular seams, of which
three, and in some places four, are workable and give a
united thickness of 18 feet of coal, the total available
supply being estimated at over 70,000,000 tons ; (3) the
Soengi Doerian Coalfield, proper, containing three work-

--- Page Break ---
COALFIELDS OF DUTCH EAST INDIES 327
able seams a lower seam from 21 to 24 feet thick, and
two higher seams averaging 6 feet in thickness.
Ombilen coals are stated to be very free from ash
5
and to contain 77 per cent, of carbon, 6 per cent, of
hydrogen, 13 per cent, of oxygen and nitrogen, and
4 per cent, of moisture. The sulphur varies from 0*35
to 0*60 per cent.
Java. The chief coalfields of Java are of Eocene
age, deposits of which are found over the whole island.
The coals are friable, but stated to be of good quality.
BORNEO.
Carboniferous strata consisting mainly of limestones
and sandstones, but not so far found to be coal-bearing,
are met with in several parts of the island, and form a
broad zone in Sarawak.
In British North Borneo the chief coalfield doubt-
fully referred to the Oolitic period occurs on the
island of Labuan, from which the yield in 1905
amounted to 58,768 metric tons. The output is chiefly
derived from a seam averaging over 9 feet in thickness
and mined at Coal Point.
In Dutch Borneo the coals are of Tertiary age, and
chiefly occur in the south and east. The best seams
belong to the lower quartz-sandstone series of Eocene
age. The next in quality are of Miocene age ; and the
poorest, consisting of inferior Brown coal and lignite,
and containing over 20 per cent, of moisture as com-
pared with 12 per cent, for the Eocene coals, belong to
the Pliocene period.
The seams over the large Barite basin in southern
Borneo number from six to eleven, but usually only

--- Page Break ---
328 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
two or three are of sufficient thickness to be worked.
These are of Eocene age and mined chiefly at Pengaron,
inland from Banjermassin. Most of the seams contain
thin bands of clay difficult to separate from the coal,
and therefore forming a large quantity of ash. These
Eocene coals are hard, of a greasy appearance, and
contain much resin. Excluding the ash resulting from
the intercalated bands of clay and shale, an average
analysis shows : carbon, 74 ; hydrogen, 5*6 ; oxygen
and nitrogen, 15 ; and ash, 8 per cent.
Immense deposits of coal of Miocene age are met
with in East Borneo in seams from I to 9 feet in
thickness, but, like those belonging to the Eocene
formation, possess the disadvantage of containing inter-
stratified bands of clay. The chief coal districts are
those of Sanga-Sanga, Pelarang, Salili-Prangat, and
Berouw.

--- Page Break ---
INDEX
AACHEN, 253
Abyssinia, 281
Africa, 280 et seq.
Alaska, 262, 264, 274
Albertite, 16, 277
Algeria, 281
Alethopteris lonchitica, 55, 68, 148,
160, 162, 199
serli, 55, 68, 148, 149, 154,
160, 162
Aliverion, 254
Alleghany Series, 268, 272
Alloa Coalfield, 226
Altai, 318
Alton Coal, 70, 196, 198, 202
Amakusa Coalfield, 320
Aman Valley, coals of, 151
America, North, 260 et seq.
South, 310 et seq.
Ammanford, 151
Ancacho Santa Valley, 311
Andenne Beds, 234
Ankober, 281
Annagher Coal, 230
Anthracite, 15, 18, 20, 36
Anthracomya, 56
adamsi, 58, 149, 178
calcifera, 60, 179
wodiolaris, 58, 149, 178
phillipsi, 60, 68, 69, 149, 178,
179, 199, 205, 207, 234
williamsoni, 58, 149, 178
Anthraxolite, 16, 277
Antrim, 229, 230
Appalachian Coalfield, 271
Arctic Circle, 260, 261
Ardwick, 204, 205
Argyll Coalfield, 227
Arkansas Coalfield, 271, 274
Arley, 188
Arley Mine Coal, 204, 205
Armadale, 15, 227
Armorican disturbance, 231
Arran, 228
Ash Coal, 96. 176
Ashby de la Zouch, 190
Ashton Great Seam, 158
Ashton-under-Lyme, 205
Assam, 299, 300
Astuna, 255
Atton Boring, 252
Auckland, 322
Australia, 300 et seq.
Austria, 253 et seq.
Autun Coalfield, 247-248
Aveize Group, 246
Ayrshire Coalfield, 223
Baachus Marsh Beds, 310
Baggeridge, 186
Ballycastle, 229, 230
Baluchistan, 300
Banjermassin, 328
Bannock Band Coal, 214
Bantgefarthen, 316
Barakar Group, 296, 298, 299
Bare Coal, 188
Barite, basin of, 327
Barncraig Coal, 226
Barnsley Coal, 197 et seq.
Bas Boulonnais, 239, 240
'Bass,' 26
Bass Coal, 184
Bassett Edge, 73
Bassey Mine Coal, 96, 176 et seq.
Batrachosuchus, 285
Batsford, 163, 166
'Batt,' 26
329

--- Page Break ---
330 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Battle, 164
Beaufort Series, 282 et seq.
Beaumont Vein, 242
Bedminster Great Seam, 158
Beefie Coal, 225
Beeston Coal, 196
Belgium, 233 et seq.
Sellerophon, 183
urei, 251
Belsay, 217
Bench Coal, 188
Bensham Coal, 218
Bentham, 216
Berard, 246
Bernician Series, 216, 217
Berouw, 328
Besseges Group, 246
Bestwood, 202
Better Bed Coal, 8, 9
Big Coal, 149, 151
Bin Coal, 205
'
Binds,' 26
Bismarck Seam, 250
Bitton, 157
Blackaveel Coal, 230
Black Band Group, 176 et seq.
Ironstone, 28, 96, 205
Blackhill Coal, 217
Black Pins Vein, 149
Black Shale Coal, 197
Black Water Valley, 230
Blanzy Coalfield, 244, 245
Blatter Kohle, 12, 37, 252
Bletchley, 165
Blue Coal, 287
Blue Mountains, 306
'
Boghead,' 14
Bohemia, 254
Bokaro Coalfield, 299
Bokkeveld Series, 280
'
Bords,' 108
Borehole Coal, 306
Borneo, 327
Bosnia, 254
Botacatu Sandstones, 311
Bothrodendron lesli, 285, 291
Bothwell, 227
Bottom Coal, 306
Boulogne, 239
Bovey Tracey, 12
Bowen River Formation, 301
Bowen Series, 305
Bowling Alley Coal, 94, 176
Bowness, 226
Brabant, 233
Brabourne, 165
Brachiopoda, 61, 62
Bradford Four Feet Coal, 205, 207
Brakpan, 289
Brass Coal, 151
Brazil. 310
Brick-clay Group, 184
Brick-kiln Row Coal, 93
Bright Block Coals, 273
Bright Coal,' 7
Brithdir Coal, 145
British Columbia, 278
Brittany, 242
Brive, 244
Broadsound Basin, 302
Brockwell Coal, 216, 218, 219
Brooch Coal, 184
Brora, 228
'
Brown Coal,' 12, 36
Brunner Coalfield, 323
Bryncoch Vein, 152
Buck Mountain Bed, 270
Bulgaria, 254
Bulk Vein, 230
Bull Coal, 156
Buller Coalfield, 323
Bullhurst Coal, 95, 176
Bulli Coal, 306, 308
Bullion Coal, 70, 205
Bull Vein, 159
Bulman Coal, 217
Burdekin Beds, 302
Burford, 163
Burghersdorp Beds, 282
Burmah, 299, 300
Burnley Coalfield, 204, 206
Burrum Beds, 301
Coalfield, 302
Bushveld Sandstone Series, 290
Butterknowle Fault, 218
Bydyllog Coal, 149
Byerite, 16
Gala, 286
Calamites gigas, 252
Calciferous Sandstone Series, 221
Callipteridium, 291
stormbergense, 286
Callipteris conferta, 252

--- Page Break ---
INDEX 33 1
Calorific Power, ig
Calyx Drill, 77
Campine, 2
Canada, 276 et seq.
'
Cannel,' 13
Cannel Band Coal, 214
Cannel Mine Coal, 204
Cannel Row Coal, 93, 96
Cannel Seam, 185, 287
Caparo, 312
Cape Breton Coalfield, 277
Cape Colony, 280 et seq.
Cape Lisburne, 264, 274
Cape Mondego, 256
Cape System, 283, 289
Carbonicola acuta, 58
aquilina, 58
robusta, 57
subconstricta, 58
turgida, 57
vinti, 179
Carmarthen, 144 et seq.
Carnic Alps, 255
Carpolithes corculum, 165
Carway Coal, 151
Cassiland, 253
Castlecomer Coalfield, 230
Castle Donnington, 170, 172
Cathedral Coal, 157
Catherine Bay Coal, 306
Caucasus, 259
Cave Sandstone, 282
Cedros, 312
Cephalopoda, 62, 179, 219
Ceratites Beds, 320
Champion Bay, 301
Chantounay, 242
Charleroi Beds, 234, 236
Charlotte Mine Coal, 205
Charnian Ridge, 200
Chatelet Beds, 234
Chatham, Trinidad, 312
Cheadle, 180
Coalfield, 182 et seq.
Chemiss Coal, 226
Chemnitz, 253
Chichibu Series, 320
Chili, 311
China, 313 et seq,
Chokier Beds, 234
Chonetes, 62
Christchurch, 324
Church-Close Coal, 156
Church Vein Coal, 152
Churchway Highdelf Coal, 154
Cinder Coal, 184
Clarence River Beds, 301, 303
Clashacona, 230
Claverley, boring at, 186
'
Clays,' 26
Cleat,' 108
Cleithrolepis, 304
Clod Coal, 191, 211
Clowne Coal, 197, 198
Clunch,' 27
Clyde River, Australia, 306
'
Coal
'
: classification, 17
- 18 ;
composition, 36 ; distribution,
46 ; origin, 32 ; varieties, 13
Coalbrookdale Coalfield, 210
Coal Cliff, 300
Coal-island, 230
Coal Pit, 200
Coal Point, 323, 327
Coanwood, 219
Cobble Coal, 183
Cockshead Coal, 176
Coedyrallt, 208
Coleford Highdelf Coal, 154
Coleorton, 191
Cologne, 253
Colorado, 264
Commentry Coalfield, 244, 247
Compton Dundon, 161
Concepcion, 311
Conemaugh Series, 268
Congleton, 180, 182
Congo Free State, 293
Conisborough, 199
Conites, 291
Connaught, 229
Coolbaun, 230
Cooper Eye Coal, 217
Cordaites hislopi, 291
Cordova, 256
Coria Bay, 301
Cork, 228, 230
Corwin Group, 264
Cottian Alps, 255
Coumi, 254
County Mayo, 228
Court Herbert Coal, 152
Coventry, 187, 189
Cowden Coal, 217

--- Page Break ---
332 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Coxstool Coal, 226
Crabtree Coal, 93 et seq. ; also 70,
178
Cracovie, 251
Cran-de-Retour, 241
Cremorne, boring at, 308
Crete-du-Condros, 165, 233
Creusot Coalfield, 244-246
Cromhall, 158
Crown Hills, boring at, 195
Crumbourke Coal, 205
Ctenodonta, 61, 198, 205
Culford, 166
Culm, 16, 162, 250
Cumberland Coalfield, 214
Cusel Beds, 252
Cycads, 297, 304
Cynognathus, 285
Dadoxylon, 308
Daintree Coal, 309
Dakota, 264
Dalkeith, 225
Daltonganj Coalfield, 299
Damuda Series, 296, 297, 298
DAWSON, SIR W., 32, 276
Dawson River, 310
Debra-Lebanos, 281
Deccan, 294
Decize, 244
Dee, Estuary of, borings in, 209
Deep Coal, 184, 188
Deep Hard Coal, 197
Deep River, 262, 264
Deep Soft Coal, 197
DE LA BECHE, SIR H. T., 32
Dempsey Series, 306
Denbighshire Coalfield, 207
Dent Fault, 215
Denton Low Coal, 218
Derbyshire Coalfield, 195 et seq.
Derry Coal, 230
Desert Sandstones, 302
Desford, 191, 193, 194
Diamond Coal, 225
Dibunophyllum, 51
Dickey Gobbler Coal, 191
Dicynodon Beds, 282
Dicynodon latifrons, 285
Dilhorne Coal, 183
Dimorphoceras gilbertsoni, 162, 183
Dinant, 233
; Dinocephalians, 285
Discina, 61
Dobra, 254
Dogger Bank, 200
Dombrowa, 250
Doncaster, 202
Donetz, 256 .
Dorsten, 248
Dortmund, 248
Double Coal, 188
Douglas Coalfield, 223
Douro, 256
Dover, 165
Drakensberg Mountains, 286
Drews Vein, 152
Drowsalls Coal, 208
Drumglass Main Coal, 230
Drumgraig Coal, 227
Dryburn Limestone, 217
Du Bois, 247
Dumbarton, 223
Dundee, South Africa, 288
Dunedin, 323, 324
Dunfermline Splint Coal, 226
Dungannon, 230
Dunkard Series, 65, 268, 272
Dun Limestone, 217
Durham Coalfield, 216 et seq.
Dusseldorp, 248
Dutch East Indies, 324 et seq.
Dutch Limburg, 233, 237
Dwyka Conglomerate, 282, 284,
289, 292, 311
Dysart, 226
Eaglesbush, 152
Earls Parrot Coal. 226
East Maitland Series, 306
Ebbw Vale, 149
Ecca Beds, 282 et seq.
Edestus, 179
'Edge Coals,' 224, 230
Edwalton, 201
Eelwell Limestones, 217
Egypt, 281
Eight Feet Coal, 306
Bambury Coal, 95, 176,
178
Ekibas-Touz, 318
Ell Coal, 188, 191, 227
Elled Coal, 148, 151
Ellinge, 165

--- Page Break ---
INDEX 333
Ellistown, 192
Epinac, 244
Erdige Kohle, 252, 253
Eregli, 254
hrin, 312
Ermelo, 15, 290
Esgryn Coal, 146, 152
Espley Rocks, 131, 179, 187, 188,
203, 208
Estenan, 278
Estrada Nova Series, 311
Etruria Marl Group, 172 et seq.
Eureka Coal, 191
Eurydesma cordata, 306, 307
Ezo, 319
Face,' 108
Faille du Midi, 241
Faille Limite, 241
Farewell Rock, 93
Farrington Series, 156 et seq.
Top Coal, 157
Faserkohle, 7
'
Faults,' 103
Fawcett Coal, 217
Faymoreau, 242
FAYOL, M., 247
Fells Sandstone, 217
Fen Country, 200
Ferry Bank Farm, 209
Fife Coalfield, 226 et seq.
Fifteen Feet Coal, 225
1
Fireclay,' 27
Firth of Clyde, 220
Firth of Forth, 226
Five Feet Coal, 152, 176, 184,
191, 226
Five-Quarter Coal, 218, 219
Flat Coals,' 224
Flint Coal, 211
Flintshire Coalfield, 207
Flockton Coal, 197
'
Floor' of coal, 21
,
Forest of Dean Coalfield, 153 et
seq.
Forest of Wyre, 211 et seq.
Forest Sandstone, 293
Formosa, 319, 322
Four Ashes, 186
Four Feet Coal, 183, 184, 188,
208, 306, 307
Four Mile Creek, 306
Four Oaks, 189
France, 238 et seq.
Central, 244 et seq.
Northern, 239 et seq.
Frankfurt, 253
Fulledge Main Coal, 204
Fundy Bay, 276
Fungous Coal, 211
Fusain, 7
Fusilina ventricosa, 258
Gangamopteris cyclopteroides, 285,
291
obovata, 311
vertebraria, 308
Gannister Coal, 196, 204
Gard, 244, 246
Garn Swilt Coal, 146, 151
Garo Hills, 299
Garw Coal, 22, 149
Gaskohle, 252, 253
Gastnoceras carbonarittm, 162, 183,
198
listen, 162, 178, 198, 251
Gayton, 165
Gedling, 201
Geislautern Group, 251
Gemeine Braunkohle, 252, 257
Germany, 248 et seq.
Gilmerton, 225
Gin Mine Coal, 94, 179
Giridhi Coalfield, 298, 299
Glamorganshire, 144 et seq.
Glanzkohle. 252, 253
Glendonite, 308
Glossopteris angustifolia, 291, 308
browniana, 285, 291, 308, 311
indica, 291, 311
Gloucestershire Coalfield, 154 et
seq.
Glyphioceras paucilobum, 179
Gnapiog Coal, 149
Gnoll, 152
Goldsitch Moss, 182
Gondwana Land, 280
Series, 45, 47, 294, 308, 311
Gorlwllyn Coal, 148
Gosswater, 223
Gower, 151
Graces Coal, 157
Graigola Coal, 151, 152
Grand-Moloy, 244

--- Page Break ---
334 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Grande-Veine-des-Dames, 236
Graphite, 15
Great Bentley Fault, 184
Great Boothorpe Fault, 191
Great Northern Coal, 306
Great Row Coal, 176
Great Seam, 152, 156, 225
Great Vein, 159
Great Whin Sill, 218
Greece, 254
Greeneyes Coal, 217
Green Island Coalfield, 323
Greenway Coal, 152
Greete River, 215, 216
Greta Series, 306, 307, 310
Grey River, 323
Grosseto, 255
Guadiato River, 256
Guatemala, 312
Cuba, 286
Gulf States, 260, 262
Gunnerton Coal, 217
Gwendraeth Coal, 151
Stanllyd Coal, 151
Gympie Formation, 301
'
Hade
'
of a fault, 105
Halesowen Sandstone Group, 185
Halifax Hard Coal, 196, 198, 204
Soft Coal, 204
Hamstead Colliery, 185, 186
Hard Mine Coal, 94, 176
Hardy Coal, 217
Harecastle, 180, 182
Harris's Bulk Vein, 230
Harwich, boring at, 166
Hathern, 191, 195
Haunchwood Sandstone, 188
Havilah Seam, 309
Hawkesbury Coal, 188
Sandstone, 301, 303
Series, 303, 304
Haxey, 138, 200
Heaton Park, 207
Hercynian movement, 143, 144,
164, 231
Higashi-Muro-gori Coalfield, 320
High Hazles Coal, 197
Highley, 211
High Main Coal, 218
Hilt's law, 41, 249
Hitachi, 322
Hokkaido, 319
Hollin Coal, 208
Holly Lane Coal, 94, 176
Honshu, 319
Houille daloide, 7
Huanuco, 311
Hughes Vein, 146, 151, 152
Huminite, 16
Hungary, 253 et scq.
Hutton Coal, 218, 219
Hyugo, 319
Ignornay, 247
Illawarra, 306
Ince Coals, 204
India, 293 et seq.
Indiana, 273
Indus River, 294
Indwe Coal, 286, 287
Ingleton Coalfield, 214
Inkstone Series, 320
Inverell, 307
Ipswich Coalfield, 302
Ireland, 228 et seq.
Irwell Valley Fault, 206
Isiomoteshima, 322
Italy, 255
Izumi Sandstone, 320
Jabalpur Group, 296
Jaintia Hills, 299
Japan, 318 et seq.
Jarrow Coal, 230
Java, 327
Jet, 14
Jewel Coal, 225
Jharia Coalfield, 298, 299
'
Joints,' 108
Joppa, 225
Junin, 311
Jura, 246
Kaiping, 314
Kaitangata Coalfield, 323
Kaliwa, 299
Kakanj-Doboi, 254
Kaolin, 193
Karanpura Coalfield, 299
Karatsu Coalfield, 321
Karharbari Group, 296, 297, 298,
3ii
Karroo Formation, 281 et seq.

--- Page Break ---
INDEX 335
Karvvin, 254
Keele Group, 97, 173 et seq.
Kenai Series, 262
KENDALL, P. F., 200
Kent Coalfield, 164 ct seq.
Kent's Thick Coal, 197
Kerry, 228
Khasi, 299
Kherson, 259
Khost, 300
Kiama, 307
Kiandra Bay, 302
KlDSTON, R., 148, 172, 222
Kiev-Elizabetgrad, 259
Kilang, 322
Kilburn Coal, 191, 196, 197
Kiltongue Coal, 227
Kimberley, 287
Kingswood Series, 157 et seq.
Kinlet, 211
Kinshin, 321
Kinshu, 319
Kintyre, 227
Kirghis, 318
Kiu-Chou, 317
Kladno-Rakonitz, 254
Knowles Coal. See Whinghay
Coal, 96
Kohlenkalk, 316
Kohlenrothliegende, 251
Koomati Poort Coalfield, 290, 292
Kouznetsk, 318
Kreka, 254
Kyushu, 319
Labuan, 327
La Grande Couche, 244, 247
Laingsburg Beds, 282
Lake Tanganyika, 280
Lal-lal, 302
Lally, 247
Lanarkian Division, 172, 222
Lanarkshire Coalfield, 227 et seq.
Lancashire Coalfield, 203 ct seq.
Laramie Division, 277
Laval, 243
Leather Mill, 191
Le Botwood Coalfield, 210
Leicestershire Coalfield, 190 et seq.
Leigh, 207
Leinster, 229
Leiopteria longirostris, 183
Leonard Vein, 242
Lepidodendron aculeatutn, 165
lycopodioides, 165
obovatw/n, 162
podroanum, 291
veltheimiamim, 52, 250, 310
Lepidostrobus variabilis, 165
Lethbridge, 278
Leven, 226
Lewisburn Coal, 217
Lichar Coals, 217
Liege Coalfield, 166, 233 et seq.
Ligalet Coalfield, 326
'
Lignite,' n
Limerick, 228
'
Limestones,' 27
Lincolnshire, 139
Lingula mytiloides, 64, 65, 178, 183,
198, 205, 236
Linlithgowshire, 223, 226, 227
Linton Fault, 194
Lippstadt, 250
Listracanthus wardi, 198
Lithostrotion basaltiforme, 51
Little Limestone Coal, 217
Little Row Coal, 93
Little Slyving Coal, 156
Littry, 242
Liushu, 314
LIVINGSTONE, D., 293
Llanelly, 153
Llansamlet, 152
Llantwit Coals, 152
Llynfi Rock, 146
LOGAN, SIR W. E., 32, 276
Louth, 139, 140, 200
Lower Eight Feet Coal, 226
Four Feet Coal, 150, 208
Smith's Coal, 287
Low Main Coal, 218
Lugau, 251
Lu-tchu Islands, 319, 322
Lycopodium chamacyparissum, 8
clavatum, 8
LYELL, SIR C., 276
MacArthur Seam, 309
Machrihanish Bay, 227
Madagascar, 10
Magdeburg, 253
Magellan Straits, 44
Mahadeva, 296

--- Page Break ---
336 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Main Coal, igi, 192, 208, 209, 227,
287
Band Coal, 214
Brassey Coal, 208
Makum Coalfield, 300
Malvern Hills Coalfield, New
Zealand, 324
Mammoth Seam, 270
Manchester, 203, 204, 205, 206
Manchuria, 314
Manitoba, 277
Mansfield, 139, 140
Colliery, 202
Manton Colliery, 202
Margineanca, 254
Mariopteris muricata, 162
Market Bosworth, 194
Market Weighton, 201
Maryland, 272
Mastodontosaurus platyceps, 304
Matatiele, 287
Maudlin Coal, 218
McMuRTRiE, G. E. J., 155
Mendip Anticline, 141, 158
Hills, 159 et seq.
Metal Band Coal, 214
Meuse, 237
Meux's Brewery, boring at, 164
Michigan, 272
Microgomphodon, 285
Middleberg, 289
Middle Coal, 156
Middle Parks, Colorado, 16
Midgeholme, 219
Midlothian Coalfield, 223 et seq.
Miike Coalfield, 321
Mikura, 320
Millery, 247
'Mineral Charcoal,' 7, 108
Misaka Series, 320
Mississippian Series, 265, 266, 274
Missouri, 266, 274
Mitagong, 307
Moelgilau Fault, 144, 145
Mohpani Coalfield, 299
Moira Coal, 191
Molteno Beds, 282, 283, 286, 289
Monmouthshire, 145 et seq.
Monongahela Series, 268, 272
Mons, 237
Moorstone Rock, 221
Moriyosho Coalfield, 320
MorlaisMain Coal, 208
Morpeth Coal, 307
Moscovian Division, 251, 258,
3 J4. 3i8
Moss Coal, 94, 170
Mossfield Coal, 94
'
Mother of Coal,' 7
Moulins, 247
Mountain Mines, 204 et seq.
Mount Lambie, 302
Much, 300
Muddy Creek Beds, 301
Mukden, 314
Munster, 229, 248, 249
Murray River, 300
Musselburgh, 225
Myalina compressa, 183
Mynyddislwyn Coal, 145, 152
Myrolepis, 304
Nagato Coalfield, 320, 322
Naiadites carinata, 58, 149, 178
modiolaris, 58, 149, 178, 191
quadrata, 58, 149, 178
Nailsea, 156, 157, 161
Nailston, 192
Nalon Valley, 255
Namur, 233, 237
Nanaimo, 278
Narrabeen Shales, 303
Natal, 288 et seq.
Naticopsis, 192
Neath, 146 et seq.
Nebraska, 274
Netherfield, boring at, 164
Netherseal Colliery, 194
Nettle Bridge Valley, 157, 159
Neuropteridium validum, 291
Neuropteris gigantea, 55, 199
rarinervis, 165
tenuifolia, 165
New Brunswick, 276
Newcastle, South Africa, 288
Group, North Staffordshire,
97 et seq.
Series, Australia, 301 et seq.
New Main Coal, 211
New Rock Series, 144, 157
New South Wales, 306 et seq.
Newtown, 230
New Zealand, 322 et seq.
Nceggerathiopsis hislopi, 285, 311

--- Page Break ---
INDEX 337
Nine Feet Coal, 151
Ninety Fathom Dyke, 219
Normandy, 242 et seq.
Northampton, 163, 166
North Greens Coal, 225
North Sea, 200, 219
North Staffs Coalfield as type
coalfield, 90 et seq.
description of, 175 etseq.
Northumberland Coalfield, 216
et seq.
Notochampsa, 285
Nottinghamshire, 195 et seq. ; also
170
Nova Scotia, 72, 276
Nucula, 198
Nuculana, 205
Nuneaton, 169, 187, 189
Clays, 188
Nyassaland, 282
Ogasawarajima, 320
Oldbury, 185
Old Coal, 150
Old Park Coal, 184
Ombilen Coalfield, 326
Openshaw Mine Coal, 205
Orange River Colony, 282, 289
Orleans Conglomerate, 311
Orrell Coal, 204
Orthis crenistra, 310
michelini, 316
resiipinata, 310
Orthoceras, 183, 192
Orthotetes, 316
Osnabriick, 248
Ostmark, 16
Ostrau-Karwin, 253
Oswestry, 208, 209
Otozamites, 304
Ottweiler Beds, 251, 252
Oudenodon, 285
Oviedo, 255
Owthorpe, 196, 200
Oxford Limestone, 217
Pachydomus, 308
Paltfoniscus, 304
Palamau, 299
Palermo Shales, 311
Palmerville, 309
Panchet Series, 296, 297
Pancraig Coal, 151
Panther Creek Basin, 270
Papier Kohle, 12, 37
Parambahan Coalfield, 326
Pareiasaums, 282, 285
Parker Mine Coal, 205, 207
Parkgate Coal, 197
Parknaclea Coal, 230
Parrot Coal, 228
Pas de Calais Coalfield, 239 et seq.
Passa Dois Series, 311
Peacock Coal, 96
1
Peat,' 10
Pe-chi-li, 314
Peckkohle, 252, 253
Pecopteris arborescens, zonal fossil,
55; also 68, 131, 154, 160,
165, 180, 192, 199, 203
miltoni, 148, 160
oreopteridea, 160
unita, 55, 68, 160
Pecten Bed, 70
Pekin, 314
Pelarang, 328
Pelican Creek, 309
Pemberton, 211
Pembrokeshire Coalfield, 149 et
seq.
Pendleside Series, 196, 213
Pendleton Colliery, 203
Pengaron, 328
Penfilia Coal, 152
Pennant Sandstone Series, 142,
144
Pennine Anticline, 142, 170, 213
Chain, 64, 138
Pennsylvanian Coalfields, 266 et
seq.
Pentland Hills, 223
Pennystone Ironstones, 185, 211
Permo-Carboniferous, fossils of,
66
Phillipsia, 251, 316
Phyllotheca, 285, 288
griesbachi, 311
Pictou Coalfield, 277
Piedmont, 255
Pinchin Coal, 151
Pitch Coal, 12
Pittsburg Coal, 22. 268, 272
Plainmellor, 219
Plashetts Coal, 217
22

--- Page Break ---
338 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
PIatyschisma, 307
Plessis, 242
Pleuronautilus , 183
Podozamites, 304
Point Noir, 312
Poland, 250, 251, 258
Pondoland, 282
Pont-a-Mousson, 252
Pontefract, 202
Port Livingstone, 312
Portugal, 255 et seq.
Po-Shan Series, 318
Posidoniella lavis, 178, 183
sulcata, 183
Posidonomya becheri, 52, 229
Pottery Coalfield. See North
Staffs Coalfield
Pottsville Conglomerate, 268, 270
Powell Coal, 208
Productus brachythcerus, 306
cora, 258
giganteus, 52, 258
scabriculus, 183
semireticulatus, 310
Prohcanites compressus, 52
Psendamusium fibrillosum, 198
Pseudomonotis Bed, 320
Psygmophyllum kidstoni, 291
Pteridophytes, 50
Pterinopecten carbonarius, 183, 198
papyraceus, 64, 162, 178, 183,
198
sanguinolites , 191
Pteroptyllum, 288
Punjab, 300
Queen's County, 228
Queensland, 301 et seq.
Quetta, 300
Radstock Series, 144, 156, 158,
159, 160
Rajmahal Coalfield, 296, 299
Ramgarh Coalfield, 299
Rams Coal, 205
Raniganj Coalfield, 298, 299
Ras Las Coal, 149
Rathluba Coal, 307
Rbynik, 250
Red and Grey Series, 176 et seq.
Redan Seam, 251
Red Ash Coal, 270
Red Ash Series, 148
RENAULT, M., 36
Red Bogs, 10
Red Mine Ironstone, 106
Red Vein Coal, 151
Rhode Island, 274
Rhodesia, 282, 284, 293
Rhondda No. 2 Coal, 145 et seq.
Rhymney, 149
Richmond, 164, 262, 264
Rider Coal, 183
Rio Bonito Series, 311
Rio do Pasto Beds, 311
Rio Negro, 312
Roannais, 246
Roaster Coal, 191
Rock Faults, 23
Rocinha Limestone, 311
Roger Nine Feet Coal, 204
Rolling Downs Formation, 301
1
Roof
'
of a coal, 22
Ropersole boring, 165
Roslin Sandstone, 221, 222, 227
Rosser Veins, 149
Rotherham, 199
Roumania, 254
Rowhurst Coal. See Ash Coal
Rowley Regis, 185, 186
Royley Coal, 204
Ruabon Clays, 208, 209
Ruddington, 170, 195, 201, 202
Rugeley, 185
Ruhr Coalfield, 248, 249, 251
Russia, 256 et seq.
Ryder Coal, 188
Ryoseki Series, 320
Ryuku, 319'
Saarbriicken Coalfield, 248, 251,
252
Sabero, 255
Sabi, 293
Sahara, 281
Saint Bride's Bay, 153
Chamond, 246
Etienne Coalfield, 244
Foy, 246
Helens, 204
Laurs, 242
Leger, 247
Pierre-de-la-Cour, 243
Salili-Prangat, 328

--- Page Break ---
INDEX 339
'
Sampling
'
of coal, 17
'
Sandstones," 25
Sandwell, 186
Sanga-Sanga, 328
Sangre, 312
Sao Bento Series, 311
Saprokohl, 38
Sapropil, 38
Sardinia, 255
Saxonian, 239, 246
Saxony, 248
Scarle, 138, 200, 202
Scar Limestone, 217
Schatzlar Group, 250
Schizodus antiquus, 178
Schizoneura, 291, 297
Scotland, 220 et seq.; also 2, 15,
28, 42, 51,90
Scremerston Coals, 217
Sealands, 209
'
Seat-earths,' 33
'
Seat-stone,' 21
Selby, 138, 202
Sengwe River, 293
Senseki, 321
Servia, 254
Settle River Coalfield, 309
Seven Feet Coal, 188, 204, 225, 307
Bambury Coal, 176 et seq.
Shaffalong Coalfield, 180, 182
Shafton Coal, 197
Shag Point Coalfield, 323
Shakespeare Cliff, 164
'
Shales,' 26
Shallow Coal, 184
Shan-Si, 16, 316, 317
Shan-Tung, 318
Sharlston Coal, 197
Sheriffhall Fault, 225
Shrewsbury Coalfield, 210 et seq.
'Shift,' 106
Shikuku, 319
Shilbottle Main Coal, 217
Shin-Si, 317
Shinzi Series, 320
Shoa, 281
Shropshire, 173
Sienna, 255
Sigillaria brardi, 285, 291, 311
rugosa, 55
tesselata, 148, 160, 162
Silesian Coalfield, 251, 254, 258
Silkstone Coal, 197, 199
Silverdale, 101, 104
Silvermine Coal, 93
Sind, 300
Singareni, 299
Six Feet Coal, 151, 152, 183, 226,
307
Skewen, 152
Skizugawa Series, 320
Slate Coal, 188, 191
Slyving Coal, 156
Smith's Coal, 287
Snibston Colliery, 192
Soap Vein, 149
Soar Valley, 137, 193, 195, 202
Soengi Doerian Coalfield, 326
Somersetshire Coalfield, 154^5^.
SORBY, H. C., 30
Soudan, 281
South Vein, 230
Spain, 255 et seq.
'
Spavin,' 21
Sphenopteris obtusiloba, 55
neuropteroides, 148, 149
Spirifermosquensis, 258, 316
Spirorbis, 179, 185, 187, 210, 211,
212, 214, 222
Splint Coal, 217, 225, 227
Springs, 289
Squamularia, 318
Ssi'-ch-uan, 317
Staffordian Division, 172
Staffordshire, North, as type re-
gion, 90 et seq.
description, 175 et seq.
South, 184 et seq.
Stairhead Coal, 225
Stanhope Coal, 191
Stanllyd Coal, 151
Star Formation, 301
1
Steam
'
Coal, 18
Steam Coal Series, 144 etseq.
Stenopora, 310
Stenopteris elongata, 286
Stephanian Division, 231 et seq.
Sterkstroom, 287
Stigmaria ficeides, 55, 165
Stockings Coal, 191
Stoke, 104, 106, 109
Stone, 170, 172
Stormberg Series, 282, 284, 286,
290
22 2

--- Page Break ---
340 GEOLOGY OF COAL AND COAL-MINING
Streatham, 164
Styria, 254
Stublick, 219
Dyke Fault, 218
Stwrain Coal, 151
Sudbury, 277
Sulphur Coal Group, 211
Sumatra, 326
Sur Moulin, 247
Surrey, 164
Sutherland Coalfields, 227 et seq.
Swallow Drum Coal, 226
Swansea Bay, 144
Swansea Four Feet Coal, 145
Measures, 144
Swaziland, 292
Sweden, 16
Sweet Coals, 211
'Swell,' 24
Swindon, 163
Sydney, Australia, 73, 300, 308
Coalfield, Nova Scotia, 277
Symon Fault, 211
Syncyclonema, carboniferutn, 198
Syringopora reticulata, 51
Table Cape Beds, 301
Table Mountain Series, 283, 289
Taiwan, 319
Talchir Coalfield, 299
Division, 296
Tamsui, 322
Tanganyika, 282
Taplitz, 254
Tasmania, 45, 301, 302
Tasmanite, 16
Team Wash, 219
Tegullet, 281
Temnocheilus carbonarius, 183
Ten Feet Coal, 94, 176, 178
Ten Feet Rock, 95
Tete, 293
Tetori Series, 320
Texas, 266, 274
The Joggins, 276
Therocephalians, 285
The Three Lounts Coal, 191
Thetis Group, 264
Thick Coal, 23, 184, 185, 186, 306
Thinnfeldia odontopteroides, 285, 304
rhomboidalis, 286
Thirty Feet Coal, 23, 34
Thirty Inch Coal, 217
Thornton, 193
Three Feet Coal, 151, 307
Three-Quarter Coal, 217, 218
Thurgarton, 195, 199, 202
Tillery Vein, 151
Timber Vein, 151
Timor, 324
Tceniopteris carruthersi, 286
daintreei, 304
Tomago Series, 306
Tongshan Colliery, 314
Tonkin, 318
Top Coal, 211, 287
Top Hard Coal, 197 ct scq. ; also
64, 126, 192
Torbanehill, 14, 227
Torbanite, 14, 287
Torinosu Series, 320
Tormynydd Rock, 146
Toula, 38
Tow Chouw, 314
Trachypora, 310
Transvaal, 289 et seq.
Tremanotus, 304
Trencher Bone Coal, 204
Trinidad, 312
'
Troubles,' 103
Tubarao Series, 311
Tuedian Series, 216
Tuli River, 293
Turkey, 254
Turnford, 166
Tuscany, 255
Twelve Inch Coal, 287
Twist Coal, 94, 179
Two Feet Coal, 93
Two Yard Coal, 188, 208
Tyne Valley, 217, 219
Uitenhage Series, 282
Ultrillas, 256
Umia, 296
Umtavuna Beds, 289
'
Underclay,' 21
'
Underlie,' 104
Undine, 255
United States, 261 et seq.
Upper Eight Feet Coal, 226
Four Feet Coal, 151
Smith's Coal, 287
Ural Mountains, 40, 256

--- Page Break ---
-
INDEX
Uralian Division, 255, 314
Utrecht, 289
Valenciennes, 234, 240, 242
Vancouver Island, 278
Variscan, 232
1
Vein,' 22
Vendean massif, 242
Vereeniging, 288, 289, 290
Vertebmria, 297-308
Victoria, 302, 310
Coal, 151
Viljoen's Drift, 289
Virginia, 10, 266
Virtuewell Coal, 227
Vobster Series, 144, 157
Vouvant, 242
Vryheid, 289
Waikato Coalfield, 324
Walchia pinniformis, 252
Wales, North, 208 et seq.
South, 144 et seq.
Wallarah Coalfield, 306
Wallsend Coal, 218
Wankies, 293
1
Want
'
of a fault, 105
Ware, boring at, 166
Warora Coalfield, 299
'Warrant/ 21
Warren House Coal, 197
Warthe Valley, 253
Warwickshire Coalfield, 187 et seq.
Washington County, 262
'
Washouts,' 23
Wathwood Coal, 197
Wenallt Coal, 146, 152
Wernffraith Coal, 145, 152
Wesel, 248
Wester Coal, 217
Westerloo, 237
West Maitland, 307
Westphalia, 248
Westphalian Division, 172
Westport, 323
Wharfe Anticline, 213
Whitbank Coalfield, 292
White Ash Series, 148, 157
Coal, 16
Vein, 151
Whitehaven Sandstone, 214
Whitwick Colliery, 192
Wianamatta Shales, 301, 303
Wigan Nine Feet Coal, 204
Williamsville, 312
Winghay Coal. See Knowles
Coal, 96
Winpenny Coal, 93, 176
Witham, boring at, 161
Witteberg Series, 283
Wollongong, 300, 302
1
Wood,' 36
Woodfield Coal, 191
Woodhead Coal. 183
Woorgreen's Series, 153
Worseley Four Feet Coal, 205
Wrexham Fault, 209
Wyoming, 264, 271
Wytham, boring at, 163
Yamanoi Plant Bed, 320
Yang-tsi, 317
Yard Coal, 94, 150, 176, 184, 191,
204
Rock, 95
Yate, 158
Ynysarwed Coal, 145, 146, 152
Yoredale Rocks, 196, 213
Yorkshire Coalfield, 195 et seq.
Ystradgynlais, 151
Yunnan, 318
Yutari River, 322
Zambesi River, 281, 282, 293
Zaphrentis, 51
Zenica, 254
Zsill Valley, 254
Zululand, 288 et seq.
Zwickau, 251
THE END
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., PRINTERS, GUILDFORD

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
AYS PRIOR TO DUE DATE.LOAN PERIODS ARE t-MONTH. 3-MONTHS AND 1-YEAR
RENEWALS: CALL (415) 642-3405
UNIVERSITYOF CALIFORNIA, BERKELE
FORM NO. DD6, 60m, 1 783 BERKELEY, CA 94720

--- Page Break ---
U.C. BERKELEY LIBRARIES
,'554;
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY

--- Page Break ---

--- Page Break ---
